WILLCOX MUNICIPAL CODE 2014 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Willcox, Arizona 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
City of 
WILLCOX, ARIZONA 
____________ 
Mike Laws 
Mayor 
Terry Rowden 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Tim Bowlby 
Rachel Garza 
Robert A. Irvin 
Elwood A. Johnson 
Gerald W. Lindsey 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Ted Soltis 
City Manager 
____________ 
Ann Roberts 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Crystal Hadfield 
Finance Director/City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the city of Willcox, Arizona. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    This 2014 republication brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. NS317, adopted February 20, 2014. 
    The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with the 2014 republication, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Katrina Hansen, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Virginia Mefford, City Clerk, and Ted Soltis, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Willcox, Arizona. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Willcox, Arizona. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Willcox, Arizona, 2014. 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This Code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this Code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the Code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code contains about 18 titles. The titles in this Code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. 
Section. 
    Each section of the Code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272, § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with the 2014 republication, ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the Code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of the 2014 republication, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the Code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    In 2014 this table was discontinued and replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    In 2014, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List was added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the Code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will ensure that the Code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this Code were consecutively numbered. When new pages are inserted between existing pages, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If possible, please send them in Word format, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also reduce the number of errors. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. NS319  9-18-2014 Include 1 NS320  2- 5-2015 Include 1 NS321  2- 5-2015 Include 1 NS322  8- 6-2015 Omit 2 NS323  4- 7-2016 Omit 2 NS324  6- 2-2016 Include 2 NS325  6- 2-2016 Include 2 NS327  2-16-2017 Include 3  
TITLE 1 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Chapters: 1.01 General Provisions 1.02 Saving Clause 1.03 Definitions and Interpretations 1.04 General Penalty; Continuing Violations 1.05 Mayor, Generally 1.06 City Council 1.07 City Officers and Personnel 1.08 Magistrate's Court 1.09 Elections 1.10 Ordinances, Resolutions and Contracts  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS283, §§ 1, 4, adopted March 3, 2008, repealed tit. 1, chs. 1.01-1.12, §§ 1.04.010, 1.08.010, 1.08.020, 1.12.010-1.12.040, and enacted a new tit. 1 as set out herein. The former tit. 1 pertained to general provisions, and derived from Ord. NS-33, adopted in 1975; Ord. NS-94, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS109, adopted March 22, 1983; and prior code §§ 1.04.010, 1.08.010, 1.08.020, 1.12.010-1.12.030. 

Chapter 1.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Title. 
A.	Upon the adoption by the council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the official City Code of Willcox. This City Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the Willcox City Code and is hereby published by authority of the council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the city as provided in section 1.01.040 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal documents. 
B.	Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the Willcox City Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-1-1), 2008) 
1.01.020 - Scope. 
    This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-1-2), 2008) 
1.01.030 - Acceptance. 
    The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of the state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section 1.02.010 of this title. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-1-3), 2008) 
1.01.040 - Amendments. 
    Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-1-4), 2008) 
1.01.050 - Code alterations:. 
    It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Said code, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to the office of the city clerk when directed so to do by order of the council. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-1-5), 2008) 
Chapter 1.02 - SAVING CLAUSE 
Sections: 

1.02.010 - Repeal of general ordinances. 
    All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: 
A.	Tax levy ordinances; 
B.	Appropriation ordinances; 
C.	Ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; 
D.	Franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; 
E.	Contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; 
F.	Salary ordinances; 
G.	Ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; 
H.	Improvement ordinances; 
I.	Bond ordinances; 
J.	Ordinances relating to elections; 
K.	Ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and 
L.	All special ordinances. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-2-1), 2008) 
1.02.020 - Public ways and public utility ordinances. 
    No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of section 1.02.010 of this chapter, except as this City Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-2-2), 2008) 
1.02.030 - Effect of repeal; court proceedings. 
A.	Reviving Prior Ordinances. When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
B.	Offenses: 
1.	No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, and applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect. 
2.	Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendments hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the prior Willcox Municipal Code shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
C.	Extend to all Repeals. This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
D.	Current Pending Actions. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. 
E.	Matters of Record. The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-2-3), 2008) 
1.02.040 - Severability clause. 
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part hereof or any portion adopted by reference or any codes or portions of codes adopted herein. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-2-4), 2008) 
Chapter 1.03 - DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS 
Sections: 

1.03.010 - General rules of interpretation. 
    "Liberal construction" means all general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the mayor and council may be fully carried out. 
    "Minimum requirements." In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    "Computation of time" means the time in which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is a holiday, and then it is also excluded. In cases in which notice of a decision by the city must be given to a petitioner and in which the petitioner must file a notice of appeal of such decision within a time certain of less than ten days, such time shall be computed starting with the day after the day during which the notice of decision is received by the petitioner by personal service or registered or certified mail. 
    "Delegation of authority" means whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    "Gender" means a word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    "In the city, within the city" means all territory over which the city now has or shall thereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers. 
    "Joint authority" means all words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    "May" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    "May not" states a prohibition. 
    "Must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    "Nontechnical and technical words" mean words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    "Number" means words used in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
    "Oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    "Officers and employees generally" means whenever any officer or employee is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Willcox." 
    "Or" and "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    "Ordinance." The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city has been changed in the content of this City Code to "title," "chapter," "section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the city's ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. 
    "Tense" means words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-3-1), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 1-214; extraterritorial jurisdiction, A.R.S. 9-240(B)(21); 9-276(A)(18); application of municipal ordinances to municipality owned, leased property, A.R.S. 9-401; 9-402. 
1.03.020 - General definitions. 
    Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto: 
    "Agent" means a person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication. 
    "City" means the City of Willcox, County of Cochise, State of Arizona. 
    "City Code" means the City Code of the City of Willcox. 
    "Council" means unless otherwise indicated, the city council of the City of Willcox. 
    "County" means the County of Cochise, State of Arizona. 
    "Fiscal year" means the fiscal year for the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of each year. 
    "Nuisance" means anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons within the community. 
    "Offense" means any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this City Code. 
    "Operator" means the person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession. 
    "Owner" as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of a whole or a part of the building or land. 
    "Person" includes the state, the county, a political subdivision of the state, other governmental entity, a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as unit, as well as an individual and also includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative. 
    "Personal property" is anything other than real property and shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein. 
    "Public place" includes any park, cemetery, schoolyard, sidewalk, or open space adjacent thereto. 
    "Retailer," unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer. 
    "Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property. 
    "Shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    "Shall have been" includes past and future cases. 
    "State" means the State of Arizona. 
    "Street" includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, land, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
    "Wholesaler and wholesale dealer," unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale. 
    "Written, in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by such person's proper mark. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-3-2), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 1-215[28]. 
1.03.030 - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, and references in Code. 
A.	The catchlines of the sections of the City Code, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
B.	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections of this Code or where otherwise a (State law reference-Similar provisions, A.R.S. 1-215(28) appears in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-3-3), 2008) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - General penalty; continuing violations. 
A.	In this section, "violation of this Code" means: 
1.	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
2.	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
3.	Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful act by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
B.	In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
C.	Unless a violation of this Code has been otherwise classified within the particular chapter or section of the Code defining such, a violation of this Code shall be designated as a class one misdemeanor. Any person found guilty of a misdemeanor or petty offense violation of this Code, upon conviction, shall be sentenced and fined in accordance with A.R.S. 13-707 and 13-802(2016), and shall include state mandated surcharges, if applicable. 
D.	Any violation of this Code that would constitute a civil traffic violation shall be subject to the provisions of A.R.S. title 28, chapter 5 and the Rules of Court Procedure for Civil Traffic and Civil Boating Violations. 
E.	Violations of this Code that are ongoing and continuous in time shall constitute a separate offense for each day that the violation continues and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and shall be punishable as hereinabove described. The imposition of a fine does not prevent the ability to obtain equitable relief. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-4-1), 2008; Ord. NS327, § 1, 2017) 
1.04.020 - Application of provisions. 
A.	Application of Penalty. The penalty or penalties provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of this City Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section. 
B.	Acts Punishable Under Different Sections. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of this City Code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
C.	Breach of Provisions. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this City Code and there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-4-2), 2008) 
1.04.030 - Liability of officers. 
    No provision of this City Code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-4-3), 2008) 
1.04.040 - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
A.	The repeal of an ordinance does not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
B.	The repeal of an ordinance does not effect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution, or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-4-4), 2008) 
Cross reference- Ord. NS284, 8-06-2007; saving clause, tit. 1, ch. 1.02) 
1.04.050 - Severability. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this chapter and of the Willcox City Code as a whole are severable. If any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section is declared unconstitutional by a valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such constitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter or of the Willcox City Code, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation of any such unconstitutional word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-4-5), 2008) 
Cross reference- Saving clause, tit. 1, ch. 1.02) 
1.04.060 - Provisions as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of the Willcox City Code and/or this chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as ordinance provisions previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, is/are to be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-4-6), 2008) 
Chapter 1.05 - MAYOR, GENERALLY 
Sections: 

1.05.010 - Selection of mayor. 
    At the first meeting after their election and qualification, the council members shall elect a mayor from among their number. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-1), 2008) 
1.05.020 - Vice-mayor. 
    At the first meeting after their election and qualification, the council members shall elect a vice-mayor from among their number. The vice-mayor shall assume the duties of the mayor in the absence, disqualification or resignation of the mayor. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-2), 2008) 
1.05.030 - Acting mayor. 
    In the absence or disability of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the most senior council member shall serve as acting mayor and shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the mayor during such absence or disability. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-3), 2008) 
1.05.040 - Term of mayor and vice-mayor; vacancies. 
    The mayor and vice-mayor shall serve at the pleasure of the council. The mayor and vice-mayor shall be selected by the council at the first council meeting following the general election each two years, but in any event, within 20 days after the date of the general election. Should a vacancy in the office of mayor occur, the vice-mayor shall assume the duties and responsibilities of the mayor. The council shall select from among their number a replacement for vice-mayor. Replacements will fill the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-4), 2008) 
1.05.050 - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The powers and duties of the mayor shall include the following: 
A.	The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. 
B.	The mayor shall be the chair of the council and preside over its meetings. The mayor may make and second motions and shall have a voice and vote in all its proceedings. 
C.	The mayor shall execute and authenticate by his or her signature such instruments as the council or any statute, ordinance, resolution or this Code shall require. 
D.	The mayor shall make such recommendations and suggestions to the council as he or she may consider proper. 
E.	The mayor may declare an emergency or a local emergency within the meaning of A.R.S. 26-301 and 26-311 pursuant to A.R.S. 26-311(A) whenever the mayor shall deem that an emergency exists due to fire, conflagration, flood, earthquake, explosion, war, bombing, acts of the enemy or natural or manmade calamity or disaster or by reason of threats or occurrences of riots, routs, affrays or other civil disobedience which endanger life or property within the city if authorized by ordinance or resolution. 
F.	If an emergency is declared pursuant to subsection (E) the mayor shall, during such emergency, govern by proclamation and shall have the authority to impose all necessary regulations to preserve the peace and order of the city pursuant to A.R.S. 26-311(B). 
G.	In periods of local emergency, the city shall have the full power to provide mutual aid to any affected area in accordance with ordinances, resolutions, emergency plans or agreements therefore pursuant to A.R.S. 26-311(C). 
H.	Powers and duties of the mayor after issuance of declaration of emergency or a local emergency. 
1.	The mayor, on behalf of the city, may make, amend and rescind rules and regulations necessary for emergency functions but such shall not be inconsistent with orders, rules or regulations promulgated by the governor and such shall be filed in the office of the city clerk pursuant to A.R.S. 26-307. 
2.	The mayor, on behalf of the city, may appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials and supplies for emergency purposes; may provide for emergency management within its jurisdiction in accordance with state emergency plans and programs; and may establish such emergency programs pursuant to A.R.S. 26-308. 
3.	The mayor, as chief executive officer of governing body, may appoint a director who shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of local emergency management programs, subject to the direction and control of the mayor of the governing body pursuant to A.R.S. 26-308. 
4.	State emergency plans shall be in effect in the City of Willcox, Cochise County, Arizona and the city shall take such action necessary to carry out the provisions thereof pursuant to A.R.S. 26-308. 
5.	The mayor, on behalf of the city, may facilitate the rendering of aid to persons or property in areas of the state stricken by an emergency and to make unnecessary the execution of written agreements in times of emergency. Any emergency plans duly adopted and approved satisfy the requirements for mutual aid agreements and may allow for the rendering of aid outside of the city pursuant to A.R.S. 26-309. 
I.	Mayor shall have the power to issue enforcement orders, rules and regulations to protect the safety, life, property and the general welfare of the citizens by: 
1.	Imposition of a curfew in all or any portion of the city. 
2.	Ordering the closing of any business. 
3.	Closing to public access any public building, street or public place. 
4.	Calling upon regular or auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within or outside the city for assistance to enforce orders, rules and regulations issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-5), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 26-316 et seq. 
1.05.060 - Political activities prohibited. 
    No public organization under the authority of this chapter shall participate in any form of political activity nor shall it be employed directly or indirectly for political purposes. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-6), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 26-315 et seq. 
1.05.070 - Immunity-Officers/emergency workers and limitations. 
A.	The city is not be liable for any claim based upon the exercise or performance, or the failure to exercise or perform, a discretionary function or a duty by any emergency worker, excepting willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith of any such emergency worker, in engaging in emergency management activities or performing emergency functions under this chapter or Title 36, Chapter 6, Article 9 as promulgated pursuant to A.R.S. 26-314(A). 
B.	The immunities from liability, exemptions from laws and rules, all pensions, relief, disability worker's compensation and other benefits that apply to emergency personnel when performing their respective functions within and outside the city apply equally under either jurisdiction pursuant to A.R.S. 26-314(B), (C). 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-7), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 26-314 et seq. 
1.05.080 - Violation-Classification. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who knowingly fails or refuses to obey any lawful order, rule, or regulation issued as provided in this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. This provision does not apply to the refusal of any private organization or member thereof to participate in a local emergency or State of emergency as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-8), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 26-317 et seq. 
1.05.090 - Absence of mayor. 
    The mayor shall not absent himself from the city for a greater period than 15 consecutive days without informing the council and appointing the vice-mayor to act in his or her place. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-9), 2008) 
1.05.100 - Failure to sign documents. 
    If, for five consecutive days, the mayor fails or refuses to sign any ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand, or other document or instrument requiring his or her signature, then a majority of the members of the council may, at any regular or special meeting, authorize the vice-mayor or, in his or her absence, an acting mayor, to sign such ordinance, resolution, contract, warrant, demand or other document or instrument which, when so signed, shall have the same force and effect as if signed by the mayor. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-5-10), 2008) 
Chapter 1.06 - CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 
In General 
City Council Procedure 
IN GENERAL 

1.06.010 - Elected officers; terms and vacancies. 
    The elected officers of the city shall be seven councilmembers, one of whom shall be designated as mayor and one of whom shall be vice-mayor in accordance with chapter 5 of this title. The mayor and council members shall constitute the council and shall continue in office until assumption of duties of office by their duly elected successors. Councilmembers shall serve four-year overlapping terms in the manner provided by state statutes. Members of the council shall assume the duties of office at the first regularly scheduled council meeting in December. The council shall fill by appointment the unexpired term of a council vacancy. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6-1), 2008; Ord. NS316, § 1, 2013) 
1.06.020 - Oath and bond. 
A.	Oath of Office. Prior to assumption of the duties of office, each council member shall, in public, take and subscribe to the oath of office. 
B.	Bond. Prior to taking office, the mayor and each council member shall execute and file an official bond, enforceable against the principal and their sureties, conditioned on the due and faithful performance of their official duties, payable to the state and to and for the use and benefit of the city or any person who may be injured or aggrieved by the wrongful act or default of such officer in his official capacity. A person so injured or aggrieved may bring suit on such bond under provisions identical to those contained in ARS 38-260. Bond premiums shall be paid by the city. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the city from obtaining a blanket bond pursuant to the provisions in ARS 9-302. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6-2), 2008) 
1.06.030 - Corporate powers. 
    The corporate powers of the city shall be vested in the council and shall be exercised only as directed or authorized by law. All powers of the council shall be exercised by ordinance, resolution, order or motion. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6-3), 2008) 
1.06.040 - Financial disclosure statement. 
    Each member of the council shall file a financial statement in a form and with such information as required by state statutes. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6-4), 2008) 
1.06.050 - Compensation. 
    The compensation of elected officers by the city shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6-5), 2008) 
CITY COUNCIL PROCEDURE 
1.06.110 - Meetings. 
A.	Regular Meetings. The council shall hold two regular council meetings each month. Said meeting dates and time shall be established by resolution. In the event that a regular council meeting falls on a legal holiday or an election day, the meeting shall be held at the same hour on a day other than a legal holiday as determined by the mayor and council. All regular council meetings will be held at the Willcox city council chambers unless an alternate location has been designated in writing and posted as required by this chapter and state law. 
B.	Special Meetings. The city clerk, city manager or three members of the council, upon written request of said three members, may convene the council at any time by notifying the members of the date, hour and purpose of such special meeting. The public shall be given at least 24 hours' notice of such special meetings by the posting of a notice in at least three public places within the city. In the case that an emergency which would require action or would have a detrimental effect on the health and safety of the populous of the city, the council is permitted to hold an emergency meeting without a 24-hour notice period. 
C.	Public Meetings; Executive Sessions. All proceedings of the council shall be open to the public. Upon approval by a majority vote of the council, the council may meet in a closed executive session pursuant to provisions of state law. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-1), 2008) 
1.06.120 - Quorum. 
    No action shall be taken at a council meeting unless a quorum is present. A majority of the council members in office shall constitute a quorum for transacting business. If a quorum is not present, the council meeting is automatically adjourned. A lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. Any number of the council, at any regular or special meeting, may, in writing, demand the attendance of the absent members, which demand shall be entered on record forthwith by the clerk, who shall thereupon notify absent members of the time and place of the meeting. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-2), 2008) 
1.06.130 - Agenda. 
    Prior to each council meeting, or on or before a time fixed by the council for documents to be submitted for inclusion as an item on the agenda, all city personnel, department heads, elected officers and outside persons/entities shall submit all matters to the city manager. The manager shall prepare an agenda in consultation with the mayor and set the order of business and furnish each council member, the mayor and the city attorney with a copy of the agenda and other necessary reports and materials, together with a copy of the minutes of the last preceding council meeting. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-3), 2008) 
1.06.140 - Consent agenda. 
A.	When any item of business requires action by the council, but is of a routine and non-controversial nature, such item may be presented at a regular council meeting of the council as part of a consent agenda. 
B.	There shall be no debate or discussion by any member of the council regarding any item on the consent agenda beyond asking questions for simple clarification. 
C.	The consent agenda shall be approved by a motion "to approve the consent agenda" and shall be considered by the council as a single item. 
D.	Upon objection by any member of the council to the inclusion of any item on the consent agenda, that item shall be removed from the consent agenda forthwith. Such objection may be recorded at any time prior to the taking of a vote on the motion to approve the consent agenda. All such items shall be considered individually, in the order in which they were objected to, immediately following consideration of the consent agenda. 
E.	Items which require a public hearing or which have been noticed as a public hearing may not be placed on the consent agenda. 
F.	Approval of the motion to approve the consent agenda shall be fully equivalent to approval, adoption or enactment of each motion, resolution, or other item of business thereon, exactly as if each had been acted upon individually. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-4), 2008) 
1.06.150 - Order of business. 
    The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: 
A.	Call to Order. The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting and shall call the council to order. In the absence of the mayor, the vice-mayor shall call the council to order. In the absence of both the mayor and vice-mayor, the acting mayor shall call the meeting to order. Upon the arrival of the mayor or the vice-mayor, the vice-mayor or the acting mayor shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council. The mayor shall preserve order and decorum and decide all questions of order and conduct. 
B.	Roll Call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the clerk or the clerk's designee shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered into the minutes. If a quorum is not present, the members present shall adjourn and shall proceed as provided pursuant to section 1.06.120 of this chapter. 
C.	Pledge of Allegiance. The mayor or designee shall lead the pledge of allegiance. 
D.	Minutes. Minutes of previous council meetings shall be approved by a motion "to approve the minutes." Council or staff members may request corrections in the minutes prior to their approval. 
E.	Call to the Public. Petitions, communications, and comments or suggestions from citizens present shall be heard by the council. All such remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole, and not to any member thereof. Such remarks shall be limited to three minutes, unless additional time is granted by the council. No person other than the individual speaking shall enter into discussion without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a council member except through the presiding officer. The mayor or city staff may provide information or an answer to the question raised, however no discussion of an issue so raised may take place unless such matter of discussion is so included in the public notice of the meeting. 
F.	Ordinances, Resolutions, Other Actions Requiring Council Approval. The council shall consider any ordinance, resolution, or other action requiring council approval as may be listed on the agenda. 
G.	Reports by Officers and Committees. City officials and committees shall present any reports required by the council. 
H.	Reports by Council. City council members shall present any reports or communications. 
I.	Adjournment. The mayor shall, at the conclusion of all agenda items, adjourn the meeting. A call to adjourn by the mayor shall always be in order and decided without debate.) 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-5), 2008) 
1.06.160 - Voting. 
A.	The mayor shall vote as a member of the council. 
B.	The vote of every individual on every issue that is voted upon shall be included in the minutes. 
C.	Voting procedures shall follow "Robert's Rules of Order." 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-6), 2008) 
1.06.170 - Rules of order. 
    The mayor or city attorney shall act as parliamentarian of all regular and special council meetings and shall decide on disagreements with respect to the application of rules of order. "Roberts Rules of Order" will be followed. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-7), 2008) 
1.06.180 - Suspension of rules. 
    Any of the provisions of this chapter may be temporarily suspended in connection with any matter under consideration by a recorded vote of three-fourths of the council members present; except, that this section shall not be construed to permit any action that is contrary to state statutes. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-6A-8), 2008) 
Chapter 1.07 - CITY OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL 
Sections: 
In General 
City Manager 
City Clerk 
City Attorney 
IN GENERAL 

1.07.010 - Personnel policy. 
A.	Purpose; Policy Adopted. In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with city employees and to establish a format for handling routine personnel matters dealing with all city personnel not excepted in this section, a city personnel policy is adopted by resolution. 
B.	Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all personnel of the city except volunteer firefighters. Officers of the city appointed by the council pursuant to statute, persons engaged under contract to supply expert and/or professional and/or technical services for a definite period of time may be governed by individual contract, statutory regulation and/or resolution of the city council. 
C.	Modifications; Amendments. The council may adopt by resolution rules and regulations to give effect to this section, which may be modified, amended or changed from time to time, but such rules and regulations must follow the generally accepted principles of good personnel administration. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7-1), 2008) 
1.07.020 - Absence from office. 
    No officer shall absent himself from the city for a greater period than 15 days without the consent of the council, and in case any officer does so, the council may proceed as in the case of a vacancy. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7-2), 2008) 
CITY MANAGER 
1.07.110 - Creation of office. 
    The office of city manager is created. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-1), 2008) 
1.07.120 - Appointment; qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council for a definite or an indefinite term. He or she shall be chosen by the council on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his or her actual experience in, or his or her knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or her office set forth in this chapter. At the time of the appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city, but during his or her tenure of office, he or she shall reside within the city and the mayor and council shall have the authority to approve for the city manager to reside outside the city limits. No councilmember shall receive such appointment during the term for which he or she shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his or her term. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-2), 2008; Ord. NS294, § 1, 2009) 
1.07.130 - Bond. 
    The city manager shall furnish a surety bond to be approved by the council, the bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-3), 2008) 
1.07.140 - Powers and duties. 
A.	Generally. The city manager shall be the executive officer and head of the administrative branch of the city. He/she shall be responsible to the city council for a proper administration of all affairs of the city. He/she shall have the power and shall be required to: 
1.	Execute, on behalf of the city council, general administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the city. 
2.	Attend meetings of the city council with the duty of reporting on or discussing any matter concerning the affairs of the departments, boards, services or activities under his supervision, upon which, in his judgment, the city council should be informed. 
3.	Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all appointive officers and employees of the city, except as otherwise provided by law or contract. All appointments and removals shall be based upon merit and upon the qualifications or disqualifications of such officer or employee without regard to any political belief or affiliation. 
4.	Coordinate the administrative functions and operations of the various departments, appointed advisory committees and boards, divisions and services of the city government, and on the city's behalf, carry out policies, rules, regulations and ordinances adopted by the city relating to the administration of the affairs of such departments, committees, boards, divisions or services. 
5.	Prepare or cause to be prepared and submitted to him by each department, division, committee, board or service of the city government, itemized annual estimates of expenditures required by them for capital outlay, salaries, wages and miscellaneous operating costs; tabulate the same into a preliminary consolidated municipal budget; and submit the same to the city council annually on the date specified by the council, with his recommendations as to any increases, decreases, cancellations, transfers or changes in any of the items included in the preliminary budget. 
6.	Supervise expenditures of all departments, divisions or services of the city government and act as purchasing agent for all purchases of all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and materials which may be required for any of such departments, divisions or services, except as otherwise provided by law in accordance with the city purchasing policy and amendments adopted by resolution or ordinance thereto. 
7.	Analyze and supervise the functions, duties and activities of the various departments, advisory committees/boards and services of the city government and of all employees thereof, and make such recommendations to the city council with reference thereto as in his judgment will result in the overall operation of the city government in the highest degree of efficiency. 
8.	Develop and organize necessary improvement projects and programs and aid and assist the city council and the various departments and boards in carrying the same through to a successful conclusion. 
9.	Serve as public relations officer of the city government and follow through and endeavor to adjust all complaints filed against any employee, department or service thereof to the end that every effort may be made to satisfy all citizens that their city government is being operated in their behalf with the highest degree of efficiency. 
10.	Make and keep an up-to-date inventory of all personal property owned by the city or leased under a lease-purchase arrangement and recommend to the city council the purchase or lease of new machinery, equipment and supplies whenever, in his judgment, the same can be obtained at the best advantage, taking into consideration trade-in value of machinery, equipment, etc., in use. 
11.	See that all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced. 
12.	Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under his jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council. The city manager may be the head of one or more departments and may act as city clerk in addition to his other duties, if so directed by the city council; but in any case, the city clerk shall function under the administration of the city manager, and shall be an administrative assistant of the city manager. 
13.	See that all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed. 
14.	Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties. 
15.	Perform such other duties as may be required of him by the city council, not inconsistent with the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
B.	Control of Police Department. The police department of the city and all personnel thereof are placed under the control and administrative supervision of the city manager, and all powers of the city manager as set forth in this chapter shall apply with respect to the police department of the city. 
C.	Restrictions. 
1.	The city manager shall not exercise any policy making or legislative functions, nor attempt to commit or bind the city council or any member thereof to any action, plan or program requiring official action of the city council. 
2.	It is not intended by this chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon the city manager which is vested in or imposed by general law or city ordinances in any other city advisory committee, board, commission, officer or employee except as specifically set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-4), 2008) 
1.07.150 - Council interference prohibited. 
    Neither the council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office by the city manager or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administration of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-5), 2008) 
1.07.160 - Removal from office. 
    The city manager may be removed, with or without cause, by the city council, by simple majority vote of its members, unless the city council has entered into a contract of employment with the city manager, in which event, the city manager may be removed in accordance with the terms of such contract. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-6), 2008) 
1.07.170 - Compensation. 
    The city manager shall receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall fix from time to time by contract, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7A-7), 2008) 
CITY CLERK 
1.07.210 - City clerk; manager's assistant and city treasurer. 
    The city clerk shall be under the supervision and administration of the city manager and shall function as an administrative assistant to the city manager. The city clerk shall be treasurer of the city and have the care, control and custody of all monies of the city. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7B-1), 2008) 
1.07.220 - Other duties. 
    The city clerk or his or her designee shall attend all meetings of the city council and keep a true account of council proceedings, and shall have care, control and custody of the records and books of the city and keep true accounts of the receipts and expenditures of money. He or she shall make all publications required by law. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7B-2), 2008) 
1.07.230 - Bond. 
    The clerk, before or after entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall execute to the city a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $10,000.00 conditioned on the faithful performance of his or her duties, which bond shall be placed in the custody of the city manager. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7B-3), 2008) 
CITY ATTORNEY 
1.07.310 - City attorney-Appointment; duties. 
    There shall be appointed by mayor and council an attorney for the city, whose duty shall be to attend to all civil legal business of the city, under the direction of mayor and council to provide legal advice to the governing body, the city manager and city officers; to draft, review and approve all resolutions, ordinances, contracts, intergovernmental agreements (IGA), memorandum of understandings (MOU) and any other documents to be presented to mayor and council. 
    There shall be appointed by mayor and council an attorney for the municipal court, whose duty shall be to attend to all legal matters related to civil, criminal and code violations within the city municipal court. 
    Mayor and council may vest all duties within a single appointed attorney to attend to all legal matters enumerated in the paragraphs above. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-7C-1), 2008; Ord. NS314, § 1, 2013) 
Chapter 1.08 - MAGISTRATE'S COURT 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Established; jurisdiction. 
    There is created and established for the city a municipal court which shall be known as the magistrate's court. This court shall have exclusive jurisdiction of all violations of this Code and ordinances of the city, and concurrent jurisdiction with the Justice of the Peace Precinct in which the city is located for violations of the laws of the state committed within the limits of the city. This court shall, in addition to the foregoing, have the jurisdiction to issue municipal search and arrest warrants, blood draw warrants and warrants of inspection. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-8-1), 2008) 
1.08.020 - Presiding officer; magistrate duties. 
A.	Presiding Officer. The presiding officer of the magistrate's court shall be the city magistrate, who shall be appointed by the council. A magistrate shall serve for a term of four years with the beginning and end of the term of appointment to correspond with his or her elected service to the office of Justice of the Peace for Precinct Number Four, Cochise County, State of Arizona. A magistrate shall be appointed to serve as a juvenile hearing officer as provided by statute. Otherwise, the magistrate shall be appointed to serve as juvenile hearing officer as provided by statue and the magistrate serves at the pleasure of the appointing governing body. The magistrate shall receive such compensation as the council may from time to time determine. 
B.	Absence of the Magistrate. If the magistrate is temporarily absent or is incapacitated or unable to serve, the nearest Justice of the Peace within the county may be called upon by the mayor to preside over the magistrate court. The mayor and council may appoint a judge pro-tem to preside in the absence of the magistrate and mayor may call upon a judge pro-tem to preside in the absence of the magistrate. 
C.	Powers and Duties. The powers and duties of the magistrate shall include: 
1.	The powers and duties set forth and conferred upon presiding official under the provisions of the state constitution and statutes, this Code and the ordinances and resolutions of the city. 
2.	The duty to keep a docket in which shall be entered each action and the proceedings of the court therein. 
3.	The responsibility for fixing and receiving all bonds and bails and receiving all fines, penalties, fees and other monies as provided by law. 
4.	The duty to pay all fees, fines, penalties and other monies collected by the court to the required entities and the treasurer of the City of Willcox. 
5.	The duty to submit a monthly report to the council summarizing court activities for that month. 
6.	The duty to prepare a schedule of traffic violations not involving the death of a person, listing specific bail for each violation. 
7.	The duty to establish and implement a bond schedule for offenses for which persons are incarcerated and eligible for pretrial release and/or for appearance bonds and designate procedures for acceptance of bail bonds in lieu of continued detention during hours when the municipal court is not in session and/or when a judge pro-tem or justice of the peace is not available. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-8-2), 2008; Ord. NS321, § 1, 2015) 
1.08.030 - Conduct of proceedings. 
A.	Compliance with Law. The proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with the state constitution, the applicable state statutes and the rules of the State Supreme Court pertaining to municipal courts. The proceedings shall also be conducted in accordance with the rules of civil and criminal procedure as applicable to courts of limited jurisdiction and as may be required by the superior court, unless otherwise prescribed, and provided for by this Code and resolutions of the city not in conflict therewith. 
B.	Complaints. The magistrate's court proceedings shall be commenced by complaint under oath and in the name of the state setting forth the offense charged and such particulars of time, place, person and property as to enable the defendant to understand distinctly the character of the offense complained of and to answer the complaint. 
C.	Summonses and Warrants. If the magistrate is satisfied that the offense complained of has been committed by the person charged, the magistrate shall issue a summons or a warrant of arrest. Before issuing a summons or warrant of arrest on a complaint, the magistrate may subpoena and examine witnesses as to the truth of the complaint. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-8-3), 2008) 
1.08.040 - Fees in general. 
A.	There is hereby established the following list of fees: 
1.	Time Payment Fee. A fee of $20.00 shall be assessed and collected from those persons who request and are granted a monthly payment plan to pay fines and fees. 
2.	Dilatory/Late Payment Fee. A fee of $20.00 shall be assessed and collected from those persons that have been ordered to pay fines, penalties, or other fees and having failed to pay by date ordered. 
3.	Court Abstract Fee. A fee of $20.00 shall be assessed and collected from these persons requesting a court abstract for purposes of driver's license reinstatement. 
4.	Community Court Fee. An administrative fee of $40.00 shall be assessed and collected from those persons participating in diversion, house detention or community service programs. 
5.	Drug Court Fee. An administrative fee of $40.00 shall be assessed and collected from those persons participating in the drug court program. 
6.	Administrative Attorney Fee. An administrative fee of $20.00 shall be assessed and collected from those persons who are appointed a defense attorney by the court. 
7.	Fees for Court Appointed Counsel. Persons who are financially unable to hire private counsel and who are appointed counsel by the court, shall reimburse legal costs as ordered by the court. 
8.	Fees for Costs of Incarceration. Persons ordered to be incarcerated as part of any sentencing in the magistrate's court shall reimburse the costs of incarceration. 
9.	Jury Cancellation Fee. A fee of $100.00 shall be assessed and collected from any party or that party(s attorney who requests a jury trial and if, after the court schedules process for jury empanelling, person decides not to proceed to jury trial. 
10.	Mandated Surcharges. Surcharges as may be mandated by the Arizona Supreme Court and/or Arizona Revised Statutes and required to be imposed by the court. 
11.	Public Records/Recordings. Charges as may be mandated or permitted by the Arizona Supreme Court and/or Arizona Revised Statutes as may be required or permitted for public records request; records for appeal; and recording of proceedings. 
B.	The magistrate shall retain discretion in all cases to waive, reduce or delay the collection of these fees/fines whenever appropriate. It shall nonetheless be the general rule that all fees established pursuant to this section shall be assessed in full and collected as allowed herein. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-8-4), 2008) 
1.08.050 - Severability. 
    Any portion of this section found to be unconstitutional, unenforceable, or otherwise determined invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be severable from this section and the balance shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-8-5), 2008) 
Chapter 1.09 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

1.09.010 - Voter registration. 
A.	Registration Required. Before any person otherwise entitled to vote at a regular city primary or general election in the city shall be entitled to vote in such primary or general election, he shall be registered every two years in the city as provided in subsection (B) of this section. 
B.	Procedure. Any person otherwise entitled to vote in a regular primary, general or special election shall register to vote at the city hall or other places as may be designated by the city clerk. Registration to vote shall be open to the public and shall begin within 60 days before, and shall be closed ten days before the regular city election. Registration requirements and deadlines are further subject to Arizona Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-9-1), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 9-821; 9-822; 9-823; 9-824; 16-122. 
1.09.020 - Declaration of elected official. 
A.	Commencing with the year of 1968, and thereafter, any candidate for municipal office who receives a majority of all votes cast at a primary election shall be declared to be elected to the office for which he is a candidate. 
B.	Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, if more candidates than necessary to fill a vacancy or vacancies receive a majority of the votes cast at the primary election, then the candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast shall be declared elected. 
C.	In the event that at a primary election the number of candidates receiving a majority of all votes cast is less than the number of vacancies to be filled, then those candidates receiving a majority of all votes cast shall be declared elected, and as to the other vacancies, there shall be placed on the general election ballot the names of enough candidates to equal twice the number of such vacancies, the candidates being those who receive the highest plurality of votes at the primary election but not a majority of the votes cast. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-9-2), 2008) 
1.09.030 - Time of taking office. 
    Any candidate elected under the provisions of section 1.09.020 of this chapter shall take office at the same time and under the same conditions as if he were elected at the general election. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-9-3), 2008) 
1.09.040 - Ballot restrictions. 
    Nothing on the ballot in Willcox municipal elections shall be indicative of the source of the candidacy or of the support of the candidate. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-9-4), 2008) 
1.09.050 - English/Spanish language materials required. 
A.	All voting notices, forms, instructions, assistance or other materials or information relating to municipal elections of the city and to the electoral process, including ballots, shall hereafter be printed and, where applicable, published, posted or distributed in both the English and Spanish languages as may be permitted or required by law. 
B.	The Spanish language material shall be published, distributed or posted in the same manner as other election materials, and in addition, sample ballots printed in the Spanish language and all other election materials printed in the Spanish language that would ordinarily be made available or distributed to the general public prior to a municipal election shall be delivered to any community based organization and to any other appropriate minority organization in the city requesting same, within five days after sample ballots are printed and delivered to the city for further distribution to Spanish speaking members of the electorate of the city. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-9-5), 2008) 
Chapter 1.10 - ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS 
Sections: 

1.10.010 - Prior review and approval. 
    Before presentation to the council, all ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall have been reviewed as to form by the attorney and shall, when there are substantive matters of administration involved, be referred to the person who is charged with the administration of the matters. Such person shall have an opportunity to present his or her objections, if any, prior to the passage of the ordinance or resolution or acceptance of the contract. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-1), 2008) 
1.10.020 - Authority to introduce. 
    Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters requiring action by the council shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council except, that the city attorney or the city manager may present ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects to the council, and any member of the council may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance, resolution, matter or subject be adopted; otherwise the ordinance, resolution or subject matter shall not be considered. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-2), 2008) 
1.10.030 - Reading of proposed ordinance. 
    Ordinances shall be read, prior to adoption, but may be read by title only; provided, that the council is in possession of printed copies of said ordinance. A member of the council may request that the ordinance under consideration be read in full, and in such a case, the ordinance shall be read in full. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-3), 2008) 
1.10.040 - Contents of ordinance. 
A.	Each ordinance should have but one subject, the nature of which shall be clearly expressed in the title. Whenever possible, each ordinance shall be introduced as an amendment to this Code or to an existing ordinance, and in such case, the titles of the sections to be amended shall be included in the ordinance. 
B.	An ordinance to enact the provisions of a code or public record theretofore in existence without setting forth such provisions may be adopted by reference but the adopting ordinance shall be published in full. At least three copies of the code or public record shall be filed in the office of the city clerk of the municipality and kept for public use or inspection. A code or public record enacted by reference may be amended in the same manner. 
C.	A penalty clause contained in a code or public record shall be set forth in full in the adopting ordinance. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-4), 2008; Ord. NS320, § 2, 2015) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 9-802; 9-803. 
1.10.050 - Effective date of ordinances. 
A.	A city ordinance shall not become operative until 30 days after its passage by the council and approval by the mayor, unless it is passed over the mayor's veto, and then it shall not become operative until 30 days after final approval and until certification by the clerk of the city of the minutes of the meeting at which the action was taken, except emergency measures necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the city. 
B.	An emergency measure shall not become immediately operative unless it states in a separate section the reason why it is necessary that it should become immediately operative, and unless it is approved by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of all the members elected to the city council, taken by ayes and nays, and also approved by the mayor. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-5), 2008; Ord. NS320, § 1, 2015) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. NS320, adopted Feb. 5, 2015, changed the title of § 1.10.050 from "Effective date" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 19-142. 
1.10.060 - Signatures required. 
    Every ordinance passed by the council shall, before it becomes effective, be signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and acknowledged that it has been approved as to form by the city attorney. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-6), 2008) 
1.10.070 - Publication. 
    Only such orders, ordinances, resolutions, motions, regulations, or proceedings of the council shall be published as may be required by state statutes or expressly ordered by the council. Ordinances shall be published once each week for two consecutive weeks in a weekly newspaper of general circulation or four times in a daily newspaper of general circulation. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-7), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 9-812; 39-204. 
1.10.080 - Posting certain ordinances. 
    Every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine, forfeiture or other punishment shall, in addition to the provisions of section 1.10.070 of this chapter, be published after its enactment by posting in three or more public places within the city, and shall be in force from and after the date of posting. Posting may be established by the affidavit of the person who posted the ordinance filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. NS283, § 1(1-10-8), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 9-813; 39-204. 
TITLE 2 - BOARDS COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES[1] 
Chapters: 2.01 Planning and Zoning Commission 2.02 Reserved 2.03 Historical Preservation Advisory Committee 2.04 Reserved  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS283, §§ 2, 4, adopted March 3, 2008, repealed tit. 2, chs. 2.04-2.52, §§ 2.04.010-2.04.060, 2.08.010-2.08.040, 2.12.010-2.12.090, 2.16.010-2.16.070, 2.18.010-2.18.070, 2.20.010-2.20.120, 2.22.010-2.22.090, 2.24.010-2.24.040, 2.28.010-2.28.140, 2.32.010-2.32.090, 2.36.010-2.36.040, 2.40.010-2.40.060, 2.44.010-2.44.040, 2.48.010-2.48.060, 2.52.010-2.52.060, and enacted a new tit. 2 as set out herein. The former tit. 2 pertained to administration and personnel, and derived from Ord. NS-21, adopted in 1973; Ord. NS-24, §§ 1-5, adopted in 1974; Ord. NS-40, adopted in 1976; Ord. NS-49, adopted in 1978; Ord. NS-64, §§ 1-9, adopted in 1979; Ord. NS-87, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS117, adopted April 9, 1985; Ord. NS118, adopted April 9, 1985; Ord. NS121, adopted June 11, 1985; Ord. NS123, adopted Oct. 8, 1985; Ord. NS175, adopted June 28, 1994; Ord. NS177, adopted Aug. 23, 1994; Ord. NS195, adopted May 13, 1997; Ord. NS199, adopted Sept. 30, 1997; Ord. NS200, adopted Sept. 30, 1997; Ord. NS201, adopted Sept. 30, 1997; Ord. NS202, adopted Sept. 30, 1997; Ord. NS204, adopted Jan. 13, 1998; Ord. NS205, adopted Jan. 13, 1998; Ord. NS206, adopted Jan. 13, 1998; Ord. NS207, adopted Jan. 13, 1998; Ord. NS208, adopted Jan. 13, 1998; Ord. NS209, adopted Dec. 23, 1997; Ord. NS205, adopted Jan. 13, 1998; Ord. NS233, adopted June 12, 2001; prior code §§ 2.04.020-2.04.060, 2.08.010, 2.08.040, 2.08.050, 2.08.080, 2.12.010-2.12.090, 2.16.010-2.16.070, 2.20.010-2.20.120, 2.24.010-2.24.040, 2.28.010-2.28.110, 2.28.300, 2.32.010-2.32.040, 2.36.010-2.36.060, and 7.04.010-7.04.040. 

Chapter 2.01 - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.01.010 - Creation. 
    There is created a planning and zoning commission within and for the city to be known as the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-1), 2008) 
2.01.020 - Composition; appointment; terms; vacancies; removals. 
A.	Composition; Appointment. The city planning and zoning commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor and city council from among the qualified electors of the city. The mayor, with the consent of the council, may appoint an ex-officio member to the commission, such member shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Ex-officio members shall not be entitled to vote on any item brought before the commission. 
B.	Terms and Vacancies. The membership of the five members shall be appointed in staggered four-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and council to fulfill the unexpired term of the former member. 
C.	Removals. Members of the commission shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the commission. Should a member have three unexcused absences, in succession, the member will be removed from the commission by the mayor and city council. Members may be removed by a majority vote of the city council without the necessity of a hearing or notice of such action, and such action shall be final. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-2), 2008) 
2.01.030 - Organization and rules. 
A.	Officers: 
1.	At the regularly scheduled July meeting of the planning and zoning commission of every year, the commission shall organize by electing one of its members to serve as chair and one member as vice-chair at the pleasure of the commission. In the absence of staff, a member of the commission shall serve as recording secretary for the recording of minutes for the commission, who shall keep a record of attendance, proceedings and transactions. The minutes or a statement of legal action taken shall be placed on the Internet as required by law. 
2.	The term of the officers shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election. 
B.	Rules and Regulations. The commission may prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of its internal affairs, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. 
C.	Meetings. The commission shall designate a regular meeting time and place, and all meetings shall be in conformance with the Arizona Open Meeting Law. 
D.	Quorum. No action shall be taken at a commission meeting unless a quorum is present. Three commission members shall constitute a quorum for transacting business. If a quorum is not present, the commission meeting is automatically adjourned. A lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. Any number of the commission at any regular or special meeting may demand, in writing, the attendance of the absent members. Such demand shall be entered of record forthwith by the recording secretary, who shall thereupon notify absent members of the time and place of the meeting and of the demand for her/his attendance. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-3), 2008) 
2.01.040 - Duties generally. 
A.	It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission, when requested by the mayor and city council, by resolution or otherwise, to make a report or recommendation in connection with any matter relating to the overall development of the city. The commission shall have authority to make such investigations, maps, reports and recommendations in connection therewith as deemed desirable. In every case, when the commission disapproves a matter which, under the terms of this chapter, the mayor and city council are officially required to submit to the commission for approval, disapproval or recommendation, the commission shall communicate its reasons to the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall have the power to overrule the disapproval. 
B.	The commission may recommend to the mayor and city council programs for public works and improvements and for the financing thereof. The commission shall consult and solicit advice with and from public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and from and with citizens in relation to the development and/or implementation of the plan prepared by the commission. All public officials shall, upon request by the mayor and council, furnish to the commission, within a reasonable time, such authority as may be necessary to enable the commission to fulfill its functions, promote planning and carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
C.	When requested by mayor and city council, the commission shall make an annual report setting forth the state and progress of its work and further periodic reports concerning the said work. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-4), 2008) 
2.01.050 - General plan. 
A.	Contents. The planning and zoning commission working together with the city's chief executive officer, "city manager," shall formulate and develop a comprehensive long-term general plan for all development within the city and such territory outside of the corporate city limits as falls within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to A.R.S. 9-462.07 or which has a bearing on the planning of the city based on easements, rights-of-way or state leases. In addition, to make changes in, additions to or extensions of such plan. The general plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive matter, shall show recommendations for the development of such territory, including, among other things, the general location, character, and extent of streets, parks, squares, playgrounds, waterways, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces; the general location of public buildings and other utilities for water, light, gas, sanitation, transportation, communication, power and other purposes; the removal, relocation widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, and change of spaces of buildings, property, utilities or terminals; the general character, location and extent of community centers or housing developments; and a zoning plan and regulation as provided in this chapter. 
B.	Adoption. The planning and zoning commission may recommend the adoption of the general plan as a whole by a single resolution, or it may be successive resolutions with functional divisions of the subject matter of the general plan. Before the adoption of the plan or any part, amendment, extension or addition, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. The adoption of the general plan or any part thereof shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than three members of the commission. The resolution shall refer expressly to the maps, description and other matters intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the general plan, and the action taken shall be entered upon the map, plan and descriptive matter over the signature of the chair of the commission. The map, plan and descriptive matter shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be a public record. 
C.	Legal Status. The legal status of the adopted general plan or any part thereof shall be that of an official guide for the planning and zoning commission in the performance of its duties and functions under this chapter. The commission shall recommend and the mayor and city council shall adopt the general plan or part thereof. The zoning administrator shall keep the planning and zoning commission apprised of actions taken related to the general plan. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-5), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 9-462.07. 
2.01.060 - Zoning. 
    Under the authority of A.R.S. 9-462 and 9-463 and other related statutory and constitutional provisions, and under the authority granted by this chapter, a zoning commission has been established. The planning and zoning commission, as created in this chapter, shall henceforth and hereafter perform the duties of the zoning commission and have the powers thereof as set forth in this chapter and in applicable constitutional and statutory provisions of the state. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-6), 2008) 
2.01.070 - Subdivisions. 
    Upon request by the mayor and city council, the commission shall prepare and submit proposed regulations governing the subdivision of land. Such regulations may provide for the harmonious development of the city and such territory outside of the corporate city limits as falls within the jurisdiction of the mayor and city council by virtue of A.R.S. 9-462.07; 9-474 through 9-479 and 9-1141. Such regulations shall be for the purpose of coordination of streets within subdivisions and with other existing or planned streets, or with other features of the adopted general plan; for adequate open spaces for traffic, recreation, light and air; for conservation of water supply, development of adequate transportation, water drainage, utility lines for gas and water, and sanitary facilities; and for the management and avoidance of population congestion. Prior to submitting the regulations to the mayor and city council, the commission shall hold a public hearing or hearings thereon and give due notice of the hearing or hearings to the public. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-7), 2008) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 9-462.07; 9-474-9-479; 9-1141. 
2.01.080 - Public hearings. 
A.	Notice Requirements. Where notice of a public hearing is required to be given by Arizona Revised Statutes, the commission shall comply with such statutes. Where notice is not required to be given by a statute, the commission shall adopt rules and regulations designed to give reasonable notice to the public and affected parties. Public notice of one or more hearings may be included within the same notice. 
B.	Fee. Before any public hearing is held by the planning and zoning commission on any application to amend or change zoning district boundaries, as provided under this chapter, the applicant for such amendment or change shall first pay to the development services division a fee as established by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-8), 2008) 
2.01.090 - Financial interests. 
    No member of the commission shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale or transaction to which the city is a party and which comes before the commission. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-9), 2008) 
2.01.100 - Compensation. 
    Commission members shall serve without compensation. Commission members shall be entitled to reimbursement for prior authorized expenditures in performing their duties. All expenditures shall follow the city purchasing policy guidelines. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-1-10), 2008) 
Chapter 2.03 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Sections: 

2.03.010 - Creation. 
    There is created a historical preservation advisory committee within and for the City of Willcox to be known as the historical preservation advisory committee. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-1), 2008) 
2.03.020 - Composition; qualifications. 
A.	The city historical preservation advisory committee shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor and city council from among the residents of the city and the surrounding community. At all times, three members of the committee shall be qualified electors of the City of Willcox. 
B.	The mayor, with the consent of the city council, may appoint an ex-officio member to the advisory committee. Such member shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. Ex-officio member shall not be entitled to vote on any item brought before the advisory committee. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-2), 2008) 
2.03.030 - Appointment; terms; vacancies; removals. 
A.	Appointment; Term; Vacancies. The five members shall be appointed in staggered four-year terms. To encourage participation from residents of the city and community, advisory committee members are encouraged to serve no more than two consecutive four-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and city council to fulfill the unexpired term of the former member. 
B.	Removal. Members of the advisory committee shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the historical preservation advisory committee. Should a member have three unexcused absences, in succession, the member will be removed from the advisory committee by the mayor and city council. Members may be removed by a majority vote of the city council without the necessity of a hearing or notice of such action, and such action shall be final. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-3), 2008) 
2.03.040 - Organization and rules. 
A.	Officers: 
1.	At the regularly scheduled July meeting of the historical preservation advisory committee of every year, the committee shall organize by electing one of its members to serve as chair and one member as vice-chair at the pleasure of the committee. In the absence of staff, a member of the advisory committee shall serve as recording secretary for the recording of minutes for the committee, who shall keep a record of attendance, proceedings and transactions. The minutes or a statement of legal action taken shall be posted on the Internet as required by law. 
2.	The term of the officers shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election. 
B.	Rules and Regulations. The historical preservation advisory committee may prescribe rules and regulations for the conduct of its internal affairs, copies of which shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. 
C.	Meetings. The advisory committee shall designate a regular meeting time and place, and all meetings shall be in conformance with the Arizona Open Meetings Law. 
D.	Quorum. No action shall be taken at a committee meeting unless a quorum is present. Three committee members shall constitute a quorum for transacting business. If a quorum is not present, the advisory committee meeting is automatically adjourned. A lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. Any number of the committee at any regular or special meeting may demand, in writing, the attendance of the absent members. Such demand shall be entered of record forthwith by the recording secretary, who shall thereupon notify absent members of the time and place of the meeting and of the demand for her/his attendance. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-4), 2008) 
2.03.050 - Duties. 
A.	It shall be the duty of the historical preservation advisory committee to provide advisory assistance to the city council in establishing a citywide policy for preservation and restoration of historical sites and properties located in the city and for the purpose of preserving the heritage of the city. 
B.	When requested by the mayor and city council, the advisory committee shall make an annual report setting forth the status and progress of its work and further periodic reports concerning the said work. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-5), 2008) 
2.03.060 - Financial interests. 
    No member of the historical preservation advisory committee shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale or transaction to which the city is a party and which comes before the committee. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-6), 2008) 
2.03.070 - Compensation. 
    Historical preservation advisory committee members shall serve without compensation. Committee members shall be entitled to reimbursement for prior authorized expenditures in performing their duties. All expenditures shall follow the city purchasing policy guidelines. 
(Ord. NS283, § 2(2-3-7), 2008) 
TITLE 3 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Chapters: 3.01 General Finance Provisions 3.02 City Tax Code  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS283, §§ 3, 4, adopted March 3, 2008, repealed tit. 3, chs. 3.04-3.20, §§ 3.04.010, 3.08.010-3.08.320, 3.12.010-3.12.090, 3.16.010-3.16.030, 3.20.010-3.20.070, and enacted a new tit. 3 as set out herein. Former tit. 3 pertained to revenue and finance, and derived from Ord. NS-55, adopted in 1978; Ord. NS-78, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS-79, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS-81, §§ 1-7, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS-86, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS-93, adopted in 1980; Ord. NS107, § 1, adopted Dec. 14, 1982; Ord. NS123, adopted Aug. 12, 1986; Ord. NS129, adopted Nov. 18, 1986; Ord. NS128, adopted April 29, 1987; Ord. NS150, § 1, adopted July 23, 1991; Ord. NS180, adopted Dec. 13, 1994; Ord. NS261, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 1, 2005; Res. No. 2008-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 22, 2008; prior code §§ 3.04.010, 3.08.010-3.08.320, 3.12.030-3.12.080, 3.16.010-3.16.030. 

Chapter 3.01 - GENERAL FINANCE PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

3.01.010 - Claims against city. 
A.	Presentation; Restrictions. Every person having a claim on account against the city, excepting those referred to in this section, shall present their claim in writing to the city manager, stating minutely what the claim is for, specifying each item and date and amount thereof. No demand shall be allowed in favor of any person who is indebted to the city without first considering deduction of such indebtedness. Nothing herein shall be held to apply for the demands of official salaries, which, by expressed provisions or ordinance or resolution, are made in demand against the city. 
B.	Filing; Procedure. Claims shall be filed with the city manager, and said claims shall be handled in accordance with the city purchasing policy. 
C.	Demands and Payments. 
1.	For purposes of this section, in accordance with A.R.S. 9-247, all demands shall be made by purchase orders. The terms "purchase order" and "warrant" shall be synonymous. The terms "check" and "voucher" shall be synonymous. 
2.	When any amount is allowed as a demand against the city, a check shall be drawn on the treasury, signed by the mayor or vice-mayor and the city manager or finance director or treasurer, which check shall be delivered to the party in whose favor the same is drawn and presented by him to the treasurer. All checks shall be made payable to the order of the person entitled thereto. Such check may be presented by the assignee, executor, personal representative or administrator of the person to whom the same is drawn. 
3.	Checks must specify the liability for which they are drawn and when the same accrued, and must be paid in the order of presentation. If the fund upon which such check is drawn is insufficient to pay the same, such check shall be registered by the treasurer and thereafter paid in the order of its registration as such funds shall become sufficient. 
4.	Checks shall be on the form established by resolution of the council. 
5.	No check or voucher drawn on the treasurer shall be drawn in favor of any other person than the one to whom the same is due. 
6.	Payment for checks, together with accrued interest thereon, shall be made by check drawn by the treasurer on the city depository, which check shall show thereon the number of the check or checks so paid and the amount of accrued interest thereon. When such checks may be returned from the depository as paid, they shall be filed by the treasurer in the records of his office and shall constitute a credit in his favor for the amounts therein stated in all settlements of accounts with the city. 
7.	The treasurer of the city shall not pay any check or voucher drawn on her/him unless such check be presented for payment by the person in whose favor such check is drawn, or his assignee, executor, or administrator. 
(Ord. NS283, § 3(3-1-1), 2008) 
Cross reference- Title 1, chapter 1.07, § 1.07.140. 
3.01.020 - Delinquent improvement district assessments. 
A.	Sale Procedure. On sale of lots or portions thereof arising from delinquent payment of improvement district assessments of the city, if there is no purchaser other than the city who will pay the entire amount of the assessment, penalty, and costs, including $10.00 to the city clerk for a certificate of sale, the city clerk shall sell the lot or portion thereof to the person who will take the least quantity of land, and then and there pay the amount of the assessment then delinquent, including interest, penalty and costs due, and $10.00 to the city clerk for a certificate of sale, and in such event, deed shall issue to the purchaser in accordance with the provisions of law, subject to redemption as provided by law. 
B.	Lien. The lien on the entire lot, piece, or parcel of land assessed and sold in the manner provided by subsection (A) of this section shall continue to be in effect for the amount of the assessment or portion thereof, including interest, penalty and costs thereafter to become due, and the land may again be sold should the assessment again become delinquent. 
C.	Sale Notice. All notices of sale for delinquent assessments shall contain the provision of this section. 
(Ord. NS283, § 3(3-1-2), 2008) 
3.01.030 - Procurement policy. 
A.	Applicability. This section applies to every expenditure of public monies by this city irrespective of their source, including federal assistance monies, except that this section does not apply to grants or contracts between this city and other governments, except as provided by this section. This section also applies to the disposal of city materials. Nothing in this section shall prevent this city from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest or cooperative agreement. This section also applies to contracts, except sale or lease of city real property, where there is no expenditure of public monies when the city determines source selection and award of a contract. 
    The provisions of this section are not applicable to contracts for professional witnesses if the purpose of such contracts is to provide for services or testimony relating to an existing or probable judicial proceeding in which this city is or may become a party or to contracts for special investigative services for law enforcement purposes. 
    Agreements negotiated by the city attorney in settlement of litigation or threatened litigation are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
    The purchases of materials for resale in a concession operation are exempt from the provisions of this section. However, such purchases shall be in accordance with procedures prescribed by the city manager. 
    The provisions of this section are not applicable to contracts for municipal improvement districts. Such contracts shall be awarded in accordance with A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter 4. 
    Contracts for the performance of annual audits required by A.R.S. Title 9, Article 7.1 shall be awarded in accordance to A.R.S. 9-482. 
B.	Adoption by Reference. The City of Willcox Procurement Policy is adopted by reference and is hereby referred to and made part hereof as if fully set forth herein in its entirety. The procurement policy has been officially and formally adopted by mayor and council pursuant to Resolution No. 2008-01 on January 7, 2008, and formally declared a public record pursuant to Resolution No. 2008-08 on February 18, 2008. Any future amendments or modifications to the city procurement policy shall be approved and adopted through the resolution process. Mayor and council shall formally consider and adopt any amendment or modification to the city procurement policy. 
(Ord. NS283, § 3(3-1-3), 2008) 
Chapter 3.02 - CITY TAX CODE 
Sections: 

3.02.010 - Code adopted. 
    The "Willcox City Tax Code" as adopted and amended by the Willcox City Council from time to time by ordinance, is hereby referred to and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. NS283, § 3(3-2-1), 2008; Ord. NS317, § 1, 2014) 
Note- Said Tax Code as presently adopted is a public record of the city; three copies of such referenced document are on file in the office of the city clerk for public inspection. 
3.02.020 - Violation; penalty. 
    Any person found guilty of violating any provision of the tax code and amendments thereto referenced in section 3.02.010 of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense, punishable as herein described. 
(Ord. NS283, § 3(3-2-2), 2008) 
TITLE 4 - BUSINESS 
Chapters: 4.01 Business Permit Regulations  
Chapter 4.01 - BUSINESS PERMIT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

4.01.010 - Violation of code compliance; penalty; enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, business association, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity to operate a business without first obtaining a business permit as provided in title 4. 
A.	Violations. Any person, business association, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity who shall: 
1.	Violate any of the provisions of the City Code adopted as the "business permits and regulations" as set forth in title 4, chapter 1, sections 4.01.010 through 4.01.110 or who shall fail to comply therewith; or 
2.	Violate or fail to comply with any lawful order of any duly appointed issuance/compliance official(s) thereto; or 
3.	Operate a business not in conformance with regulations adopted under this chapter or business permit issued thereto; or 
4.	Fail to comply with any other ordinance, as affirmed or modified by the mayor and city council or any order of a court of competent jurisdiction with the time fixed, or from an order which no appeal is taken; shall respectively be guilty of a petty offense or a misdemeanor as prescribed in title 1, chapter 4, section 1.04.010 and herein. 
B.	Penalty. Any person or any other legal entity violating any of the provisions of title 4, herein adopted shall be subject to the penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 1, section 1.04.010 of this Code: Fine not exceeding $300.00 for offenses designated as petty offenses pursuant to A.R.S. 13-601 or a fine not exceeding $2,500.00 for offenses designated as misdemeanors plus statutory surcharges as mandated by the legislature on/after December 15, 2008, or as amended; a probationary period and imprisonment/confinement up to 180 days or any combination thereof, including suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other equitable relief except as otherwise provided elsewhere in the Code. 
    The application of the penalty as set forth in title 4 shall not, in any event, preclude an enforcement order to assure compliance with the Code regulations, and the issuance/compliance official may issue a citation (complaint) to any person, business association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity in violation of, or not in complete compliance with any provision of this title. Upon issuance of any citation (complaint), the person, business association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity so cited, shall be provided a copy of the citation (complaint) as provided by law. Said citation (complaint) shall be thereafter filed with the consolidated court by the compliance officer issuing such citation (complaint). 
C.	Enforcement. The enforcement powers and duties of the compliance official and of any other administrative authority as may be referenced in any section of the City Code, for any and all matters pertaining to any business permits. The mayor and city council and/or the city manager may, from time to time, authorize such appointments and duties as needed to perform any and all code compliance and enforcement or other duties that may be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-1), 2008) 
State Law reference- Licensing authority, A.R.S. 9-240(18). 
4.0l.020 - Issuance/compliance official(s): 
A.	Office Created; Supervision. 
1.	The office of "issuance/compliance official(s)" is created, and the city clerk and the office of finance and budget are designated to act and to be known as the issuance/compliance official(s). 
2.	The issuance/compliance official(s) shall be city employees under the direction of the city manager. 
B.	Duties. 
1.	Generally: 
a.	The issuance/compliance official(s) shall have the authority and responsibility to perform all the requirements specified title 4 and Arizona Revised Statutes or as required by this Code, ordinances and resolutions as adopted by mayor and council. 
b.	Issuance of Permits: The issuance official shall direct the manner of issuing and registering the business permits. He/she shall enforce all provisions of the regulations adopted herein. 
c.	Enforcement: The compliance official(s) shall issue such notices of determination and orders of corrective action as may be necessary to enforce compliance with state law, City Code business regulations. 
2.	Records kept: The issuance/compliance official(s) shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, or reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. 
C.	Cooperation From Other Officials. The issuance/compliance official(s) may request and shall receive necessary assistance and cooperation from other city officials in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-2), 2008) 
State Law reference- Licensing authority, A.R.S. 9-240(18). 
4.0l.030 - Definitions. 
    In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    "Business" means any trade, calling, profession, or occupation, which regularly provides goods and/or services within the corporate limits of the city. "Business" does not include schools, churches, athletic groups, non-profit organizations, persons fulfilling work under a warranty or professionals performing work within their profession, on an itinerant basis, within the city limits of Willcox, who are licensed by the state of Arizona. 
    "Permanent business" means a business use which occurs for a period of more than six months a year. 
    "Home based business" means a temporary business use, which occurs for a period of less than six months a year from a temporary location or structure and includes peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. 
    "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or any other group, organization, or entity acting as a unit in the plural as well as the singular number. 
    "Regularly" means at least once a month. 
    "Special event" means an event which: 
A.	Is operated in a temporary structure or in the out of doors. 
B.	Includes, but is not limited to, circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, religious revivals, political rallies, vehicle shows and displays, swap meets, rodeos, and similarly recognized temporary activities. 
C.	Does not include wedding and funeral ceremonies, elections, private yard sales, car washes, activities exempt under section 4.01.070.A of this chapter and activities such as retail sales promotions conducted under an existing business permit that could otherwise be lawfully conducted in accordance with the provisions of the zoning restrictions in the district where such promotion takes place. 
    "Temporary business" means a temporary business use which occurs for a period of less than six months a year from a temporary location or structure. "Temporary business" shall include peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-3), 2008) 
State Law reference- Licensing authority, A.R.S. 9-240(18). 
4.0l.040 - Compliance and permit required. 
A.	Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business, either from a permanent structure or a mobile structure or by personal solicitation or contact, or to conduct a special event, without complying with the regulations specified in this chapter and obtaining an annual business permit from the city. 
B.	Non-Business Enterprises. Institutions, organizations, enterprises and agencies classified as "non-business" (schools, churches, athletic groups or nonprofit organizations) conducting business like activities are required to obtain a permit in order to collect documentation of exempt status and vital business statistics utilized in development of a community business profile. Upon receipt of an application from a "non-business" enterprise, the city will review the application and determine if the applicant qualifies to be issued an exemption of fees under section 4.01.070.A of this chapter. 
C.	Temporary Businesses; Special Events. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a temporary business or special event without first obtaining a temporary business permit as provided in title 4. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-4), 2008) 
4.0l.050 - Separate permits required. 
A.	A separate permit must be obtained for each branch establishment or location where a permanent or temporary business is conducted. 
B.	When more than one business is operated, transacted or practiced in the same location by the same person, only one permit shall be required for such person. 
C.	When more than one business is operated, transacted, or practiced in one location by a person other than the primary person, a separate permit shall be obtained for each person conducting such business. For example, for construction jobs, the general contractor and each subcontractor will be required to obtain separate permits. In the case of an establishment in which merchandise, goods and services are placed on consignment by persons and where the primary person is issued the state tax ID license and accepts responsibility for collection and payment of all taxes on transactions subject to said taxes, the primary person is responsible for obtaining a business permit for said business. 
D.	For special events, the sponsor of the primary event shall be required to obtain a permit or temporary business permit. The city council requires all vendors participating in the event (unless exempted by city council) to obtain a permit and deems it necessary for preserving the general health, welfare and safety of the community. 
E.	If the proposed use will be conducted on property not owned by the applicant, the applicant is responsible for notifying the owner of the property where the proposed use will take place of the intention to conduct a temporary business on said owner's property and enlist permission to conduct business on said property. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-5), 2008) 
4.0l.060 - Application for permit; issuance. 
A.	It shall be the duty of the issuance official to provide the appropriate application form and to prepare and issue a business permit under this chapter for every person liable to obtain such a permit hereunder. If the proposed use involves a temporary business or a special event, the issuance official shall also provide the applicant with a temporary business permit application. The business permit application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following information: 
1.	Name of business. 
2.	Name of applicant and relationship to the business or entity. 
3.	Complete permanent and local address. 
4.	A brief description of the nature and type of the business. 
5.	List of the type of product(s) produced or sold or the service(s) rendered. Specify if the materials and products will include flammable or toxic materials. 
6.	If the business is a corporation, the state where incorporated, and provide the name and address for the Arizona statutory agent. 
7.	Names and addresses of officers/owners of the business. 
8.	The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
9.	If applicable, state sales tax number and a copy of the applicant's Arizona transitional sales tax license or documentation of exemption. 
10.	If applicable, the county, state or national licensing information for all businesses, trades and professions deemed necessary to conduct business. 
11.	Registration number or copy of any other license deemed necessary to conduct business (health, state, local or national certification, etc.) 
B.	Upon receipt of a completed business permit application, the city shall: 
1.	Review, verify and process the application. 
2.	Forward the application to the development services department "DSD" which shall review to verify that all zoning requirements are satisfied. 
3.	Upon receipt of a temporary business permit application, the city shall review, verify and process the application, including review by the department of public safety "DPS" and the "DSD", which shall review said application to verify that all safety and zoning requirements are satisfied. 
B.	If a temporary business permit is issued, the permit shall indicate the time period for which it is valid. A temporary business permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed six months. 
C.	If the temporary business permit involves a special event, the applicant shall be provided with an information sheet listing guidelines for special events. The "DSD" and the "DPS" shall have the right to impose conditions on the permit, including, but not limited to, conditions relating to insurance, parking, health and sanitation, hours of operation, permissible noise levels, and other public safety concerns. 
D.	Once the city has reviewed and verified the application and the departmental review for the issuance official, the permit shall be issued within a period of 72 hours (three working days). 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-6), 2008) 
4.0l.070 - Permit fees and exemptions; renewals. 
A.	A person applying for a business permit under this chapter shall pay an annual processing fee as may from time to time be set by resolution by mayor and council. Any organization operated exclusively for educational, religious, charitable, public service, fraternal or other nonprofit purposes and having a permanent address within the confines of Cochise County may be exempted from the fee provisions of this subsection. 
B.	All permanent business permits shall be renewed on an annual basis. The permit holder shall file with the city a renewal form supplied by the city, no later than the first working day of January of each year, with current information. Permits not filed by that date will be suspended, and a new permit will be required. If there are no changes in the information that the permit holder provided to the city the previous year, the permit holder may check the box next to "No changes in information provided last year", sign the renewal application and submit it to the city. 
C.	A new business permit fee shall become due and payable on or before the day of commencement of the business or event for which a permit is required. 
D.	A person who has an existing business permit and changes the type or nature of business or the ownership of business shall be required to apply for and obtain a new business permit. 
E.	Renewal of the temporary business permit is the sole responsibility of the permit holder. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-7), 2008) 
State Law reference- License fee, A.R.S. 9-240(19). 
4.0l.080 - Home based permit. 
A.	Permit Required. An approval for a home based permit is required prior to issuance of a business permit. 
B.	Conditions. 
1.	The total number of employees other than family members shall not exceed one full time (40 hours per week) employee or equivalent. 
2.	The home based occupation may not involve the use of more than one additional building. Yard space may not be used for storage or activities outside the dwellings not normally associated with residential use, unless approved by the city planning and zoning commission. 
3.	One commercially licensed vehicle shall be allowed. 
4.	The home based occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the building from that of a dwelling. 
5.	All signs must comply with the city sign ordinance. 
6.	Not more than the equivalent of 25 percent of the ground floor area of the dwelling may be devoted to the home based occupation. 
7.	Entrance to the home based business from the outside shall be the same entrance normally used by the residing family, except when required otherwise by regulation of the state health services department or other public agency. 
8.	The physical appearance, traffic and any other activities in connection with the home occupation may not be contrary to the objectives and characteristics of the one in which the home occupation is located. 
9.	The home based business shall not be operated in such a manner as to be a safety or fire hazard; nor shall there be emitted into the atmosphere smoke, soot, dust, radiation, odor, noise, heat, glare, toxic fumes or other condition that would be deemed harmful to the neighborhood in which the business is operated. 
10.	A home based business may be open for business during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Surrounding neighbors may need to be notified if hours of operation are extended. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-8), 2008) 
4.0l.090 - Posting permit. 
    Every permit holder operating a business at a fixed location shall keep such permit posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the place of business. Every permit holder not having a fixed place of business shall carry the permit with him/ her at all times while operating the business for which the same was granted. Every sponsor of a special event shall post the business permit and the temporary business permit required under this chapter in a conspicuous location during all hours of the special event. 
    No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or transferable to any other person. No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall apply to any business location other than the location designated in the permit application. 
    No permit holder hereunder shall have any exclusive right to any location in a public street, nor shall the permit holder be permitted to operate in any congested area where the operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a police and/or code enforcement officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-9), 2008) 
4.0l.100 - Refusal of issuance; revocation of permit. 
A.	Refusal of Issuance. The city shall have the authority to refuse to issue a new business or temporary permit if the person applying for the permit fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.	Revocation of Permit. An existing business permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the city for any of the following reasons: 
1.	Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of applying for a permit; 
2.	Judicial finding of fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of operating the business; 
3.	Any violation of this chapter; 
4.	Judicial finding that the permit holder conducted a business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public; and/or 
5.	Failure to comply with terms or conditions of approval as specified in the permit application, including, but not limited to, building permits, tent permits, signage schedules, and development. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-10), 2008) 
4.0l.110 - Appeals process adopted. 
    Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of determinations, corrective actions, and/or decisions by the issuance/compliance official(s) relative to the application and interpretation of this Code provisions, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
    Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. 
    Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to Code regulations and enforcement who are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
    Designation. The City of Willcox Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a board of appeals for all purposes described in this Willcox Municipal Code and all titles adopted by the city. 
    Duties and Authority. The board of appeals shall determine the alternative materials and methods of construction and provide reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code. For such purposes, the building inspector shall be an ex-officio member. Notice of appeal shall be given upon a form provided by the building inspector and shall be perfected within ten days after receipt of disapproval, notice of determination or notice corrective action. 
    Decisions and Findings. The board of appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulation for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings, in writing, to the building inspector with a duplicate copy to the appellant. The board may recommend, to the mayor and council, such new legislation as is consistent therewith. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-11), 2008) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ord. NS283, 2008; 2008 Code, Ord. NS289, 2008. 
4.0l.120 - Sunset clause. 
    The provisions of this chapter are subject to automatic renewal every year beginning on December 31, 2010, unless otherwise terminated, revised, revoked or amended by action of the Willcox City Council. 
(Ord. NS290, §§ 1-3(4-1A-12), 2008; Ord. NS302, § 2, 2010) 
TITLE 5 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Chapters: 5.01 General Health and Sanitation Regulations 5.02 Nuisances 5.03 Transient Dwellings 5.04 Reserved 5.05 Reserved 5.06 Solid Waste  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS246, §§ 3, 4, adopted March 17, 2003, repealed tit. 5, chs. 5.01-5.09, §§ 5.01.010-5.01.130, 5.02.010-5.02.130, 5.04.010-5.04.080, 5.09.010-5.09.040, which pertained to business, and derived from prior code § 5.04.010; the 1981 codification; and Ord. 255, adopted Aug. 2, 2004.  Subsequently, section 2 of Ord. NS292, adopted April 6, 2009, enacted new provisions as herein set out. 

Chapter 5.01 - GENERAL HEALTH AND SANITATION REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

5.01.010 - Violation of code compliance; penalty; enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, party, contractor, manager, board and officer, or any other business legal entity to create, continue or fail to abate a nuisance in a public or private place which is injurious to the health or indecent or offensive to the senses, or which obstructs the free use of property or which interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons as provided in title 5. 
    Violations: Any person, owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, party, contractor, manager, board and officer, or any other business legal entity who shall: 
1.	Violate any of the provisions of the City Code adopted as the "Health and Sanitation" as set forth in title 5, chapters 1 through 3, sections 5.01.010 through 5.03.120, or who shall fail to comply therewith; or 
2.	Violate or fail to comply with any lawful order of any duly appointed building inspector/official(s) thereto; or 
3.	Fail to abate a condition prohibited under the provisions of title 5 which has been determined not to be in conformance with regulations adopted under this title or a notice of determination and order of corrective action issued thereto; or 
4.	Fail to comply with any other ordinance, as affirmed or modified by the mayor and city council or any order of a court of competent jurisdiction with the time fixed, or from an order which no appeal is taken. 
    Penalty: Any person, owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, party, contractor, manager, board and officer or any other business legal entity violating any of the provisions of title 5, herein adopted shall be subject to the penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 1, section 1.04.010 of this Code: Fine not exceeding $300.00 for offenses designated as petty offenses pursuant to A.R.S. 13-601 or a fine not exceeding $2,500.00 for offenses designated as misdemeanors plus statutory surcharges as mandated by the legislature on/after December 15, 2008, or as amended; a probationary period and imprisonment/confinement up to 180 days or any combination thereof or as otherwise provided elsewhere in the code, by resolution of mayor and council, or by statute including suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other equitable relief. 
    The application of the penalty as set forth in title 5 shall not, in any event, preclude an enforcement order to assure compliance with the Code regulations, and the issuance/compliance official may issue a citation (complaint) to any person, owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, party, contractor, manager, board and officer, or other business legal entity in violation of, or not in complete compliance with any provision of this title. Upon issuance of any citation (complaint), the person, owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, party, contractor, manager, board and officer, or other business legal entity so cited, shall be provided a copy of the citation (complaint) as provided by law. Said citation (complaint) shall be thereafter filed with the consolidated court by the compliance officer issuing such citation (complaint). 
    Enforcement: The enforcement powers and duties of the compliance official and of any other administrative authority are set forth herein for any and all matters pertaining to any Code enforcement. The mayor and city council and/or the city manager may, from time to time, authorize such appointments and duties as needed to perform any and all Code compliance and enforcement or other duties that may be required by title 5. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ord. NS283, title 1, chapter 4, § 1.04.010, 3-3-2008) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, A.R.S. 9-801; define nuisances and abatement authority, A.R.S. 9-240(21); 9-276(16), (19); powers and abatement, A.R.S. 9-240; 9-499; 9-499.01 et seq.; prescribe regulations, A.R.S. 9-240(22), (28); 9-276(18), (19); maintain cemeteries and regulate burial, A.R.S. 9-240(11); 9-453. 
5.01.020 - Building inspector/official. 
A.	Office Created; Supervision. 
1.	The office of building inspector/official is created, and the city manager shall designate a city employee or employees to act and to be known as the building inspector/officials. 
2.	The building inspector/official(s) shall be city employee(s) under the direction of the city manager or his designee. 
B.	Duties. 
1.	Generally. 
a.	The building inspector/official(s) shall have the authority and responsibility to perform all the requirements specified title 5 and Arizona Revised Statutes or as required by this Code, ordinances and resolutions as adopted by mayor and council. 
b.	Authority: Building inspector/official(s) shall enforce all provisions of the regulations adopted herein. 
c.	Enforcement: The building inspector/official(s) shall issue such notices of determination and orders of corrective action as may be necessary to enforce compliance with state law and City Code regulations. 
2.	Records Kept. The building inspector/official(s) shall keep comprehensive records of inspections made, or reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. 
C.	Cooperation From Other Officials. The building inspector/official(s) may request and shall receive necessary assistance and cooperation from other city officials in the discharge of his/her duties. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ord. NS290, 12-15-2008, eff. 1-1-2009. 
State Law reference- Ordinance authority, A.R.S. 9-240(28). 
5.01.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. All words and phrases defined in this section shall also include their usual and natural meanings, as well as those herein specifically given. 
    "Ashes" means cinders, coal and everything that usually remains after fires. 
    "Building inspector/official" means an officer or other person designated and authorized by the city manager to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter; or the building official's authorized representative. 
    "Garbage" means all animal and vegetable and food wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, or refuse or recyclables that have been contaminated by garbage, or other such matter the accumulation of which may create a nuisance or be deleterious to public health or offensive to sight or smell. 
    "Health board" means the Cochise County Health Department. 
    "Permit" means the permission in writing of the code enforcement officer, issued according to this title and all other ordinances of the city. 
    "Person, owner, tenant, lessee, occupant, party, contractor, manager, board and officer" shall respectively hold to apply to and include both jointly and severally each and all owners, part owners, tenants, lessees, occupants, contractors, parties in interest, persons, managers, boards, officers and corporations who may hold those positions, or may be in like position of any or more thereof, referred to in any ordinance or regulation. 
    "Public place" means parks, public ways, grounds and and areas, and all open spaces between buildings and streets, and in view of such streets. 
    "Rubbish" means large and bulky waste material, such as old furniture, tires, appliances, loose and decayed material, or paper and dirt like substance that attends use or decay, or which accumulates from buildings, storing or cleaning. 
    "Street" means streets, avenues, public highways, sidewalks, gutters and public alleys. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.01.040 - Sanitary conditions of buildings. 
    The building inspector/official(s) shall apply the regulations and provisions of any technical codes adopted under title 10, section 10.01.040 to enforce sanitary conditions of buildings as provided therein. 
A.	Pipes: All house drains, waste, soil and vent pipes, taps and water pipes shall at all times be kept in good order and repair, so that no gases or odors shall escape and so that the same shall not leak. 
B.	Trapping Regulations: Every water closet, urinal, sink, basin, wash tray, bath, and every other tub or set of tubs and hydrant waste pipe must be separately and effectively trapped. The traps must be placed as near the fixtures as practicable, and in no case shall the water from the bathtub or other fixtures be connected with the water closet trap. 
C.	Placement of Waste Pipe: The waste or soil pipe in every building in the city shall be ventilated by extending the same by means of another pipe to a height of not less than six inches above the roofline of the building. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.01.050 - Offensive businesses prohibited. 
A.	The business of slaughtering cattle, sheep, swine, or pigs may be conducted with the formal approval of mayor and council and in compliance with express conditions as may be set by mayor and council. 
B.	All such businesses shall comply with all regulations as may be promulgated by the Federal Food and Drug Administration "FDA". 
C.	All such businesses shall comply with strict waste disposal procedures to assure the containment of offensive odors and contaminants from being emitted into the environment and the City of Willcox sewer system. 
D.	It is unlawful for any person or business to carry on, establish, prosecute, operate or continue within the city, the trade or occupation described above without first complying with subsections (A) through (C) above. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009; Ord. NS298, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Regulation authority, A.R.S. 9-240(21). 
5.01.060 - Offensive or unwholesome conditions and premises. 
A.	No person shall permit or have any offensive water or liquid, fluid or other substance on his premises or grounds to the prejudice of life or health, whether for use in any trade or otherwise. 
B.	No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises within the city shall suffer, permit or have upon such premises any cesspool, vault, pit, or like place, animal manure, garbage, trash, litter, rags or any other thing in which flies and/or mosquitoes may breed or multiply, unless the same shall be protected as to prevent the attraction, breeding and multiplying of flies and/or mosquitoes. 
C.	No person shall suffer or permit any premises owned, leased, occupied, controlled or managed by him, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, cesspool, water closet, sewer or private ditch or drain therein or thereupon, to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort. 
D.	No filthy or offensive water shall at any time be poured, thrown, sprinkled, or put in or upon any street, ditch, land, court, square, alley, vacant lot or public place within the city. 
E.	No person shall pollute or suffer or cause to be polluted any ditches within the city by bathing, washing, or washing clothing or any animal in or about the same, throwing or depositing therein any earth or filthy matter or anything injurious to the health or offensive to the senses or by running into the same any sewerage matter, slops, or brewery, bathhouse or kitchen wastes. 
F.	It is unlawful for any person owning or conducting, operating or managing any business place, stand, building, establishment, machinery or equipment to fail to keep the same, with the premises whereon the same is located, properly cleaned and drained. 
G.	The premises upon which fowl, rodents, cattle, horses, mules, sheep or goats are kept shall always be sanitary and subject to inspection and regulation by the code enforcement officer. 
H.	No open privy, vault, or cesspool shall be installed or maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
I.	It is unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any premises belonging to or occupied by him, or any cellar, privy, vault, pool, sewer or private drain therein to become nauseous, foul or offensive to the senses or prejudicial to the public health or comfort. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Regulation authority, A.R.S. 9-240(22); 9-276(18). 
5.01.070 - Deposit of offensive substances. 
A.	No part of the contents or substance from any sink, privy, cesspool, tubs, ice cream freezers nor any manure or other offensive substance shall be, by any person, deposited or allowed to run or drop into or remain in any street or public place. 
B.	No swill, brine, urine of animals or other offensive matter, nor any noxious liquid or other filthy matter of any kind shall, by any person, be allowed to run or run into or upon any street or public place or be taken or put therein. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Regulation authority, A.R.S. 9-240(22); 9-276(18). 
5.01.080 - Cemeteries and burials. 
A.	No interment of the dead body of any human being, or deposition thereof, in any tomb, vault, crematory or cemetery shall be made within the city without a permit, granted by the health board, not otherwise than in accordance therewith. 
B.	No new burial grounds, cemetery or vault for dead human bodies shall be established, nor shall any existing burial grounds, vault, tomb or cemetery be opened, exposed or destroyed, except by a permit, given by the health board, and every deceased person buried in any such place shall be buried to a depth of at least three feet below the surface of the ground. 
C.	Policy, regulations and establishment of fees for Sunset Cemetery shall be set by resolution of mayor and council. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- Resolution No. 2004-07, eff. 4-19-2004. 
State Law reference- Regulation authority, A.R.S. 9-240(11); cemetery maintenance, A.R.S. 9-453. 
Chapter 5.02 - NUISANCES 
Sections: 

5.02.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and preserve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Willcox, Arizona, and, through education, to protect residents and neighborhoods against nuisances as defined herein. This chapter serves these purposes by adopting minimum standards and establishing requirements for maintenance of all residential and nonresidential buildings, structures of whatever kind, vacant and improved land; and by prohibiting acts and conduct constituting nuisances that diminish quality of life. Unless specifically provided otherwise, this chapter shall apply to all buildings, structures and lands within the city without regard to the use or the date of construction, improvement or alteration. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.02.020 - Public nuisances. 
A.	Anything that is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Any act or thing that affects an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, as herein described, is not less a nuisance because the extent of the annoyance or because the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals is unequal. 
B.	Any person who knowingly maintains or commits a public nuisance, or who knowingly fails or refuses to perform any legal duty relating to the removal or abatement of a public nuisance, such violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty clause provided in title 5, chapter 1, section 5.01.010 and/or as provided by resolution of mayor and council. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ord. NS283, title 1, chapter 4, § 1-4-1, 3-3-2008. 
State Law reference- Define/abate nuisance, A.R.S. 9-276(16); compel abatement, A.R.S. 9-499 et seq.; nuisance and abatement, A.R.S. 13-2917. 
5.02.030 - Definitions. 
    The rules and the definitions set forth in this chapter shall be observed in the construction of this Code and the ordinances of this city unless such construction would be inconsistent with either the manifest intent of the city council or the context of this Code. For the purpose of this chapter, and unless the context plainly requires otherwise, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have the meaning given herein: 
    "Abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer that is of a type subject to registration under [A.R.S.] Title 28, Chapter 11, Articles I and II, whether lost, stolen, abandoned or otherwise unclaimed or unattended for a period of 48 hours on a public thoroughfare or for a period of 72 hours on public or private property. 
    "Attractive nuisance" means a condition that may reasonably be expected to attract children and that is dangerous to children because of their inability to appreciate the hazard. 
    "Building" means a structure having a roof supported by columns, posts, or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any person, entity, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature. 
    "Building code" means the code or codes adopted by this jurisdiction regulating the design and construction of buildings and structures. 
    "Building official" means an officer or other person designated and authorized by the city manager to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter; or the building official's authorized representative. 
    "Code official" means the official(s) designated and authorized by the city manager to administer and enforce this chapter, or any duly authorized representative or designee of that official. Code official includes any peace officer, fire code official, city code enforcement officer or building inspector. 
    "Commercial property" means any property occupied by a business or businesses which sell, rent, trade or store goods, or which provide a service. 
    "Contain" or "contained" means to hold, store, bundle, stack or offer for collection in a manner, receptacle or location authorized by the Willcox Municipal Code or by rules and regulations promulgated under the code. 
    "Contiguous" means, relating to property or residences, property that shares or abuts the boundary line or edge of the immediately adjacent property. 
    "Dilapidated" means a condition relating to a structure and consisting of multiple violations of the Willcox Municipal Code such that the structure is in an obvious and serious state of disrepair. 
    "Dwelling" means the same meaning as "dwelling unit." 
    "Dwelling unit" means any building or a portion thereof that is designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as living quarters exclusively for a single household. 
    "Excavation" means any well, shaft, basement, pit, tunnel, trench, hole or other like or similar removal of earth material. 
    "Garbage" means all animal and vegetable and food wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of foods, or refuse or recyclables that have been contaminated by garbage, or other such matter the accumulation of which may create a nuisance or be deleterious to public health or offensive to sight or smell. 
    "Handbill" includes any sign, notice, placard, poster, paper, advertising circular, sticker, card, leaflet, or other similar item calculated to attract the attention of the public. 
    "Health board" means the Cochise County Health Department. 
    "Health hazard" means the presence of any conditions or item(s) that adversely impact or jeopardize the well being or health of an individual. Such conditions or items include evidence of occupancy without adequate water and sanitation facilities, or may include the presence of human or animal waste, medical or biological waste, drug paraphernalia, gaseous or combustible materials, radioactive waste, dangerous or corrosive chemicals or liquids, flammable or explosive materials, friable asbestos, offal and decay matter. 
    "Imminent hazard" means a condition that places a person's life, health, or property in immediate, impending peril, or could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
    "Industrial property" means any property occupied by land uses whose primary operation involves manufacturing, assembling, processing or otherwise treating raw materials; semi finished products, or finished products, for packaging and distribution to either wholesale or retail markets. 
    "Infestation" means the apparent presence of unpleasant, damaging, or unhealthful insects, rodents, reptiles or pests. 
    "Junked or inoperable vehicle" means a vehicle that is in such a state of deterioration that it cannot be profitably dismantled or salvaged for parts and cannot be profitably restored that exhibits one or more of the following conditions: wrecked, partially or fully dismantled, abandoned, stripped, inoperative, inoperable, scrapped, or unable to be safely operated. 
    "Land" means any real property which is improved or unimproved. 
    "Litter" means to cause a condition of uncontained refuse, debris or trash. 
    "Local department" means the Willcox Development Services Department. 
    "Local health services" means services provided by the City of Willcox to its citizens beyond the county's basic level of service. 
    "Manufactured home" shall have the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. 41-2142(24) or its successor provision. 
    "Means of egress" means a continuous and unobstructed way of egress travel from any point in a building or facility that provides an accessible route to an area of refuge, a horizontal exit or a public way. 
    "Mobile home" shall have the same meaning as defined in A.R.S. 41-2142(26) or its successor provision. 
    "Owner" means, as applied to a building, structure, or land, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building, structure or land. 
    "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, but not the federal government, state, county, city or political subdivision of the state. 
    "Private property" means any real property not owned by the federal government, state, county, city or political subdivision of the state. 
    "Recyclable materials (also recyclables)" means those materials that are listed in the rules, procedures and regulations promulgated by the director of utility services as having recycle value. 
    "Refuse" means all waste materials, including but not limited to green-waste, garbage, waste generated by animals or pets, or recyclables. 
    "Resident" means a person that lives in a residence, or a responsible party. Unless specifically used in another context, resident assumes the premises owner, occupant, tenant, lessor, lessee, resident, manager, or licensee to whom a garbage or recycling container has been assigned. 
    "Residential property" means a property where the dominant use is non-transient occupancy of residential dwelling units. 
    "Responsible person" means an occupant, lessor, lessee, manager, licensee, or person having control over a structure or parcel of land; and in any case where the demolition of a structure is proposed as a means of abatement, any lien holder whose lien is recorded in the official records of the Cochise County Recorder's Office. 
    "Rubbish" means large and bulky waste material, such as old furniture, tires, appliances, loose and decayed material, or paper and dirt like substance that attends use or decay, or which accumulates from buildings, storing or cleaning. 
    "Store" means to park, leave, locate, keep, maintain, deposit, allow remaining or allow having a physical presence. 
    "Structure" means a physical element that is erected or constructed with a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to another physical element having a fixed location at, below, or above grade. The term includes, but is not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, posts, patios, improvements and other structures that are constructed or placed on the land. 
    "Uncontained refuse" means any refuse that is not contained according to the provisions of this chapter or authorized by the rules, procedures and regulations promulgated by the director of utility services. 
    "Unsheltered storage" means storage of vehicle outside a carport, garage or other building; or outside the confines of a suitably fenced area allowing the vehicle to be visible from beyond the lot boundaries. 
    "Vacant and unsecured building or structure" means any vacant or abandoned building or structure which is: (1) a fire or health hazard because of the accumulation of weeds, debris, or flammable or combustible waste or refuse; or (2) an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public because unsecured doorways or window openings or holes in the exterior of the building or structure permit entry of unauthorized persons. 
    "Vacant structure" means any unoccupied or illegally occupied structure. 
    "Weeds" includes but is not limited to untended or uncultivated plants, invasive plants, aggressively seeding plants, Russian thistle, ragweed, and plants generally accepted as having no value and frequently of uncontrolled growth. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Abandoned and junk vehicle, A.R.S. 28-4801; 28-4833 and 28-4881. 
5.02.040 - Unlawful acts. 
A.	Accumulation of Vegetation Prohibited. Each owner, lessee, tenant, resident or occupant shall maintain a property so it is free of the accumulation or untended growth of vegetation. The accumulation or untended growth of vegetation means the presence of plants on property that create a fire, safety or health hazard, or that attract vermin either on the property, on neighboring properties, or on both, and includes but is not limited to: 
1.	Any lawn grass that exceeds six inches in height. 
2.	All weeds that exceed six inches in height. 
3.	Dead plants or dead parts of plants of any kind. 
4.	Any tree, shrub, or other form of vegetation of any kind on the property or on the adjoining right-of-way, street, or alley that extends over or under the sidewalk space or roadway in a manner that may interfere with the reasonable use of the street, sidewalk, or alley for pedestrian or vehicular traffic of any kind or that may obstruct the view or light distribution of traffic-control devices or luminaries. 
5.	All undisturbed natural areas with an aggregate area greater than one-half-acre are exempt from the provisions of subsections (A)(1), (2) and (3). 
B.	Accumulation of Refuse Prohibited. Each owner, lessee, tenant, resident or occupant shall maintain a property so it is free of accumulated refuse. Accumulated refuse means contained refuse that is present on the property in a manner authorized by the Willcox Municipal Code. 
C.	Composting Permitted on Residential Property; Standards and Procedures; Violation. The provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit the maintenance of a compost pile on residential property, so long as the compost pile does not create a hazard and is: 
1.	Contained; 
2.	Maintained so as not to produce offensive odors or attract flies, mosquitoes or vermin; 
3.	Located, insofar as reasonably possible, so that it is not visible from abutting properties or streets; 
4.	Maintained in compliance with all rules, regulations and procedures that may be promulgated by the director of utility services. 
    A compost pile not in compliance with all the provisions of this section is in violation of this chapter. 
D.	Duty to Remove Weeds and Refuse from Abutting Sidewalks, Streets and Alleys Upon Notice. The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any premises shall remove from the premises and the abutting portions of contiguous sidewalks, streets and alleys, all weeds, garbage, or other refuse which may endanger the health, safety or welfare of the persons in the vicinity of such premises. This duty extends to and includes any abutting sidewalk area and one-half the width of abutting alleys, from the property line to the center-line of the alley. 
E.	Exterior Insect, Rodent and Animal Control. All premises shall be kept free from infestation of insects, rodents and other noxious pests where such infestation threatens the health, safety or welfare of a person or persons. 
F.	Burning of Refuse Prohibited. Except as specifically permitted by this chapter or other adopted codes, the open burning or incineration of refuse and/or debris is prohibited. 
G.	Exterior Hazard or Attractive Nuisance. All premises shall be kept free of any condition that constitutes a health hazard, imminent hazard, or attractive nuisance. Such prohibited conditions include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.	Abandoned Refrigerators. All premises shall be kept free of iceboxes, refrigerators or other containers with a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or greater that have an attached door or lid, snap-lock or other locking device that may not be released from the inside and that are abandoned, discarded or no longer used for refrigeration and are in any place accessible to children. In addition to any other remedy provided under this chapter, a code official may immediately and without prior notice remove an attached door, lid or other locking device or take other similar action to abate the hazard presented. 
2.	Hazardous Excavations. All premises shall be kept free of abandoned or unsecured excavations; or any excavation that creates a hazard to public safety or an attractive nuisance. An excavation made under permit and secured and maintained in a manner that complies with the applicable permit requirements is not considered a violation of this section. 
3.	Hazardous Pools. Any swimming pool or other contained body of water that contains water 18 inches or more in depth at any point and that is wider than four feet at any point and is intended for swimming must be properly secured and maintained so as not to create a hazard to public safety, a health hazard or attractive nuisance, and shall be entirely enclosed by a minimum five feet high wall, fence or other barrier that is adequate to prevent access by children. Water shall not be allowed to stagnate or to harbor insect infestation. 
H.	Littering Prohibited. 
1.	Generally. It is unlawful for any person to place any rubbish, trash, filth or debris upon any private or public property not owned or under the control of said person. In addition to any fine which may be imposed for violation of any provision of this subsection, such person shall be liable for all costs which may be assessed pursuant to this chapter for the removal of said rubbish, trash, filth or debris. 
2.	Private Property. No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied or unoccupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not; except, that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized receptacles for for collection in such a manner that the litter may be prevented from being carried and deposited by the elements upon any public place. 
3.	Public Property. It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any litter in or upon any street, alley, public grounds or school grounds. 
I.	Abandoned/Junked Vehicles. 
    Prohibited Storage. 
1.	No person owning or having custody of any abandoned, junked or inoperable vehicle may store such vehicle on private property, or on any sidewalks, streets or alleys, within the city, except as otherwise permitted under this section; 
2.	No person owning, occupying or in control of any private property within the city may store any junked or inoperable vehicle on the owned or occupied property, or on any abutting sidewalks, streets or alleys, except as otherwise permitted under this section. 
3.	Unsheltered storage of an abandoned vehicle for a period of 30 days or more on any private property within the corporate limits of the city is declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. Vehicles stored and kept as stock in trade by a regularly licensed and established new or used car dealership or by a regularly licensed and established junkyard or wrecking yard are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
    Permitted Storage. This section shall not apply to any junked or inoperable vehicle stored on private property if the vehicle: 
1.	Is on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner and licensed by the city under the under the Willcox Municipal Code, Business Privilege Licenses and the storage of the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the business enterprise; or 
2.	Is lawfully enclosed within: 
a.	An enclosed garage or other permanent building lawfully constructed of opaque materials without openings, holes or gaps other than doors and windows; 
b.	A carport, and an opaque car cover designed for that purpose (and not including tarps, bed sheets, plastic sheeting, or similar materials) completely covers the body of the vehicle; or 
c.	Any fence, wall or barrier, not less than five feet in height, constructed of opaque materials without openings, holes or gaps other than gates or doors, completely enclosing the vehicle, and equipped with self-latching gates or doors. Such fence, wall or barrier must comply with the Code. 
    Persons Responsible. Whenever the city finds that any junked or inoperable vehicle is stored on private property or on any abutting sidewalks, streets or alleys in violation of this section, the persons responsible for the violation include the recorded owner, occupant or person in control of the private property, as well as the registered owner or custodian of the vehicle. 
    Evidence of Abatement. Within 15 days from the issuance of the civil infraction citation or civil infraction complaint or at the first appearance date, whichever date comes first, the judge or hearing officer shall dismiss the civil citation or civil complaint if the defendant produces at the hearing, competent evidence of abatement as set forth in this subsection; and, if necessary, the first appearance date may be continued to permit city verification of the abatement. 
    Abatement shall consist of one or more of the following: 
1.	Lawfully storing the vehicle; or 
2.	Lawfully registering the vehicle and affixing thereto unexpired number or license plates assigned to the vehicle vehicle by any state; or 
3.	Eliminating the condition (i.e., wrecked, inoperable, etc. that causes the vehicle to be deemed a junked or inoperable vehicle. 
    Evidence of Registration. Evidence of the current registration for the vehicle may be presented as a defense to the violation. 
    Authorization to Enter Private Property for Vehicle Removal Pursuant to Court Order. Any code official or persons as may be directed by such code official may enter private property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle upon order of the court. 
    Penalty; Violation Declared a Nuisance. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalty clause provided in title 5, chapter 1, section 5.01.010 and/or as provided by resolution of mayor and council. The unlawful storage of any junked or inoperable vehicle within the city in violation of this section is declared dangerous to the public safety and a public nuisance. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009; Ord. NS300, § 2, 2010) 
State Law reference- Regulation authority, A.R.S. 9-240(21); nuisance and abatement, A.R.S. 9-276(16); compel removal, A.R.S. 9-499 et seq.; nuisance abatement, A.R.S. 13-2917 et seq.; abandoned and junk vehicle, A.R.S. 28-4801; 28-4833 and 28-4881. 
5.02.050 - Maintenance standards. 
    Nuisance Standards. Dilapidated structures, vacant and unsecured structures, buildings and structures constituting a nuisance. 
A.	Dilapidated Structures. Buildings or structures that are so deteriorated, damaged, dilapidated, or in need of repair so as to present a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community constitute a nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or demolition as provided in the Willcox Municipal Code, the adopted technical codes, Arizona Revised Statutes, and this chapter. 
B.	Vacant and Unsecured Buildings or Structures. Vacant and unsecured buildings or structures are unlawful and are prohibited by this chapter. 
1.	Duty to Clean, Secure and Prohibit Trespass. The owner or responsible party of a vacant building or structure shall remove any accumulation of weeds, combustible waste, rubbish, or refuse from the interior of the building or structure and the surrounding yards; and shall secure all doors, windows, and other openings to prevent unauthorized entry. The owner or responsible party also shall post both the structure and the exterior premises with signs to provide conspicuous and reasonable notice prohibiting entry (i.e., "No Trespassing" signs). 
2.	Re-inspection of Secured Buildings and Structures. The code official shall periodically re-inspect a building or structure that was cleaned or secured pursuant to an administrative or judicial order to ensure continued compliance with the order and this chapter. The code official may assess a re-inspection fee for actual costs of each inspection in those instances where the building or structure is again found to be vacant and unsecured or in need of debris or weed removal. 
3.	Abatement of Vacant and Unsecured Buildings. When ordered abated, a vacant and unsecured building shall be cleaned and secured as follows: 
a.	All accumulated debris and/or refuse that poses a fire or health hazard within or upon the property or premises shall be removed; and 
b.	All unsecured doorway, windows, or exterior openings shall be barricaded in accordance with standards established by the code official, which shall be kept on file with the city clerk, and in accordance with Section 7-12(a)(3) of this chapter; and 
c.	Both the structure and the exterior premises shall be posted with signs that provide reasonable notice prohibiting entry (i.e., "No Trespassing" signs). 
C.	Buildings, Structures and Land Constituting a Nuisance. All buildings, structures or land are to be maintained so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of any person or persons. The condition of a building, structure and land that meets any or all of the following is a public nuisance, is a violation of this chapter, and subjects the building, structure and land to abatement as provided in this chapter. 
1.	The building, structure, or land lacks safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic. 
2.	The building, structure, land or any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before the damage and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for buildings or land of similar structure, purpose or location. 
3.	The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
a.	An attractive nuisance to children; or 
b.	A harbor for trespassers or persons committing unlawful acts. 
4.	The building, structure, or any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to partially or completely collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
5.	The building, structure or land is infested by rodents, insects or other noxious pests, rendering it uninhabitable. 
6.	The building, structure, or land exhibits conditions that present actual or imminent hazards or dangers, or is otherwise unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used. 
7.	A dwelling is unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
8.	The building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, damage, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire chief and/or the building official to be a fire hazard. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Nuisance and abatement, A.R.S. 9-276(16); removal of debris, A.R.S. 9-499 et seq.; nuisance abatement, A.R.S. 13-2917 et seq. 
5.02.060 - Abatement required. 
    Whenever any nuisance in any place or upon any premises in the city shall have been found or declared by the proper authority to exist, and an order shall have been made directing the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of such premises to make suitable and necessary repairs or improvements, or to abate such nuisance, such repairs or improvements shall be made, and such nuisance shall be abated within the time specified by such order. 
    Court Ordered Abatement. 
A.	Upon finding a person guilty or responsible for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the court shall order such person to perform whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct and abate the violations, including clean-up, board-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation, vacation of the building or structure, permanently securing or filling the excavation, and/or demolition. An abatement order shall be effective for one year unless stayed on appeal. If stayed on appeal, the order shall be effective for one year from the end of the appeal if the judgment and sentence are upheld. If more than one person is guilty or responsible for a violation, such persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for completing the abatement. 
B.	When the court orders abatement pursuant to this section, section, the court shall advise a violator that additional fines will be imposed for failure to abate a violation, and that the city may bring criminal charges for failure to obey an order to abate a violation. 
    Abatement by the City. 
A.	In addition to ordering abatement of a violation as provided above, upon finding a person guilty or responsible for a violation of any provision of this chapter, the court may issue an order authorizing the city to perform whatever action is reasonably necessary to correct and abate the violation, including clean-up, board-up, extermination, repair, rehabilitation, vacation of the building or structure, disconnection of utilities, permanently securing or filling the excavation, and/or demolition. 
B.	The reasonable costs of any such abatement shall be the responsibility of the person found guilty or responsible of the violation. If more than one person is guilty or responsible for a violation, such persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for the costs of the abatement. The city shall pay the cost and expense of such abatement from any appropriation made available for that purpose and shall certify a statement of account to the finance director who shall collect the amount due, together with interest at the rate established by law. 
C.	Any and all charges and costs arising from the city taking action to abate a violation pursuant to a court order shall be a lien filed against the real property that is the subject of the violation. 
D.	The city may make the costs of an abatement an assessment on the property that is the subject of the violation where all of the following are true: 
1.	The case was initiated by the service of a notice of violation pursuant to this chapter; 
2.	The owner or responsible party failed to comply with such notice within 30 days; and 
3.	The notice included the estimated cost of such abatement to the city if the owner or responsible party did not comply. 
    Upon commencement of action on the property or after mailing the statement of account to the owner or responsible party, the city shall assess the property for the cost of work performed, including actual costs of any additional inspection and other incidental connected costs, and for associated legal costs for abatement or injunction, and may pursue any or all means for recovery of cost if the assessment is not paid. If the assessment is paid, the city shall remove the assessment. 
E.	An assessment made pursuant to this section is prior and superior to all other liens, obligations, mortgages or other encumbrances, except liens for general taxes. 
F.	Any liens or assessments filed with the county recorder pursuant to previous provisions of this chapter or any similar chapter shall remain in effect under the same terms and conditions that existed at the time of recording. 
G.	Any and all costs arising from the city's action to abate the violation shall be a lien filed against the real property that is the subject of the violation. If more than one person is responsible for the violation, such persons shall be jointly and severally responsible for the payment of costs or expenses of the abatement. The payment may be in addition to any civil or criminal penalty imposed pursuant to this Code. 
    Temporary Abatement. If it is determined that a nuisance is a hazard to the public safety and health, the code or building official may declare such structure a hazard. After notice is communicated to any owner of record to secure the structure and the owner does not secure the structure to city specifications, the hazard may be summarily abated by the city through boarding. The city may also post both the structure and the exterior premises with signs to provide reasonable notice prohibiting entry (i.e., "No Trespassing" signs). Any and all charges and costs arising from the city taking action to secure the structure shall be a lien filed against the real property containing such a structure. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Nuisance and abatement, A.R.S. 9-276(16); Removal of debris, A.R.S. 9-499 et seq.; nuisance abatement, A.R.S. 13-2917 et seq. 
5.02.070 - Liability for nuisance violation and enforcement. 
    The owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises, or any part thereof, where there shall be a nuisance or a violation of this title or any other ordinance, shall be jointly and severally liable therefor, and each of them may be required to abate the nuisance or comply with the order of the code enforcement officer in respect to the premises or the part thereof of which such person is owner, lessee, tenant or occupant. 
    The board, manager, code or building official, or police officer, city attorney or any employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of the duties required by this chapter or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not be personally liable for damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of such duties. A suit brought against said board, manager, code official, police officer, city attorney or employee because of such act or omission performed in the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or other pertinent laws or ordinances shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings, and any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the city. 
    This chapter does not relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or structure for any damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspections authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.02.080 - Violation; penalty. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty clause provided in title 5, chapter 1, section 5.01.010 and/or as provided by resolution of mayor and council. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.02.090 - Conflict of ordinances. 
A.	In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, building, housing, fire, safety or health ordinance or code of the city existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection and preservation of public health and safety shall control. 
B.	In cases where two or more provisions of this chapter disagree or conflict, the most stringent or restrictive shall prevail. 
C.	This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by the ordinance adopting this chapter. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.02.100 - Severability. 
    If a provision of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.02.110 - Appeals process adopted. 
A.	Board of Appeals. In order to hear and decide appeals of determinations, corrective actions, and/or decisions by the building inspector, code enforcement official(s) relative to the application and interpretation of this Code provisions, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
B.	Limitations on Authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. 
C.	Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to Code regulations and enforcement who are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
D.	Designation. The City of Willcox Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a board of appeals for all purposes described in the Willcox Municipal Code and all titles adopted by the city. 
E.	Duties and Authority. The board of appeals shall determine the alternative abatement determinations and provide reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code. For such purposes, the building inspector shall be an ex-officio member. Notice of appeal shall be given upon a form provided by the building inspector and shall be perfected within ten days after receipt of disapproval, notice of determination or notice corrective action. 
F.	Decisions and Findings. The board of appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulation for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings, in writing, to the building inspector with a duplicate copy to the appellant. The board may recommend, to the mayor and council, such new legislation as is consistent therewith. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ord. NS290, 12-15-2008, eff. 1-1-2009; Ord. NS283, 3-3-2008); Ord. NS289, 11-17-2009 
Chapter 5.03 - TRANSIENT DWELLINGS 
Sections: 

5.03.010. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    "Dwelling unit" means any suite, room, cottage, bedroom, or other unit established or maintained by a transient dwelling establishment for temporary occupancy. 
    "Health board" means the Cochise County Health Department. 
    "Local department" means the Willcox Development Services Department. 
    "Local health services" means services provided by the City of Willcox to its citizens beyond the county's basic level of service. 
    "Person" means a municipality, district, or other political subdivision; a cooperative, institution, corporation, company, firm, partnership, or individual. 
    "Plumbing" or "plumbing system" means and includes the water supply distributing pipes, the fixtures and fixture traps, the soil, waste and vent pipes, and the building drain with their devices, appurtenances and connections either within or adjacent to the transient dwelling establishments. 
    "Transient" means any member of the public who occupies a dwelling unit on a temporary basis in a "transient dwelling establishment" as defined in this section. 
    "Transient dwelling establishment" means and includes any place where sleeping accommodations are available to transients or tourists on a temporary basis, such as a hotel, motel, motor hotel, tourist court, tourist camp, rooming house, boarding house, inn, cot-house, and similar facilities, by whatever name called, consisting of two or more dwelling units; provided, however, that the term shall not be construed to include apartments, clubs, hotels, boarding houses, rooming houses and similar facilities where occupancy of all dwelling units is on a permanent or semi-permanent basis. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.03.020 - Floors, walls and ceilings. 
A.	Floor Requirements. Floors of all rooms shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
B.	Walls and Ceilings. The walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be of a finish that will permit easy cleaning and shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
C.	Floors, walls and ceilings shall be in conformance with applicable municipal adopted code requirements, State of Arizona requirements and county health requirements. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.03.030 - Dwelling unit requirements. 
A.	Dwelling units shall be of sufficient size to afford ample circulation of air and freedom of movement and shall be provided, exclusive of bathroom, closets, kitchen and similar ancillary facilities. 
B.	The window area of each dwelling unit shall be sufficient to furnish adequate natural light. 
C.	The window area shall be capable of being opened, unless other satisfactory means of ventilation is provided. Windows shall be effectively screened. 
D.	Furniture, drapes, carpets, and other accessories shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
E.	Dwelling unit requirements shall be in conformance with applicable municipal adopted code requirements, State of Arizona requirements and county health requirements. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.03.040 - Beds and bedding. 
A.	The beds, mattresses, pillows, and bed linens, including sheets, pillow slips, blankets, etc., used in all transient dwelling establishments shall be maintained in good repair, shall be kept clean and free of vermin, and shall be properly stored when not in use. 
B.	All transient dwelling establishments shall provide each bed, bunk, cot, or other sleeping place for the use of guests with pillow slips and both under and top sheets. Sheets and pillow slips shall be sized sufficiently to completely cover the mattress and pillow. 
C.	Clean linen shall be provided to each new guest and shall be changed at least once each week when individual occupancy exceeds this period. 
D.	Beds and linen shall be in conformance with applicable municipal adopted code requirements, State of Arizona requirements and county health requirements. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.03.050 - Sanitary facilities. 
A.	Bathroom Facilities. 
1.	Adequate and convenient toilet, lavatory, and bathing facilities shall be provided at all transient dwelling establishments and shall be available to the guests at all times. 
2.	Where private or connecting bathrooms are not available for each dwelling unit, separate and plainly marked central bathrooms for each sex shall be provided. 
3.	Central bathrooms shall provide not less than one toilet, one lavatory, and one tub or shower for each sex for each ten dwelling units or major fraction thereof not having private or connecting baths. At least one urinal shall be provided in each central bathroom designated for men. 
4.	Hot and cold water and soap shall be provided in all bathrooms. Clean individual towels shall be furnished for each guest. 
5.	Bathrooms shall be well lighted and ventilated. Where gravity or mechanical ventilation is provided, the ventilation ducts for the bathrooms shall not be connected into ventilation ducts from or to any dwelling unit. 
6.	Floors of all bathrooms shall be of easily cleanable construction, shall be kept clean and in good repair and, where necessary, shall slope to properly located drains. 
7.	Walls and ceilings of all bathrooms shall be of easily cleanable construction and shall be clean and in good repair. 
B.	Drinking Water and Ice. 
1.	Where drinking fountains are provided, the fountain shall be constructed so that the drinking is from a free jet projected at an angle from the vertical, and provided with a guard to prevent the mouth being placed directly against the orifice. Satisfactory arrangements shall be provided for adjusting pressure to the orifice. There shall be no possibility of the orifice becoming submerged. The fountain bowl shall be constructed of nonabsorbent, easily cleanable material. 
2.	All glasses and other multiuse utensils furnished to each dwelling unit shall be cleaned and sanitized in an approved manner after occupancy ends. Single service paper cups with suitable dispenser may be substituted for glasses. 
3.	The use of a common drinking cup is prohibited. 
4.	Ice shall be stored and handled in such manner as to prevent contamination. 
C.	Sanitary facilities shall be in conformance with applicable municipal adopted code requirements, State of Arizona requirements and county health requirements. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.03.060 - Plumbing; water supply; sewage disposal. 
A.	Plumbing. All plumbing shall be installed in accordance with existing ordinances of the city. 
B.	Water Supply. Each transient dwelling establishment shall be provided with an adequate and safe water supply from an approved source. Whenever a transient dwelling establishment finds it necessary to develop a source or sources of supply, complete plans and specifications of the proposed water system shall be submitted to the department and approval received prior to the start of construction. The design, construction, and operation of all such water supply systems shall comply with department regulations governing public water supplies. 
C.	Sewage Disposal. 
1.	The liquid wastes from all transient dwelling establishments shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable local ordinances or codes or into separate sewage disposal facilities approved by the department. 
2.	Separate sewage disposal facilities will not be approved where, in the opinion of the department, connection to a public sewer is practicable. 
3.	Where separate sewage disposal facilities are proposed, the design, construction and operation of such system shall be in accordance with department regulations governing sewerage systems and waste treatment works. Plans and specifications for such systems shall be submitted to the department and approval received prior to the start of construction. 
4.	Where septic tank disposal systems are acceptable to the department, the design and construction of such systems shall be in accordance with criteria required by the Arizona State Department of Health Services and such additional criteria as required by the department. 
5.	No sewage treatment effluent or other wastewater shall be deposited on the surface of the ground except in a manner approved by the department. 
D.	Plumbing, water supply and sewage shall be in conformance with applicable municipal adopted code requirements, State of Arizona requirements and county health requirements. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- (2009 Code, Ord. NS292, chapter 2) 
5.03.070 - Food service. 
    The storage, preparation, and serving of food and drink shall comply with the requirements of the Arizona State Department of Health Services and Cochise County Health Department regulations governing eating and drinking establishments. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
5.03.080 - Refuse storage and disposal. 
A.	All refuse shall be stored and disposed of in accordance with title 5 regulations governing the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of refuse and other objectionable wastes. 
B.	Garbage cans shall be thoroughly washed after emptying and shall be maintained free of odors and other objectionable conditions. 
C.	All containers for rubbish shall be cleaned as often as necessary to prevent a nuisance. 
D.	All refuse containers shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- 2009 Code, Ord. NS292, chapter 2. 
5.03.090 - Grounds. 
    Grounds of a transient dwelling establishment shall be properly graded and drained and shall be kept clean and free of accumulations of refuse and other debris. There shall be no evidence of fly, mosquito, or rodent breeding. 
    Grounds shall be in conformance with applicable municipal adopted code requirements, State of Arizona requirements and county health requirements. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Cross reference- 2009 Code, Ord. NS292, chapter 2. 
5.03.100 - Health/disease conditions. 
A.	The owner or operator of a transient dwelling establishment shall report to the department and to the local department the name of any occupant or employee suspected or known to have a contagious disease in accordance with A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 6, Article 2. 
B.	Every dwelling unit, after being occupied by a person known or suspected of having a contagious disease, shall be rendered non-contagious by disinfection, fumigation, or by other treatment methods as specified by the department before further occupancy. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Regulations to prevent contagious/infectious diseases, A.R.S. 9-240(20); authority to provide health services beyond county's basic services, A.R.S. 36-190. 
5.03.110 - Inspections. 
    The department and the local department shall make the inspections required by statute, by county code and this chapter. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
State Law reference- Regulations to prevent contagious/infectious diseases, A.R.S. 9-240(20); authority to provide health services beyond county's basic services, A.R.S. 36-190. 
5.03.120 - Violation; penalty. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty clause provided in title 5, chapter 1, section 5.01.010 and/or as provided by resolution of mayor and council. 
    Any violation for failure to report a contagious condition as required by chapter 3, section 5.03.100 and A.R.S. Title 36, Chapter 6, Article 2, shall be designated as a class 3 misdemeanor subject to statutory penalty. 
(Ord. NS292, § 2, 2009) 
Chapter 5.06 - SOLID WASTE 
Sections: 

5.06.010 - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    "A.A.C." means Arizona Administrative Code. 
    "Administrator" means the city manager or designee. 
    "Alley" means a public or private way giving access to the rear of lots or buildings. 
    "Alley collection" means collection of refuse deposited in refuse containers that are utilized by a covered residence and moved to the alley behind that covered residence on the designated days for collection of refuse materials. 
    "Animal waste" means all waste from household pets, stables, kennels, pet pens, chicken coops, veterinary establishments and other waste of a similar nature. 
    "Appliances" means discarded appliances including refrigerators, freezers, oven ranges, water heaters, dishwashers, washers, dryers, kitchen compactors, window unit air conditioners, evaporative coolers, water softeners and other similar large residential appliances. 
    "A.R.S." means Arizona Revised Statutes. 
    "Ashes" means all residues from the burning of any material, specifically excluding ashes from medical waste or hazardous waste. 
    "Automotive parts" means any part or combination of parts of any kind of motor vehicle, including but not limited to tires, batteries, seats, engines, fuel tanks, doors, auto glass and upholstery. 
    "Basic refuse services" means the collection and disposal of refuse generated by a covered residence in accordance with this chapter pursuant to a schedule developed by the administrator to ensure that refuse will be collected at least once per calendar week. 
    "Brush" means and is deemed to comprise but not limited to tree and hedge trimmings; discarded Christmas trees and trimmings; bark, mulch and plants, tree trunks, branches and cactus. 
    "Bulk materials" means materials that are too large to be deposited in a provided refuse container but may be collected by the licensed hauler pursuant to sections 5.06.240 and 5.06.090.B. 
    "Business establishment" means any facility utilized to conduct any sort of commercial, business or industrial enterprise, other than a residence from which a home-based business is being legally conducted. Business establishments include apartment complexes, multi-plexes which are not residential units as defined in these definitions, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, motor inns, and other like establishments providing lodging for travelers, long-term care facilities and nursing homes and activities conducted by nonprofit organizations. Also known as commercial unit. 
    "City" means the City of Willcox. 
    "City manager" means the city manager of Willcox, or designee. 
    "City utility services" means the provision of gas, water, sewer, and any other services which are provided by the city on a fee for service basis. 
    "Collection agency" means a licensed hauler, who has received a contract from the City of Willcox for covered residential refuse collection and; may also be awarded refuse collection contracts for city commercial accounts; and/or other commercial accounts under a contract with the City of Willcox. 
    "Commercial byproducts" means and is deemed to comprise, but not limited to, cuttings and savings from metal work; chemicals, oil, or special solvents; organic chemicals and compounds. 
    "Commercial hauler" means any person or entity licensed through the city to engage in collecting, removing, transporting or hauling refuse on or along any public street, avenue or alley within the city. 
    "Commercial refuse" means any refuse produced by the operation of or as a byproduct of any nonresidential account, without regard to whether the business is licensed in the city, or whether the business activity is conducted in a public business, private residence, within the city, or any other location. 
    "Commercial unit" means any property which receives city utility services and which is not a residential account, also known as commercial account. A home occupation is not considered a commercial unit/account. 
    "Construction debris" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.5. 
    "Covered residence" means the following types of residential units which receive city utility services: 
    A. Single-family homes; 
    B. Duplexes; 
    C. Tri-plexes; and 
    D. Multi-plexes of not more than four residential units, other than business establishments. 
    "Curbside collection" means collection of refuse deposited in refuse containers that are utilized by a covered residence and moved to the street curb in front of that covered residence on the designated days for collection of refuse materials. 
    "Customer" is a person(s) who has the responsibility for payment of services at a residential or commercial unit. 
    "Dangerous waste" means and is deemed to comprise, but is not limited to, toxic chemicals and unstable compounds; materials producing noxious fumes; radioactive or explosive materials. 
    "Dead animals" means small dead animals means weighing less than 75 pounds. Large dead animals means weighing 75 pounds or more. 
    "Electronic waste" means scrap electronics that include computer equipment, VCRs, audio equipment, television, cell phones, and other equipment containing circuit boards. Scrap electronics do not include speakers, or kitchen appliances. 
    "Garbage" means and is deemed to comprise all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including all organic wastes that have been prepared for, or intended to be used as food, or resulted from the preparation of food, including all such substances from all residential or commercial units; worthless and offensive matter; also nonputrescible household wastes including but not limited to bottles and cans; newspapers, paper, plastic vessels, glass and metal fragments less than two pounds in weight; fabrics; used clothing; rags, and packing materials such as styrofoam peanuts. 
    "Generator" means the person who produces or generates the refuse to which the provisions of this chapter apply. 
    "Hauler." See "Licensed hauler." 
    "Hazardous waste" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-921.5. 
    "Household hazardous waste" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.13. 
    "Landscaping rubble" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.17. 
    "Licensed hauler/licensee" means any individual or company licensed by the City of Willcox to operate within the municipal boundaries of the City of Willcox to transport solid waste. 
    "Litter" means any refuse, garbage, or debris found in public areas or generated while traveling in a motor vehicle. 
    "Medical waste" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.19. 
    "Pickup day" is the day designated for normal collection of refuse from containers. 
    "Person" is any natural individual or any organization which has legal status. 
    "Private hauler." See "Licensed hauler." 
    "Property owner" is the person who holds legal title to the land. 
    "Recyclable materials" means refuse that is separated from other refuse for the purpose of recycling or reuse, and that meets the qualitative criteria established by the administrator for recycling. 
    "Recycling" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-831.21. 
    "Recycling container" means a container used for the placement of recyclable materials for collection by the city, licensed hauler, or commercial unit pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Recycling drop-off zone" means the area designated by the city as a recycling collection center designed to accept and accumulate recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling. 
    "Recycling collection center" means the city owned property that houses the solid waste or recycling drop-off zone and approved recycling stations established by a licensed hauler, or properly zoned recycling businesses. 
    "Refuse" means all garbage, solid waste, trash, rubbish, appliances, vehicles, and brush. 
    "Refuse container" means a container used for the placement of refuse for collection by a licensed hauler permitted pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Renters (third parties)" are those persons who have made legal arrangements to use or occupy residential or commercial units subject to this section of the City Code. 
    "Residential." See "Covered residential unit." 
    "Residential unit" means any city utility account for water, sewer, or gas, or any single or combination of those utilities which serves not more than four residential houses or family units on one meter, also known as residential account. See "Covered residence." 
    "Rubbish" means all discarded nonputrescible waste matter. 
    "Salvaging" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.27. 
    "Scavenging" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.28. 
    "Scrap metals" means ferrous and non-ferrous materials suitable for recycling. 
    "Secondary hauler" means any person engaged in a business that generates, collects, removes or hauls refuse as a by-product of its primary business. Examples of secondary haulers include carpet installers, roofing companies and landscape contractors. 
    "Solid waste" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.01.A., without the exclusions set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.01.B. 
    "Solid waste inspector" means any police officer, code enforcement officer, or other city employee with written authorization from the city manager to inspect public and private properties, to issue citations and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Special waste" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-851.A. 
    "Street" means a public or private way, other than "alleys," used for public travel. 
    "Third party." See "Renters." 
    "Transfer facility" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.34. 
    "Trash" means and is deemed to comprise all nonputrescible wastes, excluding soil and construction debris, including but not limited to household trash such as cardboard boxes and cardboard; bedding, mattresses and box springs; small wood fragments not associated with building or construction; yard trash including weeds, grass clippings; discarded carpets; rope, twine, jute; bagging or burlap, and ashes. 
    "Unacceptable waste" means the following types of solid wastes that may not be placed in a refuse or recycling container: 
A.	Liquid waste; 
B.	Septic tank pumpings; 
C.	Hazardous waste; 
D.	Household hazardous waste; 
E.	Special waste; 
F.	Sludge; 
G.	Vehicle bodies; 
H.	Vehicle tires or equipment tires; 
I.	Livestock; 
J.	Batteries, other than small alkaline batteries; 
K.	Ammunition; 
L.	Medical waste; 
M.	Radioactive waste; 
N.	Scrap metal; 
O.	Household construction and demolition debris; 
P.	Concrete; 
Q.	Dirt and rocks. 
    "Vegetative waste" shall have the meaning set forth in A.R.S. 49-701.36. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.020 - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.	Protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city; 
B.	Protect the environment by establishing minimum standards for the safe and sanitary collection, storage, treatment, transportation, processing and disposal of refuse and recyclables generated within the city; and 
C.	Establish necessary fees for the city's refuse, inspection, collection and disposal services to recover the city's costs to provide such services, as authorized by A.R.S. 49-701 et seq. and 49-765. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.030 - Establishment of a fund. 
    There is hereby established an enterprise fund for the purpose of collecting monies and making payments for the operation of the solid waste activities of the City of Willcox. Such fund shall be operated as an "enterprise fund" as that term is defined by the government finance officers association (GFOA). 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.040 - State regulations adopted. 
    The laws and regulations promulgated and published by the Arizona State Health Department, along with subsequent revisions and amendments are adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter. The penalty sections in such laws and regulations shall not be applicable within this city. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 49-741.2. 
5.06.050 - General requirements. 
A.	Generator Responsibilities. Generators shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws relating to the refuse generated, including compliance with this chapter and, as applicable, provisions of title 5 of this Code. 
B.	Property Owner and Renters Responsibilities. Property owners and renters shall be responsible for compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws relating to the refuse generated, accumulated, stored or otherwise deposited on their property, including compliance with this chapter and, as applicable, maintenance provisions of title 5 of this Code. 
C.	Proper Storage of Refuse. Except where expressly provided otherwise in this chapter, all refuse shall be stored or accumulated in refuse containers meeting the requirements of this chapter. Refuse shall be placed in leak proof plastic bags that are tightly secured prior to being placed in refuse containers. This subsection does not apply to the storage or accumulation of recyclable materials pursuant to this chapter, refuse stored or accumulated within a building structure and vegetative waste stored or accumulated on property in conjunction with legitimate composting activities. 
D.	Proper Placement of Refuse. Unacceptable refuse shall not be placed in refuse or recycling containers. No refuse shall be placed in a refuse or recycling container if such placement will damage the container or preclude the lid from completely closing. 
E.	Maximum Weight. The weight of the refuse placed in 96-gallon issued refuse containers shall not exceed 200 pounds and for the one and one-half-yard and three-yard containers provided for commercial collection shall not exceed 2,000 pounds. 
F.	Proper Disposal. In addition to other federal, state and local statutes, rules and regulations limiting the disposal of refuse, no person shall discard or otherwise dispose of any refuse on or in any refuse or recycling container that has not been assigned for use by that person or on or in any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way or other city property except as expressly authorized and approved by the administrator. 
G.	All persons who use city utility service and are within the corporate boundaries of the City of Willcox are required to have solid waste service. 
1.	In order to promote the safe and sanitary disposal of solid waste, all users of city utility services within the corporate limits of the city, are required to provide for disposal of solid waste as provided in this chapter as a condition of receiving any city utility service. 
2.	Exceptions to the requirement that each utility service provide for disposal of solid waste. For the purposes of this chapter of the City Code, the following utility connections do not require solid waste service: 
a.	Voluntarily disconnected meters; 
b.	Multiple meters which serve a single property - one meter shall be labeled in city records as the main meter and other meters cross referenced as submeters; 
c.	Irrigation only meters - which shall be labeled in the city records; and 
d.	Other utility hook ups where it can be demonstrated that the presence of utilities does not result in the generation of any solid waste; 
e.	Also see [section] 5.06.050.I. 
H.	Charges for multiple residential units on one meter. Each residential unit attached to a single meter shall be charged the fee for refuse service. i.e. a duplex on one water meter would be charged two refuse charges, a triplex would be charged three refuse charges. 
I.	No Splitting of Charges on Residential Units/Commercial Units. 
1.	Each city utility service shall be one account. Only one account shall be established for each meter. i.e. a duplex on a single water meter will receive one bill for services at that location. 
2.	The primary utility service will be water; if multiple gas meters are connected to a property which has one water meter, each gas meter may be billed separately. The solid waste bill will be charged to the primary water meter account. 
3.	If no water service is available, but gas service is provided the solid waste bill shall be attached to the gas account. 
4.	If neither water nor gas is provided, but sewer service is provided the solid waste bill shall be attached to the sewer account. 
5.	If a parcel has mixed residential and commercial units (i.e., care taker units, living quarters over a commercial structure or living facilities are on a utility service whose primary activity is a commercial unit), the entire parcel shall be considered a commercial unit: determination shall be made by the administrator. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.060 - Collection hours. 
    The collection hours shall be established by the administrator. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.070 - Establishment of rates. 
A.	The city council shall review the estimated expenses, incomes, reserves, and fund balance annually in April for the fiscal year to begin the next July 1. 
B.	The city council shall set such fees and late charges, by resolution, that shall produce the sufficient estimated revenues that combined with available fund balances are sufficient to pay all of the estimated costs in the ensuing fiscal year and provide an operational reserve of three months. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.080 - Responsibility for payment of charges. 
A.	The property owner is responsible for the payment of solid waste charges under this section of the City Code. 
B.	If the property is residential property; the person(s) residing at the property is responsible for the payment of all charges under this section of the City Code. 
C.	The administrator may pursue collection of outstanding amounts by all legal means possible, including but not limited to; use of deposits, liens on property, and denial of hook ups or initiation of service, when there are outstanding amounts owed to the city by the parties requesting the hookup. 
D.	The person who has opened the account and the city have a responsibility to monitor the service provided and to make any claims for payment in a timely manner. 
E.	The city will not pursue any charges for services for which a bill has not been issued by the city for a period of six months. This does not erase past debts owed the city under [subsection] (C). The purpose of this section is for errors in billing. 
F.	The maximum time that the city will permit for refunds, misbillings, or incorrect charges for service of any type relating to solid waste service is six months. 
G.	Each person opening a solid waste service account shall be required to post a security deposit. 
1.	If the person is the owner of the property, they shall be required, prior to the initiation of service; to post a deposit in the estimated amount of one month's solid waste charges. 
2.	If the charges for solid waste service are being collected by the city through the city's billing department; and the property is rented to a third party; or the account is opened by any person other than the party receiving the services; or in the case of residential property, the party residing at the property is some person other than the property owner; there shall be deposited with the city, prior to service being initiated: a security deposit equaling twice the estimated monthly solid waste charge. 
H.	Security deposit requirements may be waived when: 
1.	The person has an existing history of no delinquent payments with the City of Willcox for the last two years. 
2.	The person is moving from one physical location to a different physical location and has a deposit on file which has sufficient amount in it to cover the new location. 
3.	The person provides the City of Willcox with a letter of reference from a similar type utility showing a history of no delinquent payments for a two-year period. The history must be within the last four years. 
I.	No interest will be paid on deposits. 
J.	Deposits may be credited to the account upon: 
1.	Closure of the account. 
2.	Maintenance of a two-year history with no delinquencies. 
K.	If an account becomes delinquent more than two times in a 12-month period or if the account is shut off for delinquency, after the deposit has been credited to the account as per [subsection] (J) above. A new deposit shall be required to continue or reestablish service. 
L.	Renters (third parties) establishing accounts must comply with requirements of [subsection] (B), but may use the provisions above in [subsection] (H). 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010; Ord. NS310, § 2, 2011) 
State Law reference- Power to engage in business of public nature; A.R.S. 9-511 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
5.06.090 - Covered residence refuse service charges. 
A.	Covered Residence Service. 
1.	A monthly charge shall be assessed for each residential unit; no allowance for holiday or missed collections beyond the control of the city. 
2.	The council may establish special residential rates for of senior or disabled individuals. Those rates shall not be less than the cost paid to the collection agency for covered residence refuse service plus the estimated amount for the tipping fees paid to the Cochise County transfer station. Collection sites for these residential units will be individually established between the administrator and the collection agency. 
3.	The collection agency is the only authorized licensed hauler for residence units of the City of Willcox. In order to gain the efficiencies of mass purchasing and to minimize the administrative costs, all residential units connected to the city's utility system, and located within the corporate boundaries of the City of Willcox, are required to use and pay for this service. Customers may haul some refuse to an approved disposal site at their expense; however, the residence refuse fees are mandatory regardless of service. Refuse service may not be cancelled except when disconnecting all city utility services to the residence. 
B.	Special Services Charges. 
1.	Bulky materials will be collected by the collection agency by special request of customers. The bulky trash collection charge is based on the volume collected. A pile of more than four cubic yards is considered bulky trash. One pickup per month per residence is included in the base monthly fee paid by the user; additional pickups may result in supplemental charges to the user. 
2.	Appliances and other items may be collected by special request by any licensed hauler (a fee may be charged). 
3.	Vacant lot cleanup charges shall be based on bulky materials collection rates. The lot owner must contract with a licensed hauler. The administrator may contact the property owner if trash is placed on vacant lots without notifying the city. 
C.	Damaged Residential Container Charges. 
1.	Covered residence customers damaging containers through improper use shall be billed for labor and material costs to repair the containers. The administrator shall notify the customer of the charges and such charges shall be applied to the monthly bill. 
2.	Normal wear and tear will not be billed as damages. The administrator shall determine what constitutes normal wear and tear. 
D.	Residents may self transport bulky materials, on occasion, to an acceptable disposal site in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
E.	The administrator may provide permission for groups performing special cleanups to transport refuse to an acceptable disposal site. 
F.	Litter may be placed in any container provided for collection under this chapter of the City Code. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
State Law reference- A.A.C. R18-13-305. 
5.06.100 - Commercial refuse account charges. 
A.	Commercial Accounts. In order to achieve a complete coverage of proper refuse disposal and an equal sharing of costs of refuse disposal all commercial units shall pay for refuse collection to a licensed hauler. Failure to arrange service is a violation of this code section and in addition to any other penalties the city shall discontinue utility service to any commercial unit which does not maintain refuse service: 
1.	Service by Collection Agency. Commercial customers shall pay for the volume of refuse collected per month based on container size and frequency of collection. The volume shall be based on a monthly average with no allowance for holiday or missed collections beyond the control of the city. 
a.	A minimum charge shall apply to all commercial units regardless of service level. The administrator shall establish the rated volume of this rate. 
b.	Commercial units may share a container when it is in the best interests of the city to provide one container for multiple commercial units (i.e. limited space for placement of containers), minimum charges shall still apply. Determination shall be made by the administrator. 
2.	Service By Other Licensed Haulers. Commercial units may hire licensed haulers to collect their refuse. Licensed haulers shall provide appropriate containers for commercial units. 
B.	Other Commercial Charges. A.R.S. 49-746. 
1.	Commercial units may arrange bulky trash collection with any licensed hauler. 
2.	Collection and transport of appliances and other items may be arranged with any licensed hauler. 
3.	Vacant lot cleanup charges may be arranged with any licensed hauler. 
C.	The administrator may provide special permission on individual occasions for self transport of trash by the commercial entity to an acceptable disposal site. 
D.	Collection and transport of dangerous waste may be arranged with any licensed hauler. 
E.	Litter may be disposed of in any container provided for collection under this chapter of the City Code. 
F.	Failure to provide adequate storage or collection of refuse by a commercial unit may result in discontinuation of city utility service to the commercial unit until proper arrangements are made for storage and collection. 
G.	Construction sites shall be maintained in a manner to prevent the distribution of waste off the site by the elements. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
State Law reference- A.A.C. R18-13-305; A.R.S. 49-746; 49-765. 
5.06.110 - Failure to pay refuse charges. 
    In the event that any customer shall fail to pay for refuse service as provided in this chapter, the administrator is authorized to discontinue water service, sewer, gas, or other city services to the property until such time as payment is made. The city may also impose a lien on the property where the refuse service was provided of sufficient amount to recapture any costs, including any administrative charges, owed to the city (also see [section] 5.06.080.B.). 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.120. - Charges for beginning services. 
    Charges for refuse services to newly constructed structures shall commence upon final inspection and approval of such structures by the administrator unless no service is required to the property. The property shall be clean and clear of all construction materials or debris. The refuse services shall begin after a certificate of occupancy permit has been issued for a structure. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.130 - Administration. 
    The administrator or designee shall be the enforcing officer of this title. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.140 - Covered residence/commercial licensed haulers-Requirements. 
    Collection of covered residence/commercial refuse and special material may be hauled by approved licensed hauler that is licensed by the city, to perform such work. Such license will be issued by the administrator under the following conditions: 
A.	The administrator must have satisfactory evidence that the person or entity requesting a license possesses the necessary equipment and qualifications to collect, transport and dispose of covered residence refuse and special material in a manner satisfactory to the administrator and in conformity with the state or county department of health laws, rules and regulations. 
B.	The licensed hauler shall receive approval to operate within the city on a yearly basis. The city and licensed hauler will execute the standard private refuse hauling agreement prepared by the city. 
C.	The said agreement shall include the following stipulations: 
1.	The collection agency shall provide the administrator with, and keep current, a list of all customers covered by the contract between the city and the collection agency. Specifically, the licensed hauler shall notify the administrator within two weeks prior to any addition or deletion of customers. 
2.	All other licensed haulers shall provide the administrator with written notice of intent to provide refuse collection services to each new business establishment prior to commencing that service. The notice shall include the name and address of the commercial unit, the ownership of the business establishment, the number, type and size of refuse containers that will be collected, and the days of collection. A complete list of all commercial units serviced by licensed haulers shall be provided to administrator with any request for annual renewal of the permit. Licensee shall also promptly notify the administrator if licensed hauler's commercial units are sold, transferred or assigned or if shall provide the administrator with written notice of intent to provide refuse collection services to each new commercial unit prior to commencing that service. The notice shall include the name and address of the commercial unit, the ownership of the commercial unit, the number, type and size of refuse containers that will be collected, and the days of collection. A complete list of all commercial units serviced by licensee shall be provided to administrator with any request for annual renewal of the license. 
3.	The licensee shall also promptly notify the administrator if licensee's business is sold, transferred or assigned or if licensee discontinues the collection and hauling of refuse within the city. 
4.	Licensed hauler shall comply with all state, county and city laws and ordinances regulating the collection of refuse. 
5.	The licensed hauler shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 naming the city as additionally insured. 
D.	This agreement shall be personal to the licensed hauler, and may not be assigned or transferred without the written consent of the city. 
E.	The administrator may impose other stipulations in the best interests of the city. 
F.	The licensed hauler shall pay monthly to the city; five percent of the gross receipts collected for providing solid waste services within the city, but not less than $50.00 each month for the privilege of using the city's rights-of-way to conduct the private business and to offset the administrative cost of maintaining the records. These receipts shall be deposited into the city's general fund. The licensed hauler shall maintain an adequate set of books to reflect the amounts charged to customers within the City of Willcox. The licensed hauler shall grant the administrator the right to audit books upon 72 hours' notice by the city. 
G.	The licensed hauler shall provide all refuse containers for customers per section 5.06.160. 
H.	Vehicle Requirements. The administrator may inspect the vehicles to be utilized by the licensed haulers prior to issuance of a license or license renewal and at any time during the term of the license. All vehicles must meet the following requirements throughout the term of the permit: 
1.	Vehicles must be maintained in good condition and repair. That portion of the vehicle into which solid waste is deposited shall be watertight up through 18 inches above the bed floor, shall have watertight rear door seal(s), if applicable, and be free of any openings that would permit solid waste to leak from the vehicle; 
2.	All open-top vehicles must be covered or tarped when in transit to prevent its contents from spilling or blowing from the container onto the roadway. Tarps must be affixed to each vehicle at all times; 
3.	All vehicles shall be equipped with an operable backup audible safety alarm meeting industry standards; 
4.	Vehicles shall be maintained and operated in such a manner to ensure that noise levels do not exceed 75 decibels at a distance of 25 feet; and 
5.	The outside of each vehicle must be clearly identified with the name and phone number of the contractor operating the vehicle and the city provided license number. All letters shall be no less than three inches in height and shall be displayed on both sides and the rear of the vehicle. 
6.	The licensed hauler shall permit the administrator to inspect trucks, containers and equipment used within the city limits upon request of the administrator. After inspection, the administrator shall notify the department of environmental quality solid waste management and the licensed hauler if any equipment, trucks or containers do not meet A.A.C. Section R18-13-310 or city ordinances. Any violations of said requirements not corrected by the licensed hauler within 15 days of notification will be reported to the department of environmental quality solid waste management. Failure to correct said violations within 30 days from initial notification shall be grounds for termination of the license to pick up refuse within the City of Willcox. 
I.	All contracts for the collection and hauling of commercial refuse within the city shall contain a clause allowing the contract to be cancelled by the customer in the event the licensed hauler's license is suspended or revoked by the city. 
J.	Licensed hauler shall immediately pick up all material that drops, spills, leaks, or is blown from a collection container or vehicle, and shall repair damage to, and clean the place onto which any material was so dropped, spilled, blown or leaked to the reasonable satisfaction of the administrator. 
K.	A secondary hauler is not required to have a license from the city to haul refuse generated by providing services to residential or commercial units which are not owned by the secondary hauler. 
L.	For the purposes of instituting service under a new collection agency contract: All commercial units, who have not filed the necessary notice of change of licensed hauler; or for which the city has not received notice from a licensed hauler of agreement with the commercial unit; will be assigned to the collection agency. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
Note- A.A.C. Section R18-13-310. 
5.06.150 - Inspections. 
    The administrator may conduct inspections of refuse storage containers, collection, hauling and disposal activities to ensure compliance with, and knowledge of, the provisions of this chapter. The administrator may provide notice of compliance violations prior to undertaking formal enforcement action pursuant to procedures established by the administrator. Inspections of restricted access areas on private property shall not be conducted without prior notice to the property owner. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
Note- A.A.C. Section R18-13-304. 
5.06.160 - Container requirements. 
A.	The licensed hauler shall provide refuse containers to all residential or commercial units for either curbside collection (one curbside container per covered residence) or alley collection, whichever is applicable. 
B.	Licensed hauler provided refuse containers are the property of the licensed hauler and shall be located as per section 5.06.170. 
C.	The container size shall be determined by the licensed hauler and administrator to meet the needs of the customer served. 
D.	The container shall be marked with the name of the licensed hauler. 
E.	Container Damage, Removal or Tampering. 
1.	General. The containers shall remain the property of the licensed hauler. The licensed hauler shall have complete jurisdiction over use, repair, removal or investigation of improper use or tampering. 
2.	Damage to Containers. 
a.	Damage to containers including burning or breakage will be investigated by licensed hauler. The residential or commercial units shall be responsible for damages due to misuse. The licensed hauler will notify the residential or commercial units of the damages to containers caused by misuse. Melting caused by hot ashes is considered damage. The city will offer one month of free garbage and trash service to customers who provide information leading to arrest and conviction of vandals. 
b.	Damages caused by improper use, overloading, or accidental actions shall be covered totally by the party who caused the damage of the container. The customers shall be notified of the charges for repair or replacement of the container. The customer(s) who are served by the collection agency shall be billed for the charges on their monthly utility bill. For container(s) used by several customers, the charges shall be distributed equally to all users of the container. 
c.	Damages caused by vandalism or normal wear will be repaired by the licensed hauler at the sole expense of the hauler. 
d.	Damages to containers caused by city equipment shall be the responsibility of the city. Any costs or charges shall be paid to the licensed hauler by the city from the appropriate department budget. 
3.	The licensed hauler will provide replacement containers at no additional expense where replacement is necessary because of normal wear and tear caused by proper usage. The owner or occupant of a covered residence will be charged the fee set forth by city council resolution when replacement of a container is required because of something other than normal wear and tear caused by proper usage. 
4.	It shall be the responsibility of the licensed hauler to maintain refuse containers in a sanitary condition and in good repair and to remove any graffiti on these containers within 72 hours following notification by the administrator. 
F.	The owner or occupant of a residential or commercial unit is responsible for keeping all licensed hauler provided refuse containers and the area around refuse containers, in a clean and sanitary condition and to use such containers only for their intended purpose. 
G.	All containers used must have operative lids and be equipped with markings stating that contain lids must be closed at all times other than when placing refuse in the container. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
Note- A.A.C. Section R18-13-307. 
5.06.170 - Placement of containers for pickup. 
A.	Alley Collection. Refuse containers shall be placed by the licensed hauler in the alley near the property line in a location determined by the administrator. No person may change the pickup locations without prior approval by the administrator. 
B.	Curbside Collection. 
1.	Refuse containers used for curbside collection shall be placed either in the right-of-way against the curb in front of each covered residence, or in the driveway for that residence at the curb line, away from street light poles, mail boxes and parked cars. Refuse containers shall be located in such a manner as to not create a pedestrian hazard, impair the use of the sidewalk or interfere with vehicular traffic. If parked cars prevent access by mechanized collection vehicles to the sidewalk or driveway, the containers shall be placed in the right-of-way away from such parked cars. 
2.	Curbside containers shall not be set out prior to 6:00 a.m. on pickup day and must be removed to the property by 9:00 p.m. on pickup day. 
C.	Special Placement. 
1.	Where mechanized collection vehicle access is restricted by the residential or commercial development design, the administrator shall designate the collection location for refuse containers, and bulk materials, on the nearest public street, or on the site commercial unit's property, on which collection vehicles are able to operate safely. 
2.	Refuse containers from such developments may be grouped together, rather than being adjacent to a covered residential/commercial unit as set forth in subsection (B) above. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
Note- A.A.C. Section R18-13-309. 
5.06.180 - Use of containers. 
A.	Designated Users. 
1.	Each container shall have a designated user or users. No other parties shall place refuse in that container. Placement of refuse in containers not authorized is a violation of this section of the City Code. 
2.	Commercial unit may not share a container or containers except as provided in [section] 5.06.100.A.1.b. 
3.	Persons using a container not assigned to them shall be notified of improper use and may be cited for improper use as per [subsection] (A)(1). 
B.	Improper use of containers is a violation of this section of the City Code: 
1.	Improper use of container shall include removal, tampering, overloading, burning in the container, dumping hot ashes, or movement. 
2.	Commercial establishments shall not move full containers. A container should remain in its assigned location. 
3.	Customers shall not place soil, concrete, or building materials in the container. 
C.	Litter may be disposed of in any container provide for collection under this section of the City Code. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.190 - Preparation of refuse for collection. 
    All refuse shall be prepared for collection or disposed of as follows: 
A.	Garbage. All refuse shall be placed within plastic bags which are closed so as to prevent the escape of any refuse from the bag. All refuse shall be placed completely within the container provided by the contractor but the container shall not be overfilled. 
B.	Trash shall be bundled or bagged as follows: 
1.	Cardboard boxes and cardboard shall be flattened, bundled and weighted to keep it in place during winds. 
2.	Weeds and grass clippings and leaves shall be bagged in plastic garbage bags of 30-gallon size and placed in the containers provided. Individuals are strongly encouraged to transport their green waste to the city composting site. 
3.	All bundles or bags shall be 40 pounds maximum and packed so as not to rupture for easy pickup in the containers provided. 
4.	Ashes must be cooled before placement in the container for collection. Ashes may be placed in the plastic containers but must be cool so as not to melt or burn the container. 
C.	Brush shall be tied, bundled and stacked as follows: 
1.	Hedge clippings and plants shall be bagged in large plastic garbage bags or in disposable cardboard boxes. The bags shall be 40 pounds maximum in weight and filled so as not to break. 
2.	Tree trimmings and branches shall be cut into maximum four-foot lengths and tied tightly into bundles of 40 pounds maximum weight. The individual stems shall be placed in a parallel direction in the bundle. 
3.	Tree trunks are handled as bulky materials. 
4.	Christmas trees and trimmings shall have all extremely flammable materials removed from same. The trees shall be cut into a length such that the maximum weight of the length is 40 pounds. Trimmings shall be boxed or bagged not to exceed maximum weight of 40 pounds without breaking. 
D.	Appliances, Furniture and Vehicles. 
1.	The licensed hauler will collect discarded appliances, lawn mowers, other outside appliances, old furniture and household tools from residences. The customer shall call the administrator for service. The customer shall provide a name and address of the location. The licensed hauler shall respond within two working days of a call. 
2.	Abandoned or discarded automobiles, motorcycles, scooters, and motorized vehicles shall be properly disposed of by the property owner from private property or by the vehicle owner from public right-of-way. 
E.	Building Materials. 
1.	All owners, contractors and builders of structures shall, upon the completion of any structure, gather up and haul away, at their sole cost and expense, all refuse of every nature, description or kind, which has resulted from the building of such structure, including all these materials previously defined in this chapter, and properly dispose of the materials at an approved disposal site. 
2.	Residential customers shall dispose of construction materials at their expense. The residential customers may haul construction materials to the landfill/transfer station themselves. This includes remodeling wastes. 
3.	Soil, concrete, bricks, concrete blocks, or fragments, aggregate, stone or bituminous concrete will not be collected by the city as part of normal refuse disposal. This must be hauled by the builder, owner or resident and properly disposed of at a landfill or transfer station. Generators of this waste may hire any licensed hauler for proper disposal. 
F.	Byproducts. Any commercial or manufacturing establishment which by the nature of its operations creates an unusual amount of byproduct refuse may be required by the administrator, to properly dispose of its own wastes at a landfill or transfer station. Generator may hire any licensed hauler for proper disposal. 
G.	Dangerous Waste. Dangerous wastes shall be placed in a proper container, plainly marked "dangerous material handle with care." The licensed hauler reserves the right to deny service for certain dangerous wastes and to require the customer to properly dispose of it by other legal means. The container shall identify the dangerous materials by the accepted material code used by firefighting organizations. 
H.	Small Dead Animals. 
1.	Small dead animals shall be disposed of by the city animal control officer through the police department. In no case shall the dead animal be placed in a refuse container or trash pickup. 
2.	Small dead animals with an aggregate weight of less than ten pounds, per week, may be disposed of by properly placement in the assigned refuse container. 
I.	Large Dead Animals. Large dead animals shall be properly disposed of by the property owners at their expense. In no case shall large animals or animal parts be placed in a refuse container or trash pickup. Generator may hire any licensed hauler for proper disposal. 
J.	Commercial Garbage, Trash, and Refuse. All commercial units shall dispose of garbage, trash and refuse through a city licensed hauler. Cardboard shall be flattened and placed in the container or flattened and bundled. The licensed hauler, with approval from the administrator, shall determine the appropriate type of container use. 
K.	Small amounts of animal waste, less than an aggregate of ten pounds per week, may be disposed of by properly placement in the assigned containers. Larger weights of animal waste must be properly disposed of by the person responsible for generation. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
Note- A.A.C. Section R18-13-306. 
5.06.200 - Illegal disposal of refuse. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or private property within the city, except as specifically permitted in this chapter. 
B.	It is illegal to place refuse in recycling containers. 
C.	It is illegal to place refuse generated outside the City of Willcox in public or private refuse containers within the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
Note- A.A.C. Section R18-13-312. 
5.06.210 - Ownership of refuse/garbage. 
A.	Residential refuse set out in alleys or street rights-of-way for collection shall become the property of the city, if the city is properly notified of the need for a pickup and the trash or brush is properly prepared to be accepted by the hauler. 
B.	Refuse in commercial containers but on private property shall be the property of the commercial unit until collected and placed in the licensed hauler's vehicle at which time it becomes the property of the licensed hauler. 
C.	Refuse becomes the property of Cochise County when properly deposited at the transfer station/landfill. 
D.	Commercial refuse shall become the property of the city when placed in vehicles operated by the collection agency. 
E.	All items properly placed in city recycling bins become the property of the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 49-745. 
5.06.220 - Scavenging refuse prohibited. 
    No person or persons shall scavenge refuse once it has become property of the city or licensed hauler as defined above. Scavenging shall include sorting through or picking up refuse from piles, containers, vehicles, or at the landfill site. Commercial units shall control scavenging of refuse from containers on their property. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, A.R.S. 49-744. 
5.06.230 - Collection of refuse. 
A.	City Collection of Refuse. Except as expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, all refuse, other than unacceptable refuse, generated at a residential unit shall be collected and either disposed or recycled by the collection agency, when placed in refuse containers issued by the collection agency, or when properly set out for bulk collection pursuant to section 5.06.240. 
B.	Covered Residences. The city will provide basic refuse services for all residential units and charge the monthly disposal fee for these services set forth in this Code. Refuse will only be collected by a licensed hauler that is permitted to provide such collection activities pursuant to section 5.06.140. 
C.	Commercial Units. The city may provide refuse collection and disposal services for commercial units. Commercial units must properly dispose of all refuse they generate through the collection agency, other licensed haulers as provided herein. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.240 - Collection of bulk materials. 
A.	Bulk Materials Collected for Disposal; Requirements; Fees. Included as part of the monthly disposal fee for providing residential refuse services; is the right to request the collection of bulk materials once per month at no additional charge. Requests for collection of bulk materials for disposal that exceed the once per month provided may be charged the fee set forth by city council resolution for additional bulk material disposal. 
B.	Collection Parameters. Owners or occupants of a residential units wishing to request bulk materials collection shall call the administrator before placing bulk materials per section 5.06.090.B. Upon receipt of a request for bulk materials collection from an owner or occupant of a covered residence, the administrator will schedule a time for the collection of the bulk materials. Bulk materials shall be placed out for collection no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day scheduled for collection and no earlier than 96 hours before the collection time scheduled by the administrator. Except as provided by the administrator; the bulk materials shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements section 5.06.190.C. Unacceptable waste will not be collected during a bulk materials collection. 
C.	Placement of Bulk Materials to be Collected. Bulk materials shall only be collected if placed along the right-of-way behind the curb or in the alley, on the property of the residential unit. The placement of bulk materials must not block alley passages, sidewalks for pedestrian usage or interfere with curbside container collection and shall be no more than four feet from the sidewalk, or curb where there is no sidewalk. Notwithstanding the above, the administrator may designate an alternative location for the placement of bulk materials to be collected where there is restricted access to the front of a residential unit, or to provide reasonable accommodations for those persons needing special assistance with proper placement. Persons in need of an accommodation shall provide the administrator with written documentation from that person's physician setting forth the need for such accommodations. Such written documentation from that person's physician must be updated on an annual basis. (also see [section] 5.06.090.A.2.) 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.250 - Biannual cleanup of alleys and streets. 
    Twice a year the city shall arrange a city-wide cleanup. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.260 - Recycling. 
A.	Residential recycling is encouraged. All recycled materials shall be stored so as to eliminate any breeding areas for insects and other pests and dispersal by the elements. No more than five percent of residential property may be used for the handling and storage of recycled materials. 
B.	Commercial recycling is permitted in properly zoned areas. 
C.	Commercial units may store materials on site for recycling in a manner to eliminate the breeding areas for insects and other pests and dispersal by the elements. No more than five percent of the commercial property shall be used for storage of recyclable materials (except recycling centers). 
D.	The city may establish recycling programs and drop off sites for recycling materials on city property throughout the city. 
E.	Residential and commercial units are authorized to transport recyclable materials to recycling/compost sites. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.270 - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    The administrator may suspend or revoke the license of a licensed hauler whenever a licensee violates the provisions of that license, or this chapter, or fails to pay all fees when due. Notice of proposed suspension or revocation shall be delivered personally or by certified mail to the licensee and shall become effective five working days after the receipt of the notice unless the licensee files a notice of appeal pursuant to section 5.02.110 of this title. Failure to file a notice of appeal within five working days of the date of the notice of suspension or revocation shall constitute a full waiver of the right to contest that suspension or termination. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
5.06.280 - Violations. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or any license issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be guilty of a civil infraction punishable as set forth in section 5.01.010. 
(Ord. NS303, § 2, 2010) 
TITLE 6 - POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY[1] 
Chapters: 6.01 Willcox Department of Public Safety 6.02 Volunteer Police Reserve 6.03 Volunteer Fire Department 6.04 Police Alarm Systems 6.05 Animal Control 6.06 Miscellaneous Offenses  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. NS218, adopted April 27, 1999, repealed the former tit. 6, chs. 6.04-6.20, §§ 6.04.010-6.04.050, 6.08.010-6.08.100, 6.12.010-6.12.060, 6.16.010-6.16.070, 6.20.010, 6.20.020, and enacted a new tit. 6, as set out herein. The former tit. 6 pertained to animals, and derived from the 1981 codification; Ord. NS115, adopted Jan. 8, 1985; Ord. NS210, adopted Feb. 10, 1998; prior code §§ 8.12.010, 8.12.020.  Subsequently, Ord. NS301, § 2, adopted Nov. 15, 2010, enacted new provisions as herein setout. 

Chapter 6.01 - WILLCOX DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY 
Sections: 

6.01.010 - Department of public safety created. 
    There is created a department of public safety for the city. The director of public safety shall serve as the chief of police and fire chief and shall be in charge of the department under the control and administrative supervision of the city manager. The director shall have authority and control of the police and fire departments and the volunteer reserve units established under this title. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-1-1), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 1.07, § 1.07.140.B. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, A.R.S. 9-801. 
6.01.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. All words and phrases defined in this section shall also include their usual and natural meanings, as well as those herein specifically given. 
    "Director of public safety" means the director hired to oversee the department and act as the chief of police and fire chief. 
    "Police reserve" means the volunteer police reserve of the city. 
    "Willcox Department of Public Safety" means the police department of the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-1-2), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve, ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.01.030 - Qualification; appointment. 
    The director of the department qualifications shall consist of being a United States citizen who is a resident of the State of Arizona, 25 years of age or over and meets minimum standards as established by the Arizona Peace Officer Standards Training Board, pursuant to A.R.S. 41-1823. The director of public safety who shall serve as police chief and fire chief shall be appointed by the city manager. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-1-3), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve, ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department; ch. 1.07, § 1.07.140.B. 
6.01.040 - Oath of office. 
    The director of public safety shall, before entering upon her/his duties, be required to take an appropriate oath. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-1-4), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve, ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.01.050 - Powers and duties of the department. 
    It is the duty of the department, under the direction of the director acting as chief of police or fire chief to: 
A.	Enforce the Willcox Municipal Code and the statutes of the State of Arizona within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law or mutual aid agreement(s) including exercising and enforcing police powers and fire prevention and suppression powers. 
B.	Enforce the traffic regulations of the city as specified in the Willcox Municipal Code and enforce the traffic laws of the State of Arizona within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law. 
C.	Enforce the animal control regulations of the city as specified in the Willcox Municipal Code and enforce the traffic laws of the State of Arizona within jurisdictional limits as conferred by law. 
D.	Perform such additional duties as may be required by the city manager, municipal code, and statutes. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-1-5), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve, ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department; ch. 1.07, § 1.07.140.B. 
6.01.060 - Powers and duties of the director. 
A.	The director of public safety shall serve as chief of police and fire chief to the Willcox Department of Public Safety under such rules and regulations as the city manager may prescribe. 
B.	The director may be called to duty by the city manager during the time of or in anticipation of any emergency situation or other occasion which, in the opinion of the city manager, will reasonably require the aid of police and/or fire personnel to maintain peace and good order in the city. 
C.	The director acting as police chief shall have the powers and authority of a peace officer. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-1-6), 2010) 
6.01.070 - Rule making authority. 
    The director of public safety acting as chief of police and/or fire chief, with the advice, consent and approval of the city manager, shall adopt rules and regulations expressly defining the powers and duties of the police and fire departments and the reserve units established under title 6. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2, 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve, ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department; ch. 1.07, § 1.07.140.B. 
Chapter 6.02 - VOLUNTEER POLICE RESERVE 
Sections: 

6.02.010 - Volunteer police reserve established. 
    There is established a volunteer police reserve for the city as auxiliary to the Willcox Department of Public Safety and as a component thereof. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-1), 2010) 
6.02.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. All words and phrases defined in this section shall also include their usual and natural meanings, as well as those herein specifically given. 
    "Director of public safety" means the director hired to oversee the volunteer police reserve in his capacity and as the chief of police. 
    "Police reserve" means the volunteer police reserve of the city. 
    "Willcox Department of Public Safety" means and includes the police department of the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-2), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.030 - Qualification; appointment. 
    The members of the reserve shall consist of United States citizens who are residents of the State of Arizona, 21 years of age or over and meet minimum standards as established by the Arizona Peace Officer Standards Training Board, pursuant to A.R.S. 41-1823. Classification of reserve status shall be consistent with Arizona Peace Officer Standards Training Board approved certification. Minimum standards for police officers shall not apply to persons applying for dispatcher position. Persons applying for positions who meet minimum requirements shall be appointed by the city manager upon the recommendation of the chief of police. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-3), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.040 - Limitation on membership. 
    The membership of the reserve shall not exceed two persons for each regular member of the police department. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-4), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.050 - Oath of office. 
    Each member of the reserve shall, before entering upon her/his duties, be required to take an appropriate oath. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-5), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.060 - Command and control; dismissal. 
    The reserves shall be under the command and subject to the direction and control of the chief of police or his designated representative. Dismissal from the reserve force shall be by the chief of police subject to confirmation of the city manager. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-6), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.070 - Powers and duties. 
A.	The members of the reserve shall render auxiliary support, without compensation, to the Willcox Department of Public Safety under such rules and regulations as the chief of police may prescribe. 
B.	Members of the reserve may be called to duty by the chief of police during the time of or in anticipation of any emergency situation or other occasion which, in the opinion of the chief of police, will reasonably require the aid of personnel other than that of the regular police department to maintain peace and good order in the city. Members of the reserve may also be called to duty at other times for training with the regular police department. 
C.	Each member shall have the powers and authority of a peace officer during such time, and only such time, as she/he is on duty in response to a call by the chief of police, subject however, to such limitations as may be prescribed under rules and regulations adopted by the chief of police. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-7), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.080 - Rule making authority. 
    The chief of police, with the advice, consent and approval of the city manager, shall adopt rules and regulations expressly defining the powers and duties of the reserve, but such powers and duties shall not be in excess of those accorded to the police nor inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-8), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.090 - Uniform and insignia. 
A.	The chief of police shall issue to each member of the reserve a badge of authority to be used by the member while on duty. The badge shall be of such design as the chief of police may determine, but shall bear the word "Reserve" across the face thereof. 
B.	The uniform shall be the same as a regular police officer of the city and be furnished at the individual's expense. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-9), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
6.02.100 - Insurance benefits. 
    While on duty, members of the reserve shall be deemed employees of the city for the purpose of securing to such members liability insurance and the benefits of the workers' compensation laws of the state in accordance with A.R.S. 23-901.06. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-2-10), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer fire department. 
Chapter 6.03 - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

6.03.010 - Volunteer fire department created. 
    There is created a volunteer fire department of the city which shall be under the supervision of the Willcox Director of Public Safety (WDPS), two assistant fire chiefs, and as many other officers and firefighters as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-1), 2010) 
6.03.020 - Rules and regulations. 
    The fire department shall be operated and managed in accordance with such departmental rules and public safety regulations as may from time to time be approved by the council. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-2), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.030 - Compensation. 
    Volunteer firefighters shall be compensated in an amount set by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-3), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.040 - Powers and duties of director. 
    The director shall ensure that firefighters are technically qualified by training and experience and shall have the ability to command people and hold their respect and confidence. It shall be the duty of the director to: 
A.	Be accountable to the city manager for the personnel, morale and general efficiency of the volunteer fire department. 
B.	Direct the operations of the volunteer fire department subject to the rules and regulations thereof. 
C.	Be present at all fires, if possible, and receive assistance from the assistant fire chiefs and other officers in planning and directing the extinguishment thereof. During the progress of a fire, the authority of the director or his designee shall be absolute in all matters directly concerning the extinguishment of the fire and the disposition of property endangered by it. 
D.	Conduct suitable drills or instruction in the operation and handling of equipment, first aid and rescue work, salvage, a study of buildings in the city, water supplies and all other matters generally considered essential to good firefighting practice and safety of life and property from fire. 
E.	Assist the proper authorities in suppressing the crime of arson by investigating or causing to be investigated the cause, origin and circumstances of all fires. 
F.	Direct the inspection of buildings and premises and serve written notice upon the owner or occupant to abate, within a specified time, any and all fire hazards that may be found. For the purpose of conducting such inspection, the director, or his designee, is empowered to enter any and all buildings and premises within the city at any reasonable hour. Any person served with such written notice shall comply and notify the director or his designee of his compliance within a reasonable time. 
G.	Keep complete records of all fires, inspections, apparatus and equipment, personnel and other information about the work of the department open to inspection and furnish to the city manager such information upon request. 
H.	Make a complete annual report, in writing, to the city manager at such time as may be specified by the council, and such report shall include the information specified in subsection (G) of this section, together with comparative data for previous years and recommendations for improving the effectiveness of the department. 
I.	Enforce or cause to be enforced all ordinances, laws and regulations of the city and state, insofar as they pertain to fire and safety. 
J.	Demote, dismiss or expel any officer or member of the volunteer fire department for neglect or refusal to perform departmental duties. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-4), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.050 - Appointment, qualifications and supervision of firefighters. 
    Firefighters shall be appointed at such time and in such manner as the director may deem necessary subject to city manager's approval. Such appointees shall have a telephone in their homes and/or a cell phone. Firefighters shall be subject to supervision by the director, the assistant fire chiefs and other officers. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-5), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.060 - Entry and police powers. 
A.	Right of Entry. It is lawful for any firefighter, acting under the direction of the director or another officer in command, to enter upon the premises adjacent to or in the vicinity of any building or other property that is on fire for the purpose of extinguishing such fire, and no person shall hinder, resist or obstruct any firefighter in the discharge of his duty as provided in this subsection. 
B.	Police Powers. All regularly appointed members of the department are given the necessary special police powers for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-6), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.070 - Equipment. 
A.	Required Equipment. The department shall be equipped with such apparatus and other equipment as may be required from time to time to maintain its efficiency and properly protect life and property from fire. 
B.	Purchase of Equipment. Recommendations concerning apparatus and equipment needed shall be made by the director, approved by the city manager and after approval by the council, such apparatus and equipment shall be purchased in accordance with the procurement policy and in such manner as may be approved by the council. 
C.	Storage. All equipment of the department shall be safely and conveniently housed in such place or places as may be designated by the director. 
D.	Prohibited Use. 
1.	No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment for any private purpose, nor shall any person willfully take away or conceal any article used in any way by the department. 
2.	No person shall enter any place where the fire apparatus is housed or handle any apparatus or equipment belonging to the department unless accompanied by, or having special permission of, an officer or authorized member of the department. 
3.	No fire apparatus or equipment shall be hired out or permitted to leave the fire station except in response to a call for aid at a fire within the corporate limits of the city or in response to a call for aid at a fire in an area authorized for fire protection service or mutual aid under the provisions of section 6.03.100 of this chapter unless otherwise directed by the director or his designee. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-7), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.080 - Vehicle right-of-way; duties of other drivers. 
A.	All motor equipment of the department shall have right-of-way over all other traffic when responding to an alarm. 
B.	No unauthorized vehicle shall follow within 500 feet of any apparatus belonging to the department, nor park any vehicle or otherwise cause any obstruction to be placed within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of the entrance when properly posted, or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant. 
C.	No person shall drive any vehicle over fire hose except upon specific orders from the director or other officer in charge where the hose is used. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-8), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.090. - Alarm arrangements; false alarms prohibited. 
    Suitable arrangements or equipment shall be provided for citizens to turn in an alarm and for notifying all members of the department so that they may promptly respond. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly turn in or cause to be turned in a false alarm. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-9), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve; ch. 6.04, police alarm systems. 
6.03.100 - Agreements for fire protection outside city. 
    The council may enter into agreements or contracts to furnish fire protection outside the city or enter into mutual aid agreements, and the fire department is authorized to render firefighting service pursuant to the terms of such agreements or contracts. The council shall prescribe by resolution the methods and terms under which the director may enter into agreements with individual property owners for fire protection. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-10), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.110 - Fire duties of police officers. 
    It is made the special duty of the director and/or other peace officers who may be on duty and available for fire duty to respond to all fire alarms and assist the department in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic and maintaining order, and in enforcing the observance of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-11), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.120 - Obedience to director required. 
    It is unlawful for any firefighter or citizen to refuse to obey an order issued by the director or his designee pursuant to his authority. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-12), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.130 - Badge. 
    Each member of the department shall be issued a badge designating his rank. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-13), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.03, volunteer police reserve. 
6.03.140 - Insurance benefits. 
    While on duty, members of the volunteer fire department shall be deemed employees of the city for the purpose of securing to such members liability insurance and the benefits of the workers' compensation laws of the state in accordance with A.R.S. 23-901.06. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-3-14), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
Chapter 6.04 - POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to regulate the activities and responsibilities of those persons who purchase, own, lease or rent a place of business and/or residence, within the city which have installed, leased, or rented service on monitored alarm systems. It is further intended to encourage the improvement in reliability of these systems, devices and services to reduce false alarms and to ensure that the police department will not be unduly diverted from responding to actual criminal activity as a result of responding to false alarms. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-1), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.020 - Scope and applicability. 
A.	This chapter specifically encompasses burglar alarms, robbery alarms, panic alarms, fire alarms and medical assistance alarms. 
B.	This chapter shall apply to all governmental agencies and facilities, including, but not limited to, offices and agencies of the city to the extent necessary to recover costs incurred. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-2), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. All words and phrases defined in this section shall also include their usual and natural meanings, as well as those herein specifically given: 
    "Act of nature" means an unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by reasonable human care, skill or foresight. 
    "Alarm" or "alarm system" means any medical or electrical device which is used to detect unauthorized entry into buildings or onto premises or to warn or alert others of an emergency or fire or of the commission of an unlawful act. 
    "Alarm business" means any person, partnership, or corporation who owns or conducts the business of installing, leasing, renting, maintaining, servicing or monitoring of alarm systems devices or services. 
    "Alarm coordinator" means public safety department individual designated to coordinate police/fire relations with the licensed alarm users and to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Alarm user" means any person, firm, partnership or corporation which leases, rents or purchases any monitored alarm system, device or service from an alarm business. 
    "Alarms" means the following alarm definition list was prepared by members of the public safety committee of the Arizona Burglar and Fire Alarm Association (ABFA) to provide all users with general guidelines for the various industry terms to facilitate improved communications and expedite response. 
    "Audible alarm" means a device which, when activated, generates an audible sound on the premises. 
    "Automatic dialer" means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line, cellular telephone service or radio link and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response either by voice methods or code signals or by maintaining an open line with emergency services. Cannot be 911. 
    "Burglary/intrusion" means a signal received from a monitored alarm that indicates a forced or unauthorized entry. Can be used for either commercial or residential and can be audible or silent. 
    "False alarm" means any activation of an alarm eliciting a response by police personnel when a situation requiring a response does not in fact exist. The term does not include activation for testing purposes when the police department has been given advance notice of such testing. The term also does not include activation caused by police department personnel. 
    "Fire" means a signal received from a monitored alarm that indicates fire, smoke, heat, or water flow through a sprinkler system. These detectors may be connected directly to the alarm system which will automatically activate the alarm, or the alarm can be manually activated. Is used for commercial and residential and is primarily an audible signal. 
    "Medical" means a signal received from a monitored alarm that is manually activated and indicates a medical emergency. This alarm is normally a residential alarm, and the signal is primarily audible. 
    "Monitored alarm" means an alarm system that transmits signals to an alarm business or monitoring agency for the purpose of alerting public safety personnel. 
    "Monitoring agency" means any person or organization, including, but not limited to, alarm businesses or answering services that are legally or contractually responsible for monitoring one or more alarm systems in the jurisdiction. 
    "Non-monitored alarm system" means those alarms that are not monitored by a monitoring agency and depend on local audible devices to summon help. 
    "Panic/holdup" means a signal received from a monitored alarm to indicate a manual activation designed for the detection of a robbery, holdup or the commission of an unlawful act at the alarm location, false activation of which can only be construed as user error. 
    "Primary alarm user" means the person or persons who contract for the lease, purchase or rental of an alarm system; or who are responsible for the premises where an alarm system is located; or otherwise arrange for the installation or service of an alarm system. 
    "Self-installer" means any property owner, proprietor, partnership, or corporation who may elect to install his own alarm system. A "self-installer" will be liable for all provisions of this chapter, the same as an alarm business. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-3), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.040 - Alarm businesses. 
A.	Equipment, Technical and Operation Standards. The following equipment standards, technical standards, and standards of operation shall be followed by the alarm business or any individual installing an alarm system: 
1.	All alarm systems shall be installed using good workmanship and shall be designed to reduce false alarms. 
2.	Control panels, motion detectors, smoke detectors, photoelectric beams and glass breakage detectors shall be Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or Factory Mutual (FM) approved or pending approval. 
3.	Alarm systems shall be designed to alert the user of possible system problems when the user tests or attempts to activate the system. 
4.	Audible alarm systems shall be designed to emit audible sounds no longer than 15 minutes from the time the alarm is activated. 
5.	Non-monitored alarm systems which depend solely on audible devices located on the outside of a business or residence to summons help are prohibited. 
6.	No person or business shall use or cause to be used any automatic dialing device that: 
a.	Automatically selects a public safety or emergency services telephone line (911) of the Willcox Police Department; or 
b.	Prevents termination of a call by public safety or emergency service personnel. 
7.	No alarm business shall place in service or monitor an alarm system that is known to be defective or contains defective components. The alarm business is responsible for inspecting the alarm system and for determining to the best of its ability that the system is operating as designed and will not be a source of additional false alarms caused by system or component failure prior to placing the system in service or commencing monitoring services. 
B.	Responsibilities. The following are responsibilities of any alarm business conducting alarm activities in Willcox: 
1.	An alarm business that installs an alarm system shall provide the primary alarm user with complete instruction, including specific written operating instructions or a video or other media presentation of the same that provides reasonable guidelines to aid the user in correctly using the alarm system installed by the alarm business. Documentation of such training shall be retained by the alarm business as long as the business services, maintains or monitors the alarm system for the primary alarm user. 
2.	Upon completion of the installation of a new alarm system, the alarm business shall immediately notify the primary alarm user of: 
a.	The need for an alarm permit for any system; 
b.	The intent of the police department to reduce false alarms and the important aspects of the fine assessment process; and 
c.	The existence of this chapter and how to obtain a copy. 
3.	At the completion of the installation of an alarm system, the alarm business shall inspect and test all equipment and features and take or cause to be taken corrective action necessary to prevent the occurrence of false alarms. The results of such tests and corrective actions shall be documented and maintained by the alarm business as long as services or monitoring is provided to users of the alarm system. 
4.	Attempt to arrange for either, the alarm subscriber, responsible party or alarm agent to go to the premises of an activated alarm system within 15 minutes of notification of need, in order to be able to assist the police department personnel in determining the reason for activation and the securing of the premises. 
5.	Promptly notify the alarm coordinator in the event the alarm business ceases to lease, rent, maintain, service or monitor any alarm system. Said notice shall be sent within 30 days of the date service or responsibility is discontinued. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-4), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.050 - Alarm subscribers and owners. 
A.	Permit Required. 
1.	All alarm subscribers and owners of existing alarm systems shall obtain an alarm user permit from the police department within ten days of the effective date hereof. 
2.	Alarm subscribers and owners installing new alarm systems shall obtain an alarm user permit within ten days of the activation of any new alarm system. 
B.	Application for Permit. Application for an alarm permit or renewal must be made by the alarm subscriber or alarm owner at the police department upon forms prepared and approved by the police department and shall contain the following information: 
1.	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the primary user (if different); 
2.	Location of the alarm system and types of emergencies reported by the system and which features are audible and which are silent; 
3.	Name of the alarm business installing and/or servicing, inspecting, maintaining and/or monitoring the alarm system; 
4.	Date of installation if a new alarm system, or date of last inspection if not a new installation; 
5.	Certification that the primary user and all others authorized regarding control of the system have been properly trained in the use of the system by an alarm business, the subscriber or by the proprietor of the system; and 
6.	The names of at least two alternative responsible parties who can be notified to assist the police department personnel as set forth above. 
C.	Fees. 
1.	Fees are set by resolution of the city council. Fees for initial permit application or renewal shall not be refundable or prorated. 
2.	If a residential alarm subscriber or owner is over the age of 65 and is the primary resident of the residence, and if no business is conducted in the residence, a user permit may be obtained from the coordinator without the payment of a fee. 
D.	Duration of Permit. Permits issued pursuant to this section shall be for a period of one year and shall be renewable on the anniversary of the permit, subject to the terms and conditions provided in this section. 
E.	Non-Transferability of Permit. Permits may not be transferred from person to person or from address to address. 
F.	Failure to Obtain Permit; Continued Use After Revocation. 
1.	If an alarm subscriber or owner fails to obtain a permit as provided herein, the alarm coordinator shall notify him that an assessment for each alarm resulting in the dispatch of police department personnel will be charged until such time as the permit is obtained. All such service fees must be paid in full before a permit will be issued. 
2.	If an alarm subscriber or owner operates an alarm system in Willcox, resulting in the response of police department personnel after having a permit revoked as provided herein, an assessment for each alarm response will be charged. 
G.	Duties of Subscribers and Owners. The following are the duties and responsibilities of all alarm subscribers, alarm owners or primary users operating alarm systems in Willcox: 
1.	To inactivate or cause to be inactivated an audible alarm within 15 minutes, in compliance with section 6.04.040.A.4. of this chapter; 
2.	To train or cause to be trained any and all persons who might have reason and authority to control the alarm system in the proper operation of the system; 
3.	To inform persons who are authorized to place the alarm system into operation of the provisions of this chapter, emphasizing the importance of avoiding false alarms; 
4.	To notify the alarm coordinator when the alarm is deactivated, the alarm business is changed or the applicant has moved from the location of the alarm system and is no longer responsible for its operation; 
5.	To maintain or to cause to be maintained the alarm system in good working order and to take reasonable measures to prevent the occurrence of false alarms; and 
6.	To inspect or cause to be inspected the alarm system at least once each 12 months as a means to prevent activations resulting in false alarms. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-5), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.060 - False alarm assessments and permit revocation. 
A.	New Alarm Systems Exempt. The following alarm systems shall not be subject to the provisions of this section: 
1.	Newly leased, rented, purchased and/or monitored alarm systems shall not be subject to the provisions of this section relating to the counting and assessment of false alarms for a "grace period" of 30 days from the date the alarm system becomes operational. 
2.	The grace period shall apply only if the alarm subscriber or proprietor notifies the coordinator in writing within ten days of the completion of installation or reinstallation. The written notice shall specify the date the system was installed or reinstalled. Notification should be mailed to the attention of the alarm coordinator at: 
Willcox Police Department 
320 W. Rex Allen Drive 
Willcox, AZ 85643 
3.	For reinstalled alarm systems, the notice shall also describe the nature and extent of the reinstallation and how the reinstallation relates to any previous false alarm history. 
B.	Assessment Provisions. Any alarm system which has four or more false alarms within a consecutive 365-day period shall be subject to assessment as follows: 
1.	The alarm coordinator shall notify the alarm subscriber or owner by regular mail when police department records indicate that an alarm system has four false alarms and direct that a report be submitted to the coordinator within ten days containing: 
a.	A description of the action taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. 
b.	Specific defenses, if any, why the alleged false alarms should not be considered false alarms. Evidence that a false alarm was caused by acts of nature or action of the telephone company shall constitute affirmative defenses to an assessment for the particular false alarm. 
2.	If the report referenced in subsection (B)(1) of this section is not received by the alarm coordinator, any notified party shall be deemed to have waived his rights to any further review or hearing as provided herein, and the alarm subscriber or proprietor operating the offending alarm system will be assessed pursuant to this section. 
3.	The alarm coordinator shall review the report of specific defenses. If it is determined that there is a valid defense, a notice shall be sent to the alarm subscriber or proprietor that no assessment will be made at that time. The notice shall specifically set forth the findings and conclusions of the coordinator with respect to the review of the report submitted. 
4.	If the alarm coordinator determines that the defense to the initial determination of false alarms has not been accepted, a notice shall be sent by certified mail to the alarm subscriber or owner that he will be assessed a false alarm assessment pursuant to this section. The notice of decision shall contain the specific findings and conclusions of the alarm coordinator with respect to the review report submitted. 
5.	Assessments will be imposed pursuant to the following: 
a.	All assessments shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
b.	All such assessment monies shall be deposited into the city general fund. 
c.	The alarm coordinator may revoke an alarm user's permit at any time after the occurrence of the fifteenth false alarm within the permit year. 
6.	If the alarm subscriber or owner fails to pay the assessment within 30 days after receipt of written notification, the coordinator may summarily revoke the alarm user's permit. 
C.	Revocation of Permit. 
1.	An alarm user whose permit has been revoked shall be furnished written notification, certified mail, of such revocation and shall, within three days after the receipt of such written notification, discontinue the use of the alarm system, or the alarm coordinator may assess charges against the alarm user as noted in section 6.04.050.F.2. of this chapter and set by resolution of the city council. 
2.	In the event the police department finds it necessary to order the revocation of a permit which necessitates discontinuing the use of an alarm or alarm system, the city shall incur no liability by such action. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-6), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.070 - Appeals. 
A.	Any alarm user dissatisfied with a decision of the alarm coordinator made pursuant to this chapter may, within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision, appeal in writing to a hearing officer designated by the city manager. A copy of the appeal request shall be sent to the alarm coordinator. 
B.	The request for an appeal shall set forth the specific objections to the decision of the alarm coordinator which form the basis of the appeal. Specific objections may include: 
1.	Acts of nature. 
2.	Action of the telephone company. 
3.	Actual emergency situations. 
4.	Police department personnel did not arrive at the premises. 
C.	The hearing officer shall review the subscriber's objections to coordinator's notice of decision within ten working days of receipt of the appeal request. All assessments shall be stayed until completion of the review. The decision of the hearing officer shall be based upon the evidence presented and shall pertain to that hearing only. 
D.	The hearing officer shall make one of the following rulings: 
1.	Affirm the decision of the alarm coordinator, in which case, any assessment or permit revocation imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be sustained; or 
2.	Reverse the decision of the alarm coordinator, in whole or in part, in which case, no assessment shall be imposed. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-7), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.080 - Intentional false alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any alarm or alarm system or cause signals to be transmitted to a monitoring agency indicating the activation of an alarm system for any reason other than to warn of an actual emergency. This section shall not apply to the testing of alarms or alarm systems by the installing or monitoring alarm business or by the alarm user; provided, however, that the police department has been appropriately notified of the test. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-8), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
6.04.090 - Confidentiality of information. 
    The information furnished by an alarm business or by an alarm user to the alarm coordinator pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential and shall not be subject to public inspection. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-4-9), 2010) 
Cross reference- Ch. 6.01, Willcox Department of Public Safety; ch. 6.02, volunteer police reserve. 
Chapter 6.05 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 

6.05.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter serves to set forth the regulations for animal control and enforcement. The Willcox Department of Public Safety, through the animal control agents, shall be authorized and empowered to enforce the regulations enumerated in this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-1), 2010) 
6.05.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. All words and phrases defined in this section shall also include their usual and natural meanings, as well as those herein specifically given. 
    "Animal" means any animal of any species that is susceptible to rabies, except human beings. 
    "At large" means any animal not confined within a building, shelter, walled or fenced area or under the control of a person, either by leash, cord, chain or other physical restraint, whether on or off the premises of the owner or person acting for the owner; in a manner such as to keep the dog exclusively on the premises where secured. 
    "Attack" means a violent or aggressive physical contact or violent or aggressive behavior that confines the movement of a person or domestic animal. An attack by an animal may include biting or an attempt to bite. 
    "Collar" means a band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the neck of a dog to which a license may be affixed. 
    "Department" means the Arizona Department of Health Services. 
    "Dog" means a member of the Canis familaris family. 
    "Enforcement agent" means that person or persons designated by the city that is/are responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and any regulations promulgated hereunder. 
    "Impound" means the act of taking or receiving into custody, by the enforcement agent, any dog or animal for the purpose of confinement in an authorized pound in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Kennel" means an enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals, in which a person keeps, harbors, or maintains from five to a maximum of ten dogs over the age of three months under controlled conditions. 
    "License" means a tag to be attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by a dog over the age of three months at all times. 
    "Livestock" means neat animals, horses, sheep, goats, swine, mules, and donkeys. 
    "Neat" means any domesticated livestock of the "Bovine Genus" family. 
    "Owner" means any person or legal entity having a possessory property right in an animal or who harbors, cares for, exercises control over, or knowingly permits any animal to remain on premises occupied by said person or legal entity. 
    "Pound" means any establishment authorized for the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping, and control of dogs and other animals that come into custody of the enforcement agent in the performance of official duties. 
    "Rabies quarantine area" means any area in which a state of emergency has been declared to exist due to the occurrence of rabies in animals in or adjacent to this area. 
    "Rabies vaccination certificate" means a method of recording and duplicating rabies information that is in compliance with the city enforcement agent's licensing system and/or city enforcement agent's prescribed forms. 
    "Stray dog" means any dog three months of age or older running at large that is not wearing a valid license tag. 
    "Vaccination" means the administration of an anti-rabies vaccine to animals by a veterinarian or in authorized pounds by employees properly trained by a veterinarian. 
    "Veterinarian", unless otherwise indicated, means any veterinarian licensed to practice in this state or any veterinarian employed in this state by a governmental agency. 
    "Veterinary hospital" means any establishment operated by a veterinarian licensed to practice in this state that provides clinical facilities and houses animals or birds for dental, medical, or surgical treatment. A "veterinary hospital" may have adjacent to it or in conjunction with it or as an integral part of it pens, stalls, cages, or kennels for quarantine, observation, or boarding. 
    "Vicious animal" any animal of the order carnivora, that has a propensity to attack, to cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings without provocation, or that has been so declared after a hearing before a justice of the peace/city magistrate. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-2), 2010) 
State Law reference- Definitions, A.R.S. 11-1001; dogs; liability, A.R.S. 11-1020. 
6.05.030 - Enforcement agent. 
A.	Powers and Duties. The director of public safety or his designated enforcement agent(s) shall: 
1.	Enforce the provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder. 
2.	Be responsible for declaring a rabies quarantine area within an area of jurisdiction. When a quarantine area has been declared, the enforcement agent shall meet with the state veterinarian and representative from the department of health services and the game and fish department to implement an emergency program for the control of rabies within an area. Any regulations restricting or involving movements of livestock within an area shall be subject to approval by the state veterinarian. 
B.	Interference with Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement agent in the performance of his/her duties. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-3), 2010) 
6.05.040 - Dog licensing and vaccination. 
A.	Anti-rabies Vaccination Required. 
1.	Before a license is issued for any dog, the owner or a veterinarian must present a paper or electronic copy or facsimile of the vaccination certificate signed by a veterinarian stating the owner's name and address and giving the dog's description, date of vaccination, manufacturer and serial number of the vaccine used and date revaccination is due. A duplicate of each rabies vaccination certificate issued shall be transmitted to the enforcement agent within two weeks of the date the dog was vaccinated. No dog shall be licensed unless it is vaccinated in accordance with A.R.S. Title 11, the provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder. 
2.	A dog vaccinated in any other state prior to entry into Arizona may be licensed in Arizona provided that, at the time of licensing, the owner of such dog presents a vaccination certificate, signed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in that state or a veterinarian employed by the governmental agency in that state, stating the owner's name and address and giving the dog's description, date of vaccination and type, manufacturer and the serial number of the vaccine used. The vaccination must be in conformity with the provisions of A.R.S. Title 11, this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder. 
3.	The enforcement agent shall make provisions for vaccination clinics as deemed necessary. The vaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian. 
B.	License Required; Fees. 
1.	A license fee shall be paid for each dog three months of age or over that is kept, harbored, or maintained within the boundaries of the city for at least 30 consecutive days of the calendar year. The license fee for dogs shall be set by city council resolution. 
2.	An applicant for a license for a dog claimed to be incapable of procreation shall furnish a proof of surgical sterilization certificate, signed by a licensed veterinarian, as proof that the dog has been surgically altered to be permanently incapable of procreation. License fees shall be paid within 30 days of obtaining and maintaining a dog within the boundaries of the city. 
3.	A penalty shall be added to the license fee in the event that application is made subsequent to the date on which the dog is required to be licensed under the provisions of this chapter. This penalty shall not be assessed against applicants who furnish adequate proof that the dog to be licensed has been in their possession less than 30 consecutive days. 
C.	Tags. Each dog licensed under the terms of this chapter shall receive at the time of the licensing such a tag on which shall be inscribed the name of the city and the number of the license and the year in which it expires. The tag shall be attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog at all times, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Whenever a dog tag is lost, a duplicate tag shall be issued upon application by the owner. The fee of the duplicate tag shall be established by resolution. 
D.	Violations. The following are violations of this chapter. Violators will be guilty of a petty offense or class 2 misdemeanor as provided herein or by statute. 
1.	Any person who fails, within 15 days after written notification from the enforcement agent, to obtain a license for a dog required to be licensed. 
2.	Any person who counterfeits or attempts to counterfeit an official dog tag. 
3.	Any person who removes a dog tag from any dog for the purpose of willful and malicious mischief. 
4.	Any person who places a dog tag upon a dog, unless the tag was issued for that particular dog. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-4), 2010) 
State Law reference- Violation; classification, A.R.S. 11-1019; anti-rabies vaccination, A.R.S. 11-1010. 
6.05.050 - Kennels. 
A.	Permit and Proper Zoning Required. A person operating a kennel within the city limits shall obtain a permit issued by the city except if each individual dog is licensed. The kennel must be located at a properly zoned location. 
B.	Permit Fee. An annual fee for the kennel permit shall be set by council resolution. 
C.	Licensing Requirements. A dog remaining within the kennel is not required to be licensed individually. A dog leaving the controlled kennel conditions shall be licensed, except if the dog is only being transported to another kennel which has a permit issued under this section. 
D.	Denial. The city shall deny a kennel permit to any person who has been convicted of a violation of A.R.S. 13-2910 or 13-2910.01 or any other state, county or municipal animal welfare law, except violations of license and leash laws. 
E.	Violations: 
1.	A person who fails to obtain a kennel permit under this section is subject to a penalty of $25.00 or as set forth by council resolution, in addition to the annual fee. 
2.	A person who knowingly fails, within 30 days after written notification from the enforcement agent, to obtain a kennel permit is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-5), 2010) 
State Law reference- Kennel; denial; violation; classification, A.R.S. 11-1009. 
6.05.060 - At large animals. 
A.	Dogs. 
1.	No dog shall be permitted at large. Each dog shall be confined within an enclosure on the owner's property or secured so that the dog is confined entirely to the owner's property or on a leash not to exceed six feet in length and directly under the owner's control when not on the owner's property. 
2.	Any dog over the age of three months running at large shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a valid license tag. Dogs that are used for the control of livestock, being used or trained for hunting, being exhibited or trained at kennel club events, or engaged in races approved by the Arizona racing commission, and such dogs while being transported to and from such events, need not wear a collar or harness with a valid license attached; provided, that they are properly vaccinated, licensed, and controlled. 
B.	Violations by Owner or Custodian. When any dog or animal is at large on the public streets, public parks, or public property, then said dog's owner or custodian or animal's owner or custodian is in violation of this chapter. License fees shall be paid within 30 days of obtaining and maintaining a dog within the boundaries of the city and shall be renewed every January. 
C.	Animals Deemed Not at Large. A dog or animal is not at large: 
1.	If said dog or animal is restrained by a leash, chain, rope, or cord of not more than six feet in length of sufficient strength to control the actions of said dog or animal or is confined entirely to the owner's property by adequate fence or other method. 
2.	If said dog is used to control livestock, being used or trained for hunting, or being exhibited or trained at a kennel club event, or engaged in races approved by the Arizona racing commission. 
3.	If said dog is actively engaged in dog obedience training, accompanied by and under the control of his owner or trainer; provided, that the person training said dog has in his possession a dog leash of not more than six feet in length and of sufficient strength to control said dog; and further, that said dog is actually enrolled in or has graduated from dog obedience training school. 
4.	If said dog is used as a police working dog during training or actively engaged in official police work. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-6), 2010) 
State Law reference- Dogs at large; licenses, A.R.S. 11-1012. 
6.05.070 - Impoundment, redemption and disposal of animals. 
A.	Impoundment Official. 
1.	Any dog(s) or animal(s) at large may be apprehended and impounded by an enforcement agent. 
2.	Said agent shall have the right to enter upon private property when it becomes necessary to do so in order to apprehend any dog or animal that has been running at large. Such entrance upon private property shall be in reasonable pursuit of such dog(s) or animal(s) and not include entry into a domicile or enclosure which confines a dog unless it is at the invitation of the occupant. 
3.	If, in the judgment of the enforcement agent, a dog at large or an animal at large is dangerous and furious, an immediate threat to human safety and cannot be safely impounded, the dog or animal may be destroyed by the enforcement agent for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory. 
B.	Impoundment of Animals. All stray animals may be impounded. 
C.	Report Required. The enforcement agent shall, within 24 hours of impounding an animal, make a written report stating the kind of animal, describing it by species, breed, color, and brand and the time it was impounded. 
D.	Notice to Owner. If the identity and address of the owner of an impounded animal is known to the department of public safety, the enforcement agent shall notify the owner of such animal personally or by letter within 24 hours after such animal has been impounded. The notice shall contain a description of the animal and shall state that unless reclaimed, such animal shall be eligible for adoption or destruction. 
E.	Period of Impoundment; Reclamation, Adoption or Disposal. 
1.	Each stray animal impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound for a minimum of 72 hours unless claimed by the owner in accordance with subsection (E)(2) of this section. Any person may adopt such animal upon expiration of the impoundment period, provided the person pays all pound fees which include spaying and neutering fees, rabies vaccination and city licensing as provided by this chapter. If the animal is not claimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent may place the animal for adoption or may dispose of the animal in a humane manner in accordance with subsection (E)(3) of this section. The enforcement agent may destroy impounded sick or injured animals whenever such destruction is necessary to prevent such animal from suffering or to prevent the spread of disease. 
2.	Any impounded licensed animal may be reclaimed by its owner or such owner's agent; provided, that the person claiming the animal furnishes proof of right to do so and pays all pound fees. If the animal is not reclaimed within the impoundment period, the enforcement agent may place the animal for adoption or dispose of the animal in a humane manner. 
3.	A dog or animal destroyed while impounded shall be destroyed by the use of one of the following: 
a.	Sodium pentobarbital or a derivative of sodium pentobarbital. 
b.	Nitrogen gas. 
c.	T-61 euthanasia solution or its generic equivalent. 
4.	If an animal is destroyed by means specified in subsection (E)(3)a. or (E)(3)c. of this section, it shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or in accordance with procedures established by the state veterinarian pursuant to A.R.S. 3-1213. 
F.	Care of Animals. All animals impounded shall be given proper care and maintenance in a safe, convenient and comfortable place within or conveniently near the city limits, and such animals shall be fed at least once every 24 hours and treated in a humane manner during the time they are impounded. 
G.	Removing Impounded Animals Prohibited. No person may remove or attempt to remove an animal which has been impounded or which is in the possession of the enforcement agent except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-7), 2010) 
State Law reference- Impoundment; reclaiming, A.R.S. 11-1013. 
6.05.080 - Rabies control; destruction of animals. 
A.	Bites From Animals. 
1.	Dogs. 
a.	An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital, for a period of not less than 14 days. 
b.	A dog properly licensed and vaccinated pursuant to this chapter that bites any person may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and maintained with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent. 
c.	Any dog subject to licensing under this chapter found without a tag shall be deemed un-owned. 
2.	Animals Other Than Dogs. An animal, other than a dog, that bites a person shall be confined and quarantined in an authorized pound or, upon the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital, for a period of not less than 14 days; provided, that livestock shall be confined and quarantined for the 14-day period in a manner regulated by the Arizona Department of Agriculture. If the animal is a caged rodent, it may be confined and quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or maintained for the required period of time with the consent of and in a manner prescribed by the enforcement agent. 
3.	Wild Animals. With the exception of a wild rodent or rabbit, any wild animal that bites any person or directly exposes any person to its saliva may be killed and submitted to the county/city enforcement agent for transmission to an appropriate diagnostic laboratory. A wild rodent or rabbit may be submitted for laboratory testing if the animal has bitten a person and either the animal's health or behavior indicates that the animal may have rabies or the bite occurred in an area that contains a rabies epizootic, as determine by the department of health services. 
B.	Report Required. When an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to the enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge. A person who knowingly fails to report the incident is guilty of a petty offense. 
C.	Destruction of Animals. 
1.	The enforcement agent may destroy any animal confined and quarantined pursuant to this chapter prior to the termination of the minimum confinement period for laboratory examination for rabies if: 
a.	The animal shows clear clinical signs of rabies. 
b.	The owner of such animal consents to its destruction. 
2.	The enforcement agent shall destroy a vicious animal, except a dog found to be vicious under section 6.05.100.A of this chapter, upon an order of the justice of the peace/city magistrate. The justice of the peace/city magistrate may issue such an order after notice to the owner, if any, and the person who was bitten, and a hearing. The justice of the peace/magistrate may impose additional procedures to protect all parties in the interest of justice, and any decision by the justice of the peace/magistrate may be appealed to the superior court. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-8), 2010) 
State Law reference- Handling; destruction, A.R.S. 11-1014; handling; classification, A.R.S. 1-1014(G). 
6.05.090 - Unlawful keeping of dogs. 
    It is unlawful for a person to keep, harbor, or maintain more than four dogs within the city except as provided by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-9), 2010) 
State Law reference- Violation; classification, A.R.S. 11-1017. 
6.05.100 - Vicious dogs. 
A.	Determination of Vicious Dog. 
1.	In the event that the enforcement agent or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that a dog is vicious and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the enforcement agent or law enforcement officer may require the seizing and impoundment of the dog pending a hearing. The hearing will be presided over by a city magistrate. Dog owners are guaranteed due process hearings in the initial determination and in the completion of any appeal process with regard to said determination that their animal is a "vicious dog" as defined by this chapter. 
2.	Written notice, in the form of a citation, informing the owner of the charged viciousness and of the hearing shall be served by the director of public safety or his designee pursuant to the rules of civil procedure. A hearing date shall be held not later than ten calendar days from the date notice was served to the owner. 
3.	The due process hearing will be conducted by a city magistrate. The city magistrate will make findings of fact and conclusions of law. The city magistrate shall provide the owner with a written copy of the findings. 
4.	The hearing shall be open to the public. At the hearing, both oral and documentary evidence may be taken from any interested person and considered in determining whether the dog is vicious. Any owner who fails to appear after notice is given without obtaining a continuance from the city magistrate may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce evidence or object to any order made by the city magistrate. The city magistrate's decision shall be based on the preponderance of evidence. 
5.	If the animal is deemed to be a vicious dog, the city magistrate will advise the owner of the decision at the hearing or send a registered letter advising the owner of such within ten days. 
B.	Control of Vicious Dog. Once a dog is declared vicious, the following steps will be required to continue ownership of such an animal: 
1.	Immediate Steps. Immediate steps that must be complete within one calendar day upon completion of notification of a determination of viciousness: 
a.	Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than six feet in length. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside confinement unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all vicious dogs on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent a dog from biting persons or other animals. Kennels or pens must meet the requirements of subsection (B)(3)a. of this section. 
b.	Confinement Indoors. No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on the dog's own volition. 
2.	Reporting Requirements. The following types of information must be reported by the owner of the dog to the director of public safety or his designee within ten calendar days of occurrence: 
a.	Death of Dog. A written notice from a veterinarian confirming the death of the dog must be provided to the director of public safety or his designee. 
b.	Yearly renewal of liability insurance. 
c.	The new address of a registered vicious dog owner should the owner move within the city limits. 
d.	The new address of a registered vicious dog that has been moved permanently outside the city limits. 
3.	Time Schedule Steps. A time schedule for completion of the following steps is to be set by the city magistrate, but in no case will it be longer than ten calendar days from the date of the city magistrate's decision: 
a.	Confinement: 
(1)	All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled. Such pen, kennel, or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. 
(2)	All structures used to confine vicious dogs must be locked when animals are within the structure. The structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen, or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. 
(3)	The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area of the perimeter fence. 
(4)	All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition and any other condition that provides for humane care. 
b.	License and Registration. A declared vicious dog shall be licensed annually, as well as permanently registered as a vicious dog with the Willcox Department of Public Safety. 
c.	Signs. All owners of vicious dogs within the city shall display, in a prominent place on their premises, a sign in three-inch letters, easily readable by the public, using the words "Vicious Dog." In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of the vicious dog. 
d.	Insurance. All owners of vicious dogs must obtain public liability insurance in a single incident amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property or animals owned by any persons resulting from the vicious dog. All owners must provide proof of insurance and effective dates to the director or his designee. Cancellation of liability insurance by the dog's owner is allowed only in the event that the dog dies. The owner of a dog must notify the director or his designee within ten days if insurance coverage is cancelled by the insurance carrier and provide proof that substitute insurance coverage has been obtained. 
e.	Failure to Comply. The purpose of complying with these guidelines for a dog declared vicious is to prevent attacks, injuries, or deaths by mandating the use of control methods. Owners have the opportunity to keep their dogs if this section is complied with. 
C.	Responsibility of Owner; Violations. 
1.	An owner whose dog fits the definition of a vicious dog in subsection (A) of this section must comply with this section, register the dog with the director of public safety or his designee, confine and control the dog in accordance with subsection (B) of this section, and post warning signs. 
2.	It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vicious dog registered in the city to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any dog determined to be a vicious dog pursuant to subsection (A) of this section that is found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment and may be destroyed upon order of a city magistrate. 
D.	Destruction of Vicious Dog. Any dog that has been determined to be a vicious dog pursuant to subsection (A) of this section that injures or kills a human being or a domestic animal and is in violation of this section shall be destroyed. 
E.	Penalties. 
1.	Any owner of a dog that has been declared vicious pursuant to subsection A of this section who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in the city court, be fined as set by council resolution. Said owner may also be charged according to state statutes governing vicious dogs. 
2.	The court may order the vicious dog impounded and destroyed. 
3.	The court may order any person who violates this section to pay all expenses related to the impounding of the vicious dog, including shelter, food, handling, and veterinary care, to the city. 
4.	The court may order any person who violates this section to pay restitution to a victim or victims whose person, animal or property was injured, killed or damaged. 
5.	In the event that the owner of the vicious dog is a minor, the parent or guardian in physical control of such minor at the time of the acts giving rise to the determination of viciousness shall be liable: a) for all injuries and property damage sustained by a person or domestic animal caused by an unprovoked attack by said vicious dog; and b) all violations of this section. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-10), 2010) 
6.05.110 - Noisy animals. 
    It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animals which disturb the peace by loud noises at any time of the day or night. Owners of said animals in violation of this section shall be issued a citation. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-11), 2010) 
6.05.120 - Excrement disposal. 
    Any person owning, possessing harboring, or having the care, charge, control, or custody of any dog or other animal shall immediately remove and thereafter dispose of any fecal matter deposited by the dog or other animal on public or private property unless the property owner has given prior approval to use said property for this purpose. Owners of animals in violation of this section shall be issued a citation. This section shall not apply to disabled individuals who, due to their disability, are unable to comply. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-12), 2010) 
6.05.130 - Diseased animals. 
    No person shall keep or retain, or allow or cause to be kept or retained, at any place within the city, any animal having any of the diseases known as glanders, farcy, tuberculosis or any other contagious disease, but shall forthwith report the fact to the enforcement agent, and under the direction of the enforcement agent, shall destroy or cause to be destroyed and removed, or cause to be removed, such animal or animals in a manner designated by the enforcement agent. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-13), 2010) 
6.05.140 - Swine. 
A.	Swine Prohibited; Exceptions. No swine shall be kept within the city limits, except registered miniature Vietnamese purebred potbelly pigs and other similar registered purebred miniature pigs. 
B.	Size and Number Restricted. Miniature pigs shall not exceed 100 pounds. No more than two miniature pigs shall be allowed per household. 
C.	Fees and Fines. Licensing fees and running at large fines will be assessed per ordinances and resolutions utilized at the time by the Willcox Department of Public Safety, Humane Division. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-14), 2010) 
6.05.150 - Keeping bees prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to keep or care for bees or maintain any stands or hives of bees within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-15), 2010) 
6.05.160 - Liability for damages. 
    Injury to any person or damage to any property by an animal shall be the responsibility of the animal's owner or person or persons responsible for the animal when such damage was inflicted. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-16), 2010) 
6.05.170 - Penalties; violation; classification. 
    Any person, who fails to comply with the requirements of [A.R.S.] Title 11, Article 6 [Animal Control] or violates any of its provisions or this chapter, is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor unless another classification is specifically prescribed in this article or in this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-5-17), 2010) 
State Law reference- Violation; classification, A.R.S. 11-1019. 
Chapter 6.06 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
Sections: 

6.06.010 - Dangerous construction. 
    It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any signs, billboards, awnings and other similar structures over or near streets, sidewalks, public grounds or places frequented by the public, so situated or constructed as to endanger the public safety. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-1), 2010) 
6.06.020 - Damage to property. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to damage in any manner or attempt to damage or tamper with any pipelines, water hydrants, street lamps or lights, or the fixtures and appliances belonging upon any of the poles or other objects for use in connection with the lighting of the streets of the city or any water pipes, hydrants or any other appliances pertaining to the water or sewer works, or any other property of any and every character belonging to the city. 
B.	It is unlawful for any person to deface, walk, ride or drive upon or over any sidewalk or street crossing composed of/or containing cement during the construction thereof, or before the same is opened to public use. 
C.	It is unlawful for any person to damage in any manner any road, street or bridge in the city limits by using the same, by heavy vehicles, malicious destruction or by any act that will result in damage to any such road, street or bridge. 
D.	It is unlawful to break or destroy any window, door, or part of any dwelling owned or occupied by another or to break or sever from any premises owned or occupied by another any gate, fence, railing, tree, brush or vine or any property whatsoever, or to deface, mutilate or injure the same. 
E.	It is unlawful for any person within the city to throw stones or other missiles at railroad trains; or for any unauthorized person to release the brakes of railroad cars standing on sidetracks or tamper with the couplings of railroad cars; or for unauthorized persons to uncouple cars standing on railroad tracks; or for unauthorized persons to uncouple the air hose of the air brake system in railroad cars; or for unauthorized persons to remove, tamper with or break switch lamps or other signals set to control the movement of trains; or for unauthorized persons to jump on or off moving trains; or to throw refuse upon or in any way litter the depot or station or grounds of any railroad. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-2), 2010) 
6.06.030 - False police reports. 
    It is unlawful for any person willfully to make any false, fraudulent, misleading, or unfounded report or statement to the police department of the city, or to willfully misrepresent any fact. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-3), 2010) 
6.06.040 - Obstruction of streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street, alley, sidewalk or park or other public grounds within the city by committing an act of, or doing anything which is injurious to the health or to commit in or upon any such streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other public grounds, any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone, in or upon, or defacing or fronting on such enumerated grounds in the city. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-4), 2010) 
6.06.050 - Obstruction of view. 
    It is unlawful for any person to maintain or allow any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstructions which prevent persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys, or highways from obtaining a clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-5), 2010) 
6.06.060 - Unauthorized signs and banners. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place any banner or sign upon a streetlight pole or traffic signal pole within the city without first obtaining authorization from the council. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-6), 2010) 
6.06.070 - Water-flow upon streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding, or to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to same or to cause damage to public or private property within the city. Said condition will be also deemed a violation of section 6.06.040 (Obstruction of streets). 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-7), 2010) 
6.06.080 - Throwing, shooting objects. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or shoot any object, arrow, stone, snowball or other missile or projectile, by hand or by any other means, in such a manner as to constitute a danger to life, limb or property. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-8), 2010) 
6.06.090 - Abandoned containers. 
    A person who abandons, discards, stores or keeps in any place accessible to children, or who, as the owner, lessee or manager, permits to remain on premises under his/her control, in any place accessible to children, a refrigerator, icebox, freezer cabinet or similar container, of a capacity of not less than one and one-half cubic feet, which is no longer used for refrigeration purposes, without the attached doors, hinges, lids or latches being removed, is guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-9), 2010) 
State Law reference- Abandoned refrigerators; classification, A.R.S. 36-1651. 
6.06.100 - Glass containers prohibited. 
A.	Definitions. Glass beverage container means any glass bottle, glass tumbler, jug, mug or other vessel or container made of glass, and designed or used to contain or hold beverages for drinking purposes. 
B.	Glass Prohibited. No person, while in any municipal park, or the community center, or the municipal swimming pool shall have a glass beverage container in his or her possession. Subsection (B) shall not apply to the possession by those persons or groups who have first obtained a permit from the city authorizing them to consume or possess such beverages. 
C.	Throwing or Breaking Glass. No person, while in any municipal park, or the community center, or the municipal swimming pool shall break, throw, toss, or otherwise propel, either intentionally, knowingly or recklessly any glass beverage container or object. 
D.	Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a petty offense and sanctioned upon conviction in accordance with section 6.06.180 of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-10), 2010) 
6.06.110 - Consumption of malt beverages in public parks. 
A.	It is unlawful for any person to consume or have in his/her possession any malt beverages in a public park. 
B.	Subsection (A) shall not apply to the consumption or possession by those persons or groups who have first obtained a permit from the city authorizing them to consume or possess such beverages. 
C.	Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, it is unlawful for any person to consume or have an open container of any malt beverage within the parking lots or vehicles within a city park. 
D.	Malt beverage includes any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume obtained by the fermentation, infusion or decoration of barley malt or hops, including but not limited to, beer, ale and malt liquor. 
E.	The following locations are exempt from this section: 
1.	Keiller Park; 
2.	Quail Drive Sports Park. 
F.	The public services and works director is empowered to issue permits authorizing the consumption and possession of malt beverages in public parks and to adopt rules and procedures for the issuance of such permits. 
E.	Violation; Penalties and Enforcement. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a petty offense and sanctioned upon conviction in accordance with section 6.06.180 of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-11), 2010) 
6.06.120 - Unlawful assemblies. 
    It is unlawful for two or more persons to assemble together for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing an unlawful act, and it shall be unlawful for any person so assembled to not immediately disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, and it shall be unlawful for any person, except public officers and persons assisting in preserving the peace, to remain present at the place of such riot or unlawful assembly. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-12), 2010) 
6.06.130 - Pawnbroker regulations. 
A.	Every pawnbroker in the city shall comply with A.R.S. Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 3, and the provisions contained therein. A pawnbroker in the city shall not enter into a pawn transaction or good faith outright purchase of tangible personal property with a person who is less than 18 years of age pursuant to A.R.S. 44-1624(B). 
B.	Every pawnbroker in the city shall maintain at the pawnbroker's place of business records of all reportable transactions and pawn tickets and shall retain the records for at least two years after the date when the transaction occurred. The pawnbroker shall ensure that the records include accurate copies of all transaction receipts or pawn tickets. On request by the WDPS police chief or any police officer designated by the chief and in the course of his/her duties, the pawnbroker shall allow the inspecting official to inspect the pawnbroker's receipts, pawn tickets or required alcohol, tobacco and firearms logs or to review any article received by the pawnbroker by pledge, purchase, or trade pursuant to A.R.S. 44-1624(G). 
C.	A pawnbroker shall produce the pawnbroker's register, shall exhibit all articles received by the pawnbroker in pledge or purchase or shall produce the pawnbroker's account of sales to the WDPS law enforcement agency on the agency's request to inspect the register, articles or accounts of sales of the pawnbroker or in the service of a search warrant or order issued by a judge or magistrate pursuant to A.R.S. 44-1624 (H). 
D.	A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-13), 2010) 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 3, A.R.S. 44-1621-44-1632. 
6.06.140 - Permitting or encouraging underage drinking. 
A.	No person of 18 years of age in Arizona may knowingly permit or fail to take reasonable action to prevent the unlawful consumption of alcoholic beverages by an underage person on premises owned by the person or under the person's control. This subsection does not apply to spirituous liquor used exclusively as part of a religious service. 
B.	A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-14), 2010) 
6.06.150 - Restricted smoking materials. 
A.	Definitions. 
1.	"Restricted Smoking Material" shall mean any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices, or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a comparable chemical: 
a.	Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A: all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether grown or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
b.	2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
c.	(6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2yl)-6a, 
7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
d.	l-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); 
e.	1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073); or 
f.	1-pentyl-3-(4-methxynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081); 
    Products containing some of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial names in lower or upper case (or combination thereof) lettering and new products may be marketed under different names and all shall be subject to this definition if they contain any of the chemical components set forth above: 
"BUZZ", "DASCENTS", "DaSCENTS", "DEMON", "DIAMOND SPICE", "EARTHQUAKE", "FAKE WEED", "FIRE N' ICE", "GENIE", "HUSH"," K2", "K-2", "K2 HERB", "K2 INCENSE", "K-2 SEX", "K-2 SUMMET", "K-2 SUMMIT", "K3", "KO KNOCK-OUT 2", "L.A. SPICE", "MISTER SMILEY", "MR. DUTCHY", "MR. SMILEY", "MYSTERY", "OCEAN BLUE", "PEP SPICE", "POT-POURRI", "PULSE", "SAGE", "SALVIA DIVINORUM", "SALVINORIN A", "SENCE", "SERENITY", "SILVER SPICE", "SKUNK", "SMOKE", "SOLAR FLARE", "SPACE TRUCKIN", "SPICE", "SPICE DIAMOND", "SPICE GOLD", "STINGER", "SYNTHETIC CANNABINOIDS", "SYNTHETIC CANANBIS", "ZOHAI". 
1.	"Restricted Smoking Material Paraphernalia" shall mean any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in ingesting or inhaling restricted smoking materials and may include: 
a.	A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
b.	A water pipe; 
c.	A carburetion tube or device; 
d.	A smoking or carburetion mask; 
e.	A chamber pipe; 
f.	A carburetor pipe; 
g.	An electric pipe; 
h.	An air-driven pipe; 
i.	A chillum; 
j.	A bong; or 
k.	An ice pipe or chiller. 
B.	Restricted Smoking Material Regulations. 
1.	Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to prohibit the sale, delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined in subsection (A) above to any individual below 21 years of age within the city limits of the City of Willcox and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials by any individual below 21 years of age within the city limits of the City of Willcox. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this section. 
2.	Sale, Delivery, Offer, or Gift. It shall be unlawful to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to anyone below 21 years of age. 
3.	Use or Possession of Restricted Smoking Material. It shall be unlawful for any person below 21 years of age to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the corporate limits of the City of Willcox. 
4.	Use or Possession of Restricted Smoking Paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to ingest, inhale, or otherwise consume restricted smoking material if they are below 21 years of age. If an individual under 21 years of age is found in possession of this type of paraphernalia it will be a violation of this section if appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia and traces of restricted smoking material are present on the device. 
5.	Location of Sale of Restricted Smoking Material and Paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to sell, offer to sell, deliver or to give any restricted smoking material or restricted smoking paraphernalia to any person other than otherwise allowed by the City of Willcox Zoning Code. 
6.	Defenses to Prosecution. It shall be a defense to a violation of this subsection that any act described herein is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. 
7.	Penalty. A person who violates this section is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-15), 2010) 
6.06.160 - Fireworks rules and regulations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in A.R.S. 36-1602, it is unlawful to sell, offer or expose for sale, use, explode or possess any fireworks. This statute shall not be construed to prohibit or restrict the manufacture or possession of any fireworks. These provisions are adopted for the purpose of regulating the use of fireworks as allowed under the provisions of the law. 
    Pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1602, each governing body may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for granting permits for supervised public displays of fireworks within its jurisdiction, by municipalities, fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations and groups. 
    Pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1605, Article 1 shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or use of fireworks for permitted uses enumerated therein or as may be regulated by this section. 
    Pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1606, the sale and use of permissible consumer fireworks are of statewide concern. The regulation of permissible consumer fireworks pursuant to Article 1 and their use is not subject to further regulation by a governing body, except that an incorporated city may regulate the use of permissible consumer fireworks within its corporate limits during times when there is reasonable risk of wildfires in the immediate county. Article 1 does not prohibit the imposition by ordinance of further regulations and prohibitions upon the sale, use and possession of fireworks other than permissible consumer fireworks by a governing body. A governing body shall not permit or authorize the sale, use or possession of any fireworks in violation of Article 1. 
A.	Definitions. Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this provision, have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
1.	Consumer firework means those fireworks defined by A.R.S. 36-1601. 
2.	Display firework means those fireworks defined by A.R.S. 36-1601. 
3.	Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, substance or combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible consumer firework as defined by A.R.S. 36-1601. 
4.	Novelty items means federally deregulated novelty items that are known as snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. 36-1601. 
5.	Permissible consumer fireworks means those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. 36-1601 that may be sold within the City of Willcox even where the use of those items has been prohibited. 
6.	Supervised public display means a monitored performance of display fireworks open to the public and authorized by permit by the director of public safety or his designee. 
B.	Fireworks Rules/Regulations; Exceptions. 
1.	The use, discharge or ignition of permissible consumer fireworks within the City of Willcox is permitted. The use, discharge or ignition of all other types of fireworks is prohibited except as may provided in this subsection. 
2.	Nothing in this section or Code provision shall be construed to prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of novelty items or to prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of permissible consumer fireworks or the occurrence of a supervised public display of fireworks except as provided in [subsection] (1) above. 
3.	Permits may be granted by the director of public safety, or designee for conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every such public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired, only after proper inspection and in a manner that does not endanger persons, animals, or property. A permit shall not be issued, and may be revoked, during time periods of high fire danger warnings as posted on the city website. The director of public safety or designee has authority to impose conditions on any permits granted. 
4.	Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the director of public safety is a petty offense punishable by minimum fine of $100.00 and a maximum fine of $300.00 for each violation. 
C.	Sale of Fireworks. 
1.	No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of permissible consumer fireworks to a person who is under 16 years of age. 
2.	The sale of permissible consumer fireworks by retail establishment is permitted if the retail establishment complies with the rules adopted pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1609. 
D.	Sale of Fireworks Regulations; Posting of Signs; Penalty. 
1.	The state fire marshall shall adopt rules pursuant to Title 41, chapter to carry out this article, including a rule that adopts the National Fire Protection Association Code for the manufacture, transportation, storage and retail sales of fireworks and pyrotechnic articles, 2006 edition pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1609(A). 
2.	A person who sells permissible consumer fireworks to the public shall comply with those rules relating to the storage of consumer fireworks and relating to the retail sale of consumer fireworks before selling permissible consumer fireworks to the public pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1609(A). 
3.	Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs indicating the following: 
a.	The use of fireworks, except as provided in this chapter City Code provision, is permitted. 
b.	Permissible consumer fireworks authorized for sale under state law may not be sold to persons under the age of 16 pursuant to A.R.S. 36-1609(B). 
4.	Signs required under this Code or the state fire marshall adopted rules shall be placed at each cash register and in each area where fireworks are displayed for sale. 
5.	The state fire marshall and/or the director of public safety or designee shall develop regulations concerning the size and color of the required signs and shall develop a model sign. The required sign regulations and model sign shall be posted on the city's website and filed in the city clerk's office. 
6.	Failure to comply with subparts a. and b. above is a civil offense punishable by a civil fine of $100.00 or as may be provided by the state fire marshall adopted rules. 
E.	Enforcement Authority; Means of Enforcement. 
1.	The director of public safety or designee, a City of Willcox Police Officer or the city attorney, may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this chapter designated as civil offenses. 
2.	Any person authorized pursuant to this section to issue a civil complaint may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid issuance of a civil or criminal complaint. 
3.	The director of public safety or designee, a City of Willcox Police Officer or the city attorney may issue criminal complaints to enforce violations of this chapter designated as criminal offenses. 
F.	Fireworks Liability; Emergency Responses; Definitions. 
1.	A person who uses, discharges or ignites permissible consumer fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is liable for the expenses of any emergency response that is required by such use, discharge or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found responsible for a violation(s) of this chapter is prima facie evidence of liability under this section. 
2.	The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the person liable for those expenses pursuant to subpart A of this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that incurred the expenses. The person's liability for the expense of an emergency response shall not exceed (dollar amount) for a single incident. The liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation of any other liability that may be imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
3.	For the purposes of this section: 
a.	"Expenses of an emergency response" means reasonable costs directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident. 
b.	"Reasonable costs" includes the costs of providing police, fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-16), 2010) 
State Law reference- Fireworks; A.R.S. 36-1601; 36-1602; 36-1605; 36-1606; 36-1609(B). 
6.06.170 - Public nuisance. 
A.	Anything that is injurious to public health and safety, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is restricted by state law or regulated by City Code, or obstructs the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, or contributes to the delinquency of underage persons, shall be declared to be a public nuisance. Any conduct, act, or thing that affects an entire community, neighborhood or protected age group, or any considerable number of persons, as herein described, is not less a nuisance because of the extent of the annoyance or damage or injury inflicted upon individuals is unequal. 
B.	A declared nuisance shall be deemed a class 1 misdemeanor. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-17), 2010) 
6.06.180 - Penalties; violation; classification. 
    Any person, who fails to comply with the rules, regulations, provisions of this chapter and/or the provisions of Title 36, Chapter 13, Article 1 [Fireworks] or violates any of the provisions of this chapter or Article 1, is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor unless another classification is specifically prescribed in this chapter or in Article 1. Penalty fines and fees shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. NS301, § 2(6-6-18), 2010) 
State Law reference- Fireworks; A.R.S. 36-1601; 36-1602; 36-1605; and 36-1606; violation; classification, A.R.S. 36-1608; pawnbrokers, Title 44, Chapter 11, Article 3, A.R.S. 44-1621-44-1632; abandoned refrigerators; classification, A.R.S. 36-1651. 
6.06.190 - Juvenile curfew. 
A.	Curfew. It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to be or remain in, about or upon any place within the incorporated area of the City of Willcox other than his or her residence or usual place of abode, during the following hours: 
Week nights (Monday through Thursday) from 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. 
Weekend nights (Friday through Sunday) from midnight to 5:00 a.m. 
B.	Parental Responsibility. It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or any adult having supervisorial custody of a minor: 
1.	Knowingly or by the exercise of negligent oversight, to allow the minor to violate this section. 
2.	To fail or refuse to take custody of the minor upon a demand by a law enforcement officer. 
C.	Exceptions. It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (A) and (B) that: 
1.	The minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or an adult having supervisorial custody of that minor. 
2.	The minor is on an emergency errand. 
3.	The minor has been specifically directed to the location on reasonable, legitimate business or some other activity by the parent, guardian or adult having supervisorial custody. 
4.	The minor is engaged in a lawful occupation or is in the process of traveling directly to or from the site of such occupation. 
5.	The minor, with the prior permission of the parent, guardian or adult having supervisorial authority over the minor is engaged in reasonable, legitimate and specific business and/or activity, including a function sponsored by a school, governmental entity, religious organization, recreational or athletic association or civil or political organization, or in traveling directly to or from any such function. 
6.	The minor is legally emancipated by marriage. 
7.	The minor, with the consent of the parent, guardian or adult having supervisorial authority over the minor, is in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
8.	The minor is on the sidewalk abutting the property where the minor resides or on either side of or across the street from where the minor resides and the adult owner or resident of the property consents to the minor's presence. 
9.	The minor is exercising First Amendment rights, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, or other rights protected by the United States Constitution. 
D.	Penalties. 
1.	Violation of this article by a minor may be enforced by the juvenile division of the Superior Court, and is subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum permissible for a petty offense. 
2.	Violation of this section by a parent, guardian or adult having supervisorial custody of the minor is a petty offense and is subject to a fine not to exceed maximum permissible for a petty offense. 
E.	Enforcement. This section is intended to reinforce the exercise of parental responsibility, rather than to attempt to transfer such authority to either the juvenile or adult criminal justice systems. Accordingly, parental or custodial enforcement remains a preferred alternative to citation or arrest. This discretion does not limit the authority of a peace officer to issue a citation or to make an arrest. 
(Ord. NS203, §§ I-V, 1997) 
Editor's note- Sections I-V of Ord. NS203, adopted Nov. 25, 1997, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 6.06.190 was at the discretion of the editor. 
6.06.200 - Care, control and sale of products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine. 
A.	Definitions. 
1.	Products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine shall include any compound, mixture, or preparation that contains a detectable quantity of ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, phenylpropanolamine or its salts, optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers. 
2.	Product packaging that lists ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine, as an active ingredient. 
B.	Sales of Products Containing Ephedrine, Pseudo-ephedrine, Norpseudoephedrine and Phenylpropanolamine. 
1.	Business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses and/or their designees, shall secure all products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine displayed behind the counter in an area protected and not accessible to customers without sales personnel assistance. The intent is to require controlled access to the products by potential purchases. 
2.	Business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses and/or their designees shall maintain a written record of all sales or other transfers of products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine. The written record shall contain the name, address, and type of photo identification used by the business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses and/or their designees, to confirm identification of the person purchasing or taking possession of the products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine, the date and time of sale/transfer, the type of photo identification used and the name and quantity of the product sold/transferred and the name of the sales person selling/transferring the product. The business shall maintain afore described records for one calendar year from the date of sale/transfer. 
3.	The business shall transfer/send, by paper or electronically, a copy afore described records to the Willcox City Chief of Police by the tenth day of each month. Additionally, the before described records shall be available for review or reproduction by law enforcement at any time during the aforementioned year. 
C.	A person who purchases or otherwise obtains products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and/or phenylpropanolamine shall be required to provide the sales person selling/transferring the products a current government issued photo identification, containing the person's name and address. Acceptable photo identification shall be one of the following: 
1.	Current driver's license or picture identification card issued by Arizona or any other state government; 
2.	Current passport; 
3.	Current tribal identification card; 
4.	Current military identification card. 
D.	Business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses and/or their designees shall not sell/transfer to any one person more than three packages, and/or any other quantity of product containing more than nine grams of ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and/or phenylpropanolamine without a valid prescription during any calendar day. 
E.	Violations of this section shall be classified as a violation of a class 1 misdemeanor in accordance with A.R.S. 13-601, 13-602; 13-707; 13-802, 13-803; 13-902. 
1.	A law enforcement agency may seize any products containing ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and/or phenylpropanolamine that are in possession of a person or entity that is in violation of this section. 
a.	Business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses and/or their designees shall be given an opportunity to correct a first offense violation of subsection (B)(1) of this section prior to seizure of the products. In the event of subsequent violations the products shall be seized. 
b.	At the time of the seizure the law enforcement agency shall serve the business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses notice of intention to forfeit the seized products. The notice shall include the procedure for filing an objection with the court and the time limits applicable in the matter. 
c.	The business owners/operators of retail commercial businesses may file an objection to the seizure of the products to the city magistrate court within 15 days from the date of the seizure. 
d.	The court shall set a hearing time within 48 hours of receipt of the objection to the seizure, excluding weekends and holidays. 
e.	At the objection hearing the city will have the burden of proving with the preponderance of evidence that the product was subject to seizure and forfeiture. 
f.	If the objection period has been waived or the business owners/operators of retail commercial business has exhausted their remedies in the courts, within 30 days the products shall be destroyed 
2.	Any products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and/or phenylpropanolamine that are seized by a law enforcement agency are subject to forfeiture as an abatement of a public nuisance under A.R.S. [Titles] 9 and 13. 
(Ord. NS264, § 1, 2005) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. NS264, adopted Dec. 19, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as § 6.06.200 was at the discretion of the editor. 
TITLE 10 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Chapters: 10.01 Building Codes and Regulations 10.02 Property Maintenance; Slumlord Enforcement Guidelines 10.03 Light Pollution and Regulation  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS289, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2008, repealed former tit. 10, chs. 10.04-10.36, §§ 10.04.010-10.04.120, 10.08.010-10.08.030, 10.12.010, 10.12.020, 10.16.010-10.16.050, 10.20.010-10.20.040, 10.24.010-10.24.050, 10.28.010-10.28.050, 10.32.010-10.32.080, 10.36.010-10.36.040, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Former tit. 10, pertained to vehicles and traffic, and derived from prior code §§ 10.04.010-10.04.120, 10.08.010-10.08.030, 10.12.010, 10.12.020, 10.16.010-10.16.050, 10.20.010-10.20.040, 10.28.010-10.28.050; Ord. NS-46, §§ 1-7, 9, adopted in 1977; Ord. NS-60, adopted in 1979; Ord. NS108, adopted March 8, 1983; Ord. NS120, adopted June 11, 1985; and Ord. NS125, adopted Jan. 28, 1986. 

Chapter 10.01 - BUILDING CODES AND REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.01.010 - Violation of code compliance; penalty; enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, business association, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity to own, construct, renovate, or otherwise maintain, construct, renovate, or otherwise maintain under color of legal title, any building premises or other improvements upon real property located within the territorial boundaries of the city, where any such building premises or other improvements, upon real property are not in compliance with the codes adopted as the "International Codes of the City of Willcox" as set forth in title 10, chapter 10.01, sections 10.01.030; 10.01.040; 10.01.050; 10.01.060; and chapter 10.02, sections 10.02.010; 10.02.020; 10.02.030; 10.02.040; 10.02.050 and 10.02.060. 
    Violations: Any person, business association, partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity who shall: 
A.	Violate any of the provisions of the codes adopted as the "International Codes of the City of Willcox" as set forth in sections 10.01.030; 10.01.040; 10.01.050; 10.01.060; and chapter 10.02, [sections] 10.02.010; 10.02.020; 10.02.030; 10.02.040; 10.02.050 and 10.02.060 or who shall fail to comply therewith; or 
B.	Violate or fail to comply with any lawful order made by the building official or of any duly appointed deputy thereto; or 
C.	Construct, renovate or otherwise maintain under color of legal title, any building premises or other improvements upon real property not in conformance with any and all detailed statements, specifications or plans submitted and approved under this chapter or any certificate or permit issued thereto; or 
D.	Fail to comply with any other order made by the fire department acting in the capacity as building official or of any duly appointed or deputy thereof, as affirmed or modified by the mayor and city council or any court of competent jurisdiction with the time fixed, or from an order which no appeal is taken, for each and every violation or instance of non-compliance or failure to comply with any lawful order issued by the fire department acting in the capacity as building official or of any duly appointed building official or deputy thereof, shall respectively be guilty of a petty offense or a misdemeanor as prescribed in title 1, chapter 1.04, ([section] 1.04.010 and herein. 
E.	Failure to comply with code requirements included in subsection (4) above shall subject party to the penalty prescribed in title 1, chapter 1.04, ([section] 1.04.010 of this Code. 
    Penalty: Any person or any other legal entity violating any of the provisions of title 10, adopted codes, and the standard details and specifications herein adopted shall be subject to the penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 1.04, ([section] 1.04.010 of this Code: Fine not exceeding $300.00 for offenses designated as petty offenses pursuant to A.R.S. 13-601 or a fine not exceeding $2,500.00 for offenses designated as misdemeanors plus statutory surcharges as mandated by the legislature on/after November 17, 2008, or as amended; a probationary period and imprisonment/confinement up to 180 days or any combination thereof, including suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other equitable relief except as otherwise provided elsewhere in the Code. 
    The application of the penalty as set forth in title 10 shall not, in any event, preclude an enforcement order for removal or abatement of violation pursuant to any provision of the codes adopted as the "International Codes of the City of Willcox" and as set forth herein. The building official, in his/her discretion and to assure compliance with the codes, may issue a citation (complaint) to any person, business association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity in violation of, or not in complete compliance with any provision of this title. Upon issuance of any citation (complaint), the person, business association, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity so cited, shall be provided a copy of the citation (complaint) as provided by law. Said citation (complaint) shall be thereafter filed with the consolidated court by the building official or the duly appointed deputy issuing such citation (complaint). 
    Enforcement: The enforcement powers and duties of the building official and of any other administrative authority as may be referenced in any section of the City Code, for any and all matters pertaining to any abatement, administrative, building, plumbing, electrical, housing, mechanical, spa/pool, and fuel/gas code compliance, enforcement, inspections, or any and all other and additional matters related thereto, shall be vested in the office of the building official or any duly appointed deputy/official. The mayor and city council and/or the city manager may, from time to time, authorize such appointments and duties as needed to perform any and all code compliance and enforcement work and any and all related inspection work or other functions that may be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, A.R.S. 9-801; powers and abatement, A.R.S. 9-240; 9-499; 9-499.01 et seq. 
10.01.020 - Building inspector. 
A.	Office Created; Supervision: 
1.	The office of building inspector is created, and the city manager shall designate a city employee or employees to act and to be known as the building inspector. 
2.	The building inspector(s) shall be a city employee under the direction of the city manager or his designee. 
B.	Duties: 
1.	Generally: 
a.	The building inspector shall have the authority and responsibility to perform all the requirements specified in any of the technical codes adopted herein including receiving applications, issuing permits and furnishing the prescribed certificates as required by this Code, ordinances and resolutions as may be adopted by mayor and council. 
b.	Inspections: The building inspector(s) shall examine premises for which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that construction is performed safely. He/she shall enforce all provisions of the building codes adopted in this title. 
c.	Investigations: The building inspector(s) shall, when requested by proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred to in the building codes adopted in this title and render written reports on the same. 
d.	Enforcement: The building inspector shall issue such notices of determination and orders of corrective action as may be necessary to enforce compliance with state law, City Code and building codes; to remove structures and existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate egress facilities, inadequate lighting or ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building inspector deems necessary as provided in International Building Code (IBC) Section 115. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe. 
2.	Inspections: Inspections required under the provisions of the building codes adopted in this title shall be made by the building inspector or her/his duly appointed assistant(s). The building inspector may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the building codes adopted in this title shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of such service. 
3.	Records Kept: The building inspector shall keep comprehensive records of applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued, of inspections made, or reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. The building inspector shall retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to building work so long as any part of the building or structure related thereto may be in existence. All such records shall be open to public inspection as a public record at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the building inspector without his/her written consent. 
4.	Reports Required: The building inspector shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or more often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued, and orders promulgated. 
C.	Cooperation From Other Officials: The building inspector may request and shall receive necessary assistance and cooperation from other city officials in the discharge of his/her duties. 
D.	Definitions: 
1.	The term "corporation counsel," as used in the building residential code, means the attorney for the City of Willcox. 
2.	The term "municipality," as used in the building residential code, means the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.01.030 - Administrative code adopted. 
A.	The documents entitled "Uniform Administrative Code, 1997 Edition," published by the International Conference of Building Officials a copy which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit A, adopted by reference (except for those provisions of the modifications which are designated for use by the county), as the "UAC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was declared a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74, adopted 11-17-2008. 
B.	Every new building and structure erected in or moved into the jurisdiction of the city after January 1, 2009, shall conform to the requirements of the administrative code adopted in subsection (A) above and as amended. All additions, alterations, repairs, changes of use or occupancy and changes of character of use or occupancy in all buildings or structures within the jurisdiction of the city shall conform to the administrative code of the city adopted in subsection (A) above and as amended, applicable to new buildings, except as specifically provided therein. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, A.R.S. 9-801. 
10.01.040 - Adoption of International Technical Codes. 
A.	The documents entitled "International Building Code, 2003 Edition as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance NS289 as Exhibit B, adopted herein by reference as the "IBC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was made a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74, adopted on 11-17-08, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
"IBC" - Chapter 16, Structural Design, section 1612.3: These Provisions shall be known as the Establishment of Flood Hazard Areas of the City of Willcox. 
FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
Effective Date: 8/28/2008. 
Community # 040018 0438 F 
Map # 04003C0438F 
Panel # 438 of 3000 
Community # 040018 0439 F 
Map # 04003C0439F 
Panel # 439 of 3000 
Community # 040018 0440 F 
Map # 04003C0440F 
Panel # 440 of 3000 
Community # 040018 0726 F 
Map # 04003C0726F 
Panel # 726 of 3000 
Community # 040018 0727 F 
Map # 04003C0727F 
Panel # 727 of 3000 
Community # 040018 0731 F 
Map # 04003C0731F 
Panel # 731 of 3000 
"IBC" - Chapter 34, Existing Structures Table, section 3410.2, Applicability: Structures existing prior to February 6, 2006, the effective date of adoption of the Building Code, in which there is work involving additions, alterations or changes of occupancy shall be made to conform to the requirements of this section or the provisions of Sections 3403 through 3407. The provisions in Sections 3410.2.1 through 3410.2.5 shall apply to existing occupancies that will continue to be, or are proposed to be, in Groups A, B, E, F, M, R, S, and U. These provisions shall not apply to buildings with occupancies in Group H and I. 
B.	The documents entitled "International Residential Code, 2003 Edition," including the appendix A through L therein, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance NS289 as Exhibit C adopted herein by reference as the "IRC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was made a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74, adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
"IRC" - Part III, Chapter 3, Table, Section R301.2(1): These Provisions shall be known as the Various City of Willcox Specifications 
Ground Snow Load: 0" 
Wind Speed: 90 mph 
Seismic Design Category: C 
Weathering: Negligible 
Frost Line Depth: 0" 
Termite: Moderate to Heavy 
Decay: Non to Slight 
Winter Design Temperature: 15 degrees F 
Ice Shield Underlayment Required: No 
Flood Hazards: FIRM December 28, 1982; LOMR February 15, 2000 
Air Freezing Index: 50 degrees F 
Mean Annual Temperature: 60 degrees F 
"IRC" - Part VII, Chapter 26, General Plumbing Requirements, Section P2603.6.1, Sewer Depth: Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304.8 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304.8 mm) below grade. 
"IRC" - Part VII, Chapter 31, Section P3103.1, Roof Extension: All open vent pipes which extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 12 inches (304.8 mm) above the roof or 12 inches (304.8 mm) above the anticipated snow accumulation, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extension shall be run at least seven feet (2134mm) above the roof. 
C.	The documents entitled "International Existing Building Code, 2003 Edition," including the Appendices A and B therein, both published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit D adopted herein by reference as the "IEB" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was declared a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
    Every new building and structure erected in or moved into the jurisdiction of the city after January 1, 2009, shall conform to the requirements of the building codes adopted in subsection above and as amended. All additions, alterations, repairs, character of use or occupancy in all buildings or structures within the jurisdiction of the city shall conform to the requirements of the building code of the city adopted in subsections (A)-(C) of this section and as amended, applicable to new and existing buildings, except as specifically provided for therein. 
D.	The documents entitled "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition," published by the International Conference of Building Officials and "Modifications of 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings," a copy of which are attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit E, are adopted herein by reference as the "ADB" of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was declared a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
E.	The documents entitled "National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition, published by the National Electrical Code Committee and approved by "ANSI" a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 08-04 as Exhibit F, are adopted herein by reference as the "NEC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was made a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE: 
A. Application For Certificate: Any person installing, altering, repairing, or remodeling any electrical system shall, prior thereto, apply to the building inspector for a certificate of compliance with the adopted national electrical code. 
B. Inspections; Issuance Or Denial: The building inspector shall, as soon as possible thereafter, inspect the electrical system in question and, if meeting requirements of said electrical code, issue to the applicant a certificate of compliance. If the electrical system in question does not meet requirements of said code, the building inspector shall specify to the applicant the changes necessary in order to secure such certificate of compliance. 
F.	The documents entitled "International Mechanical Code of 2003 Edition," published by the International Code Council and "2003 appendix A" a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit G, are adopted herein by reference as the "IMC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was declared a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE: 
A. Application For Certificate: Any person installing, removing, maintaining, altering or demolishing any heating, ventilating, cooling and refrigeration systems shall, prior thereto, apply to the building inspector for a certificate of compliance with the adopted edition of the international mechanical code. 
B. Inspections; Issuance Or Denial: The building inspector shall, as soon as possible thereafter, inspect the heating, ventilating, cooling or refrigeration system in question and, if in compliance with the requirements of the mechanical code, issue to the applicant a certificate of compliance. If the heating, ventilating, cooling or refrigeration system in question does not meet requirements of the mechanical code, the building inspector shall specify to the applicant the deficiencies needing correction in order to secure such certificate of compliance. 
G.	The documents entitled "International Plumbing Code, 2003 Edition, including said code and appendices B, C, D, E, F, G and the "ANSI Installation Standards" therein, published by the International Code Council copies of which are attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit H, are adopted herein by reference as the "UPC" "IPC" codes of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was made a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE: 
A. Application For Certificate: Any person installing, removing, altering or demolishing any plumbing system, fixture or equipment shall, prior thereto, apply to the building inspector for a certificate of compliance with the uniform plumbing code. 
B. Inspection; Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: The building inspector shall, as soon as possible thereafter, inspect the plumbing system, fixture or equipment in question and, if meeting requirements of the plumbing code, issue to the applicant a certificate of compliance. If the system, fixture or equipment in question does not meet requirements of the plumbing code, the building inspector shall specify to the applicant the requirements necessary in order to secure such certificate of compliance. 
H.	The documents entitled "International Fuel Gas Code of 2003 Edition," published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit I is adopted herein by reference as the "IFGC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was declared a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
I.	The documents entitled "International Fire Code, 2003 Edition", published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit J is adopted herein by reference as the "IFC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies are on file in the office of the city clerk which document was made a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
J.	The documents entitled "Uniform Sign Code 1991 Edition," published by the International Conference of Building Officials, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit K is adopted herein by reference as the "USC" code of the City of Willcox. Three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, which document was made a public record by city Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, is hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
Cross reference- International Building Code "IBC." 
State Law reference- Authority for gas utilities, A.R.S. 9-276(B); adoption by reference, A.R.S. 9-801; powers and abatement, A.R.S. 9-240; 9-499; 9-499.01 et seq.; state fire code, A.R.S. 41-2146 (Eff. 7-1-06), 41-2166; smoke detectors, A.R.S. 36-1636 et seq., 36-1645 et seq. 
10.01.050 - Permit fees. 
    Permit fees shall be determined by the building inspector using the development services fee schedule adopted by the mayor and city council by Resolution No. 2008-75 adopted on 11-17-2008 or as permit fees may be determined, from time to time, by city resolution adopted hereinafter. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.01.060 - Uniform standard details and specifications. 
    The Uniform Standard Details and Specifications for Public Works Construction were developed by the Maricopa Association of Governments working with various public works departments, reviewed and refined by members of the construction industry, to fulfill the need for uniform rules governing public works construction. The intended use was for large and small communities to have uniform guidance embracing the most modern materials and construction techniques to the benefit of the public and the private contracting industry. 
    These uniform standard specifications and details are subject to periodic updates/revisions to reflect advanced thinking and technology of the construction industry. 
A.	Adoption of Details and Specifications: That certain document known as "Standard Details and Specifications, Maricopa Association of Governments [hereinafter "MAG"] and latest revisions, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. NS289 as Exhibit L, is referred to and adopted by reference, as the standard details and specifications of the city, and made a public record by Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
B.	Substitution of Terms: The words "City of Willcox" shall be substituted for the words "Maricopa Association for Governments" and "Maricopa County" in all places that they appear in the specifications. 
C.	Compliance Required: The city manager, or the person to whom his authority is delegated, shall specify which provision or provisions of the standard details and specifications apply to any construction which falls within the scope of the standard details and specifications. Construction performed without complying with the details prescribed is unlawful. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.01.070 - Appeals process adopted. 
    Board of Appeals: In order to hear and decide appeals of determinations, corrective actions, and/or decisions by the building official(s) relative to the application and interpretation of this Code provisions, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business. 
    Limitations on Authority: An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this Code. 
    Qualifications: The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction. 
    Designation: The City of Willcox Planning and Zoning Commission shall constitute a board of appeals for all purposes described in the Willcox Municipal Code and all other technical codes adopted by the city. 
    Duties and Authority: The board of appeals shall determine the alternative materials and methods of construction and provide reasonable interpretation of the provisions of this Code. For such purposes, the building inspector shall be an ex-officio member. Notice of appeal shall be given upon a form provided by the building inspector and shall be perfected within ten days after receipt of disapproval, notice of determination or notice corrective action. 
    Decisions and Findings: The board of appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulation for conducting its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings, in writing, to the building inspector with a duplicate copy to the appellant. The board may recommend, to the mayor and council, such new legislation as is consistent therewith. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
Chapter 10.02 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE; SLUMLORD ENFORCEMENT GUIDELINES 
Sections: 

10.02.010 - Incorporation of state and city regulations. 
    The Arizona Slumlord Act, A.R.S. 33-1901 through 33-1905, in conjunction with the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, (hereafter referred to as "ADB"), as adopted by the city and made a public record by Resolution No. 2008-74 adopted on 11-17-2008, shall be incorporated by reference into the Willcox Slumlord Enforcement Guidelines. A.R.S. 33-1901 through 33-1905 and "ADB" may be viewed at the Elsie S. Hogan Library or the department of public services and works. This chapter and the statutes create the following two primary duties for the owner of residential rental property: 
A.	Registration with the county assessor. 
B.	Maintenance of the rental property. Failure to maintain can result in designation of the property as "slum property". 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.02.020 - Registration of residential rental property. 
A.	Registration and Compliance Required: 
1.	Pursuant to A.R.S. 33-1902, the owner of residential rental property must register with county assessor. "Residential rental property" is defined as property that is used solely as leased or rented property for residential purposes. If the property is a space rental mobile home park, "residential rental property" includes the rental spaces leased or rented by the owner of the rental space, but does not include the mobile home or recreational vehicle that serves as the actual dwelling if the dwelling is owned and occupied by the tenant of the rental space and not by the owner of the rental space. 
2.	In addition to the requirement to register pursuant to Arizona Revised Statutes (33-1902, persons and entities that are subject to this chapter shall be required to comply with all county and state registration requirements. 
B.	Failure to Register. The following are the consequences of failure to register: 
1.	Civil sanctions for failure to register are delineated in A.R.S. 33-1902(E) and (F). 
2.	Unregistered property cannot be occupied, A.R.S. 33-1902(C). 
3.	a.	Unregistered property is subject to immediate inspection, A.R.S. 33-1904(A)(1). 
b.	Inspection of rented property requires the consent of tenant or the issuance of an inspection warrant. 
c.	If property is a rental space in a mobile home park, the right to inspect does not extend to the dwelling unit not owned by landlord. 
4.	The city may conduct inspections on a periodic basis in furtherance of health, safety and welfare. The basis for the inspections may be founded upon any of the following: 
a.	Complaints or requests from interested persons. 
b.	Condition and appearance of the subject property that give rise to health, safety and/or welfare concerns. 
c.	Scheduled routine city inspections. 
5.	As delineated in A.R.S. 33-1904A1 and A2, inspection costs shall be assessed to owner, A.R.S. 33-1904(B). 
6.	Failure to register does not automatically designate property as slum property or require implementation of the abatement remedies. 
C.	Enforcement. Information concerning registration of rental property can be obtained from the county assessor's office. Complaints for failure to register rental property under subsection (A) of this section may be filed in Willcox Consolidated Court. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.02.030 - Determination of slum property/dangerous building. 
A.	Criteria for Slum Property. Criteria for designating a "slum property" is defined in A.R.S. 33-1901(3). 
B.	Criteria for Dangerous Building. Criteria for designating a "dangerous building" are defined in ADB sections 301 and 302. 
C.	Notice and Order. 
1.	Determination by the city building inspector that a residential rental property is a "slum property" and/or a "dangerous building", as defined in subsections (A) and (B) of this section, respectively, will result in the building inspector issuing a notice and order. (See section 10.02.070.A of this chapter.) 
2.	Procedure for issuing and service of a notice and order is delineated in ADB section 401 et seq. 
3.	Recordation of the notice and order is delineated in ADB section 402. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.02.040 - Procedure for designation as slum property. 
A.	The procedure for designating a property as a slum property is as prescribed under ADB section 401. Authority to designate slum property rests with the city building inspector. If an inspection reveals that a property meets the requirements for designation, the building inspector shall follow ADB section 401(b)2 through (b)5. 
B.	If the property owner fails to comply with the notice and order and does not appeal the notice, the building inspector shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate of designation as a slum property (see section 10.02.070.B. of this chapter) pursuant to ADB section 402. The certificate also must include a warning that the property is subject to the provisions and penalties of A.R.S. 33-1901 through 33-1905 and ADB section 404. In the event that the property thereafter is repaired, demolished, or otherwise abated, the building inspector shall file a new certificate stating that the property is no longer designated as slum property. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.02.050 - Consequences of designation as slum property. 
A.	Abatement of Substandard Conditions. Pursuant to ADB section 202, a property designated as a slum property constitutes a public nuisance and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. These abatement remedies are set forth in ADB section 403. 
B.	Property Subject to Inspections. A slum property is subject to immediate inspection, and to annual inspections for three years, with costs of the inspection to be assessed to the owner of the slum property. (See A.R.S. 33-1904(A)(2) and (B). 
C.	Appointment of Temporary Receiver. Pursuant to A.R.S. 33-1903, the city may seek the appointment of a temporary receiver to operate and rehabilitate a slum property. 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.02.060 - Enforcement. 
A.	Orders issued by the building inspector and/or the board of appeals shall be enforced in accordance with ADB chapters 7, 8 and 9. 
B.	The building inspector may receive recommendations from the city code enforcement officer and the director of public safety and/or fire department official acting as a building inspector concerning potential slum properties. In each case, the building inspector shall conduct an inspection to determine if the property is a slum property in accordance with section 10.02.050 above. 
C.	The process for enforcement of this chapter is described in following flow chart: 

(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
10.02.070 - Forms. 
A.	Notice And Order - Abatement Of Slum Property 
Violation #: ____________ Name: ____________ Mailing Address: ____________ Property Address: ____________ Parcel #: ____________  
The Building Inspector of the City of Willcox has determined that the described residential rental property is a slum. The described property has three or more of the conditions or defects described in Section 302 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by the City of Willcox. 
The specific violations of Section 302 are: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
You have ( ) days from the date of service of this notice and order in which to take the following actions(s): 
Any and all repairs must be commenced within ( ) days and completed within ( ) days of the service of this Notice, with all work performed in accordance with Willcox Codes, including the securing of all required permits. 
If directed to vacate the building, the building shall be vacated within ( ) days from the service of this Notice. If directed to demolish the building, the building shall be vacated within ( ) days, all permits shall be secured within sixty (60) days, and demolition must be completed within 
( ) days from the service of this Notice. 
Method of Service (circle all that apply): 
Posted   Certified   Hand delivered 
  
Inspector: ____________   Date: 
Supplement: Yes ____________ No ____________ 
        Form 401.2(2) 
B.	Certificate Of Designation As Slum Property: 
NOTICE AND ORDER ABATEMENT OF SLUM PROPERTY 
If any required repair or demolition work is not commenced and completed as directed in this Notice and Order, the Building Inspector: 
(1)	will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the directed work is completed; and 
(2)	may proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or property owner. 
Additionally, upon failure to comply with this Notice and Order, the City of Willcox may take action to abate the violations and/or issue a citation to the legal owner of record or other responsible party. Any abatement costs incurred shall be billed and assessed to the legal owner or a lien placed on the property until payment in full, plus any interest due has been received. The City may also charge an additional 5% for inspections or incidental costs and these charges may also be filed as an assessment against the property. Should the City be required to file a legal action to enforce the terms of this Notice and Order, associated legal costs may also be filed as an assessment against the property. 
Any person having any record title or legal interest in the building or structure may appeal from this Notice and Order or any action of the Building Inspector to the Board of Appeals. The appeal must be made in writing as provided in Chapter 5, section 501(a)(7) of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings and must be filed with the Building Inspector after the date of service of this Notice and Order. Failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of this matter. 
Any property designated as a Slum Property is subject to the provisions of Title 33, Chapter 17 of the Arizona Revised Statutes providing for penalties, the appointment of a temporary receiver, annual inspections, and payment of costs. 
  
        FORM: 401.2 (2) 
(Ord. NS289, § 2, 2008) 
Chapter 10.03 - LIGHT POLLUTION AND REGULATION[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS 102, from the original codification as ch. 14.30, §§ 14.30.010-14.30.080, has been redesignated as ch. 10.03, §§ 10.03.010-10.03.080, at the request of the city. 

10.03.010 - Administration. 
A.	Purpose. This Code is intended to restrict the uses of outdoor artificial illuminating devices emitting undesirable rays into the night sky which have a detrimental effect on astronomical observations. 
B.	Conformance with Applicable Codes. All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of the Code, the Willcox Zoning Regulations, Willcox Subdivision Regulations and any building codes which may hereafter be enacted, as applicable. Where any provisions of any of the Arizona State Statutes, or any of the federal law, or any companion Willcox Code comparatively conflicts with the requirements of this Light Pollution Code, the most restrictive shall govern. 
C.	Approved Material and Methods of Installation. The provisions of this Code are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided any such alternate has been approved. The city zoning inspector may approve any such alternate provided that the proposed design, material or method: 
1.	Provides approximate equivalence to those specific requirements of this Code; or 
2.	Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of the Code. 
10.03.020 - Definitions. 
    "Outdoor light fixtures" means outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to search, spot or floodlights for: 
A.	Buildings and structures. 
B.	Recreational areas.. 
C.	Parking lot lighting. 
D.	Landscape lighting. 
E.	Billboards and other signage (advertising or other). 
F.	Street lighting. 
    "Individual" shall mean any private individual, tenant, lessee, owner or any commercial entity including, but not limited to companies, partnerships, joint ventures or corporations. 
    "Installed" shall mean the initial installation of outdoor light fixtures defined herein, following the effective date of this Code but shall not apply to those outdoor light fixtures installed prior to such date. 
10.03.030 - General requirements. 
A.	Shielding. All exterior illuminating devices, except those exempt from this code, and those regulated by section 10.03.040, shall be fully or partially shielded as required in subsection (C). 
1.	"Fully shielded" shall mean that those fixtures shall be shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
2.	"Partially shielded" shall mean that those fixtures shall be shielded in such a manner that the bottom edge of the shield is below the plane center line of the light source (lamp), minimizing light above the horizontal. 
B.	Filtration. 
1.	Those outdoor light fixtures requiring a filter in subsection (C), except mercury vapor, shall be equipped with a filter whose transmission is less than five percent total emergent flux at wavelengths less than 3,900 angstroms. Total emergent flux is defined as that between 3,000 and 7,000 angstrom units. 
2.	Mercury vapor fixtures shall be equipped with a filter whose transmission is less than ten percent total emergent flux at wavelengths less than 4,400 angstroms. Total emergent flux is defined as that between 3,000 and 7,000 angstrom units. 
3.	Low pressure sodium lamps are the preferred lamp for minimizing adverse effects on astronomical observations. 
C.	Requirements for Shielding and Filtering. The requirements for shielding and filtering light emissions from outdoor light fixtures shall be as set forth in the following table: 
Fixture Lamp Type Shielded Filtered(4) Low pressure sodium(1) Partially None High pressure sodium Fully None Metal halide(6) Fully Yes Fluorescent Fully(5) Yes(2) Quartz(3) Fully None Incandescent greater than 150 W Fully None Incandescent 150 W or less None None Mercury vapor Fully Yes Fossil fuel None None Glass tubes filled with Neon, Argon, Krypton None None Other sources As approved by the city zoning 
inspector  
Notes: 
1.	This is the preferred light source to minimize undesirable light into the night sky affecting astronomical observations. 
2.	Warm white and natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects. 
3.	For the purposes of this Code, quartz lamps shall not be considered an incandescent light source. 
4.	Most glass, acrylic or translucent enclosures satisfy these filter requirements. 
5.	Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding. 
6.	Metal halide display lighting shall not be used for security lighting after 11:00 p.m. (or after closing hours if before 11:00 p.m.) unless fully shielded. Metal halide lamps shall be in enclosed luminaires. 
10.03.040 - Prohibitions. 
A.	Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited. 
B.	Recreational Facility. No outdoor recreational facility, public or private, shall be illuminated by nonconforming means after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a specific recreational or sporting event or any other activity conducted at a ball park, outdoor amphitheater, arena or similar facility in progress prior to 11:00 p.m. 
C.	Outdoor Building or Landscaping Illumination. The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building, landscaping, signing or other purpose, is prohibited except with incandescent fixtures less than 150 watts. 
10.03.050 - Permanent exemptions. 
A.	Nonconforming fixtures. All outdoor light fixtures existing and fully installed prior to the effective date of the Code may remain "nonconforming" indefinitely, provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration or restoration after abandonment of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of these regulations. 
B.	Fossil Fuel Light. Produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels. 
C.	Federal and State Facilities. Those facilities and lands owned, operated as protected by the U. S. Federal Government or the State of Arizona are exempted by law from all requirements of this code. Voluntary compliance with the intent of this Code as those facilities is encouraged. 
10.03.060 - Procedures for code compliance. 
A.	Applications. 
1.	Any individual applying for a building or use permit under the Willcox Zoning Regulations intending to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall as a part of said application submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with this Code. 
2.	All other individuals intending to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit an application to the city zoning inspector providing evidence that the proposed work will comply with this Code. 
3.	Utility companies entering into a duly approved contract with the city in which they agree to comply with the provisions of these regulations, shall be exempt from applying for and obtaining a permit for the installation of street lighting or other lighting fixtures within a residential subdivision. 
B.	Contents of Application or Submission. The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following, all or part of which may be part of or in addition to the information required elsewhere in the Willcox Zoning Regulations upon application for the required permit: 
1.	Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, other devices, etc. 
2.	Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports and other devices, etc. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings (including sections where required). The above required plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently complete to enable the city zoning inspector to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this Code will be secured. If such plans and descriptions cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration of the devices, fixtures or lamps proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence of compliance by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing lab. 
C.	Issuance of Permit. Upon compliance with the requirements of this Code, the city zoning inspector shall issue a permit for installation of the outdoor lighting fixtures, to be installed as in the approved application. In the event the application is part of the building permit application under the zoning regulations, the issuance of the building permit will be made if the applicant is in compliance with this Code as well as the other requirements for issuance under the zoning regulations. Appeal procedures of the zoning regulations for decision of the zoning inspector shall apply. 
D.	Amendment to Permit. Should the applicant desire to substitute outdoor lighting fixtures or lamps after a permit has been issued, the applicant must submit all changes to the city zoning inspector for approval, with adequate information to assure compliance with this Code. 
10.03.070 - Temporary exemptions. 
A.	Request for Temporary Exemptions. Any individual as defined herein may submit a written request on a form prepared by the planning and zoning commission to the city zoning inspector for a "temporary exemption" to the requirements of this Code, such exemption to be valid for 30 days, renewable at the discretion of the city zoning inspector. The request for temporary exemption shall contain minimally the following listed information: 
1.	Specific exemptions requested. 
2.	Type and use of exterior light involved. 
3.	Duration of time for requested exemption. 
4.	Type of lamp and calculated lumens. 
5.	Total wattage of lamp or lamps. 
6.	Proposed location of exterior light. 
7.	Previous temporary exemptions, if any. 
8.	Physical size of exterior light and type of shielding provided. 
    In addition to the above data, the city zoning inspector may request any additional information which would enable him to make a reasonable evaluation of the request for temporary exemption. 
B.	Appeal for Temporary Exemption. The city zoning inspector, within five days from the date of the properly completed request for temporary exemption, shall approve or reject in writing the request. If rejected, the individual making the request shall have the right of appeal to the appropriate board of adjustment for review pursuant to the procedures applicable to any other appeal of a decision of the city zoning inspector. 
10.03.080 - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued or permitted and upon conviction of any such violation, such person, firm or corporation shall be punished as prescribed by the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
TITLE 11 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
Chapters: 11.04 Definitions 11.08 Powers 11.12 Duties 11.16 Enforcement 11.17 Reserved 11.20 Immunity 11.24 Severability  
Chapter 11.04 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

11.04.010 - Definitions. 
    A.R.S. 26-301, as amended, is incorporated herein by reference and all definitions set forth in that section are expanded to include reference to county and state governments as applicable to the City of Willcox. 
Chapter 11.08 - POWERS 
Sections: 

11.08.010 - Powers. 
    A.R.S. 26-307 and 26-311, as amended, is incorporated herein by reference and all powers set forth in that section are understood to be applicable to the City of Willcox. 
Chapter 11.12 - DUTIES 
Sections: 

11.12.010 - City manager general duties. 
    The city manager of the City of Willcox, subject to the directions and control of the city council, shall be responsible for the organization, administration and operation of the City of Willcox Emergency Services. In accordance with the provisions of A.R.S. 26-312, the city manager may, on behalf of the city accept for purposes of emergency services, equipment, supplies, firm, or corporation of services, equipment, supplies, material, or funds, whether by gift, grant, or loan. There is hereby granted to the city manager the authority: 
11.12.020 - Non-emergency duties. 
    The city manager may perform the following duties or may delegate said duties with the exception of subsection (6), to the emergency services director. 
1.	To coordinate City of Willcox emergency services plans, procedures, programs, and other emergency services activities with federal agencies, State of Arizona, adjoining county agencies, political subdivisions and municipalities of the state and with the private sector. 
2.	To ensure compliance with the provisions of A.R.S. 26-301 et seq. 
3.	To ensure conformance with state emergency plans and procedures. 
4.	To achieve adequate operational readiness, adequacy of training programs and proper utilization of emergency equipment and supplies and budget allocations. 
5.	To make studies and surveys of the private sector as may be necessary to ascertain the capabilities of the City of Willcox for emergency services, and to plan for the most efficient use thereof. 
6.	To recommend to the mayor and council the appointment of the director of emergency services in accordance with City Code [chapter] 2.24. 
11.12.030 - Declared emergencies duties. 
    The city manager may perform the following duties or may delegate said duties with the exception of subsection (4), to the emergency services director. 
1.	To coordinate the emergency activities of all City of Willcox departments and agencies with the assistance of the director of emergency services. 
2.	To coordinate the emergency activities of the City of Willcox with federal agencies, State of Arizona, adjoining county agencies, political subdivisions and municipalities of the state, and withthe private sector to achieve the most effective use of personnel, equipment, services, facilities, and other existing available resources. 
3.	To utilize the services, resources and facilities of existing departments and agencies of city government; and, when necessary, to create new agencies or call upon the private sector to perform emergency tasks and functions unavailable in departments and agencies of the city. 
4.	To approve the purchase of supplies, materials, or services necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens, employees, property, and interest of the City of Willcox in accordance with the existing city purchasing policy. 
Chapter 11.16 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

11.16.010 - Enforcement. 
    The law enforcement authorities of the City of Willcox shall enforce all orders, rules, and regulations, issued pursuant to this ordinance all in accordance with A.R.S. 26-316, as amended, which is incorporated herein by reference. 
Chapter 11.20 - IMMUNITY 
Sections: 

11.10.010 - Immunity. 
    City of Willcox, its officers, agents, employees, and volunteers duly enrolled or registered with the City of Willcox Emergency Services, and unregistered persons placed into service during a state of emergency, are immune from liability as provided in A.R.S. 26-314, as amended, which is adopted herein by reference. 
Chapter 11.24 - SEVERABILITY 
Sections: 

11.24.010 - Severability. 
    It is intended that the provisions of this ordinance are severable. If any part thereof is declared invalid for any reason, such determination shall not effect the remaining provisions thereof. 
TITLE 12 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
Chapters: 12.04 Sidewalk Construction  
Chapter 12.04 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- For statutory provisions authorizing cities to construct sidewalks see A.R.S. 9-240(3); for procedures on property owner's default on sidewalk assessment see A.R.S. 9-243. 

12.04.010 - Dimensions. 
A.	All sidewalks in the city on Railroad Avenue shall be 12 feet wide. 
B.	All sidewalks on the east side of the Southern Pacific Railroad tracks shall have a curb ten feet from property line, with a cement sidewalk between the curb and property line of four feet. 
C.	All sidewalks in the city on the north side of the Southern Pacific Railroad shall be of the following widths: On each street or avenue in said district of the width of 79 feet or more the curb shall be 12 feet from the property line, with a cement sidewalk between the curb and property line of four feet, except from Railroad Avenue to Curtis Avenue on Maley Street the sidewalk shall be 12 feet wide. On each street or avenue in the district less than 79 feet wide the curb shall be ten feet from the property line with a cement sidewalk between the curb and property line of four feet. 
D.	There shall be a curb six inches wide at the outer edge of each sidewalk and where the pavement does not cover the full width of the sidewalk it shall be laid two feet from the lot line leaving the intervening space between the outer edge of the pavement and the curb for trees, grass and shrubbery. 
(Prior code § 12.04.010) 
12.04.020 - Placement. 
    So much of the streets in the city as is necessary to make a sidewalk of the width set forth in section 12.04.010 immediately adjoining to the lot line of every block in the city, is set apart from the street and declared to be public sidewalks. All sidewalks shall project beyond the lot line of every block in such a manner that the corners of said sidewalks shall be right angles. 
(Prior code § 12.04.020) 
12.04.030 - Following provisions required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to construct any sidewalk or pavement hereafter within the city, except within the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12.04.030) 
12.04.040 - Council resolution to construct. 
    The city council may from time to time by resolution, require the proprietors of any blocks, lots or parts of lots within the city to construct a sidewalk and pavement in front thereof of the character as set forth in this chapter; and upon failure and default of the proprietor to construct such sidewalk and pavement within 30 days after notice so to do, the same may be constructed by the supervisor of streets, and the expense thereof assessed against such block, lot or part thereof. 
(Prior code § 12.04.040) 
12.04.050 - Assessment-Sale of property if owner fails to pay. 
A.	In case any owner of lots or parcel of ground upon which the expense of making sidewalk and pavement has been assessed, shall fail or refuse, for the space of 30 days after the notification of the amount of such expense, to pay said amount to the city it shall be the duty of the city clerk, at any meeting of the board, to report said failure to the board, whose duty it shall be to cause a precept to issue for the collection of such assessment, which precept shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the city clerk, and sealed with the seal of the city, and shall set forth the name of the owner against whom the assessment is made and description of the lot or land on which is made, and the amount of such assessment, which shall be directed to the treasurer of the city, commanding him to make such assessment, within ten days after receiving such precept, of the owner in whose name such assessment is made, with precept, shall be served by the city treasurer by reading the same personally to such owner or by leaving a copy of such precept at his last or usual place of residence; or, if such owner be unknown or not a resident of the city, then by publication once a week for three consecutive successive weeks, in a newspaper printed in the city, setting forth briefly the name of the person whose property is to be sold, if known, the description of the property, the amount assessed against the same and the date of the order of such precept by the board, and giving notice that, if such assessment be not paid within 20 days after publication, he will proceed to make the same by levy and sale of the lot or land whereon the same is assessed. 
B.	It shall be the duty of the city treasurer, in case the owner or owners of said property, so levied on shall fail to pay the amount of said levy within ten days after the expiration of said 20 days, to levy said precept upon the lot or land therein described, and to sell the same, or so much thereof as may be necessary to pay such assessment with costs and charges. Notice of the time and place of said sale shall be given by advertising the same once a week for three weeks successively in a newspaper printed within said city, and such sale shall be by public auction in front of the city hall in said city; and no sale of said lot or land, previous or subsequent to the date of the resolution of the board ordering such sidewalk or pavement shall invalidate or effect any sale thereof in pursuance of this ordinance. 
C.	Upon the sale of any lot or land by virtue of such precept and the payment of the purchase money, the city treasurer or his successor in office, shall execute, acknowledge and deliver to the purchaser a certificate of conveyance for the premises which shall be valid and effectual to convey all the right, title and interest of any such owner or purchaser from him as aforesaid, and shall be prima facie evidence of the fact recited therein. 
D.	The proceeds of such sale shall be applied as follows: First, to the payment of such assessment with interest thereon from the date of the assessment, and all costs accrued thereon by reason of the sale; the residue of such proceeds shall be paid to the owner or his, her or its heir, successor or representatives, or if unknown, shall be paid into the city treasury to be held for such owner, or his heir or representative. The purchaser, under such precept, shall hold such real estate subject to the lien of the unpaid part of its portion of the whole cost of improvement. The city treasurer shall receive for levying on the real estate and advertising the same, $1.00; for personal demand for payment, $1.00; for return of the precept with his endorsement thereon, $1.00; for making certificate of sale of real estate, $1.00. He shall endorse on said precept the time of receiving the same. Within 90 days thereafter he shall make return thereof to the city clerk with the proceedings thereon. 
E.	The owner of any lot or land sold as aforesaid may redeem the same any time within six months after the day of sale by paying to the purchaser, or to the city treasurer for the use of said purchaser, his heirs or assigns, the sum mentioned in his certificate, and the amount of all subsequent assessments paid by the purchaser with 50 percent on the whole sum, and interest from date of purchase to the time of payment. 
F.	If such owner, or any person in his behalf, shall fail to redeem such land within six months as aforesaid, upon the production of the certificate of purchase the city treasurer shall execute to the purchaser his heirs or assigns, in the name of the city, the conveyance of the real estate so sold, which shall vest in the grantee, an absolute estate in fee simple, subject however, to all claims which the city may have thereon. Such certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited therein. 
(Prior code § 12.04.050) 
12.04.060 - Building permit. 
    It is unlawful for any person to erect, build or maintain any kind of structure, obstruction or pavement of any nature upon any of the streets or sidewalks of said city without a written permit from the city council and only in accordance with the express provisions of the permit. 
(Prior code § 12.04.060) 
12.04.070 - Map. 
    The map of the city made by J.A. Rockfellow C.E., dated June 1918, and of record in the office of the county recorder, is declared to be the official map of the city in so far as it may cover the grounds within the city limits; and all references in this chapter or any other ordinance or resolution of the city to streets, lots, alleys or blocks, shall be taken to refer to and be governed by the conditions of this map. 
(Prior code § 12.04.070) 
12.04.080 - General construction requirements. 
    All cement sidewalks hereafter laid and built in the city, shall be constructed of cement, under the supervision of the city engineer or other persons authorized by the city council, in the following manner: 
A.	Grade. The sidewalk stakes shall be set by the city engineer to define the line of an edge of the walk and the grade marks will indicate the top of the walk at said line. The transverse slope of the walk will be one-fourth-inch per foot; 
B.	Foundation. The grading for the foundation must be smoothly and neatly done to bring the surface at least four inches below grade of the walk when finished. Soft or loamy spots in the subgrade must be taken out and refilled with good material; all to be reamed and tamped till it presents a hard smooth surface which shall be sprinkled with water as required, enough remaining to render the surface as moist as the concrete at the time the latter is laid; 
C.	Forms. Wooden forms of the required height shall be placed in the manner necessary to outline both external edges of the walk accurately; the top of the frame being located to coincide with the established grade of the walk; 
D.	Concrete. Concrete will be put down not less than four inches in thickness and to be made as follows: First spread three bars of good clean sand on a platform, then put on one bar of Portland cement and turn the two dry until thoroughly mixed. Then spread four bars of good clean gravel or broken stone not larger than will pass through a two-inch ring; then turn until thoroughly mixed. Then apply water and turn until the proportions are thoroughly wet; spread in place and tamp thoroughly until waters come to the surface; 
E.	Top Coating. After each batch of concrete is laid as required, it shall be immediately covered with a wearing surface. Any portion of the foundation which has been left long enough to have any appearance of setting before top coating is put on shall be taken up and relaid. The top coating shall be not less than one-half-inch thick, composed of one part Portland cement and two parts of coarse sand, thoroughly mixed dry and made into mortar with least possible amount of water. It shall be evenly and compactly spread to the finish surface of the walk and made smooth and even by troweling and floating. There must be a space of one inch left at intervals of every 25 feet to allow for contraction and expansion. Top coating must be cut into blocks of approved dimensions; 
F.	Curb. The curb shall be made of the same material as specified for walks and to be not less than six inches in thickness at the top, and at such depth from grade as may be designated by the city council; slope of grade to be on the basis of one inch per foot; 
G.	General. The pavements shall be properly fitted around all fixtures in the sidewalk. When finished the work shall be kept protected from the sun with sand or dirt and kept moist by sprinkling for three days or until thoroughly set. All blocks accepted shall be perfect in all respects free from cracks, warps and similar imperfections, and if found not to comply to specifications shall be taken out immediately and replaced. 
(Prior code § 12.04.080) 
TITLE 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 13.04 Sanitary Sewer District 13.08 Municipal Sewer System 13.09 Use of Municipal Sewer Systems 13.12 Water Regulations and Fees 13.13 Backflow Prevention 13.14 Sewer Pretreatment 13.16 Gas Rates  
Chapter 13.04 - SANITARY SEWER DISTRICT[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- For statutory provisions authorizing cities to establish a sanitary sewer district see A.R.S. 9-276(21). 

13.04.010 - Cesspool-Privy-Conformance required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to construct, alter or repair any cesspool or septic tank on any lot or parcel of land included within the sewer district. It is unlawful for any person to use or maintain any privy or privy vault within the sewer district. Whenever it shall come to the attention of the city council or plumbing inspector that any cesspool or septic tank is unsanitary or a menace to life or health or is in violation of this section, the council or plumbing inspector may order the use or maintenance of the same discontinued and order that proper sewage disposal connections be made with the city sewer system. 
(Prior code § 13.04.010) 
Chapter 13.08 - MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Sewer system to be operated as utility. 
    The sewage system of the city, shall hereafter be operated as a utility undertaking. 
(Prior code § 13.08.010) 
13.08.019 - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.	Protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
B.	Protect the environment by establishing minimum standards for the safe and sanitary collection, treatment, and disposal of sewer. 
C.	Establish necessary fees for the operation of the city's sewer system; to recover the city's costs to provide such services. As authorized by A.R.S. 9-511.01. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2, 2011) 
State Law reference- Sanitary Sewers; A.R.S. 9-276 et seq.; HB 2193, 9-511.01. 
13.08.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this chapter. 
    "Acre" means 43,560 square feet of land, excluding easements or rights-of-way. 
    "Administrator" means the city manager or designee. 
    "Applicant" means the owner, or owner's representative, of a property requesting connection to the public sanitary sewerage system owned by the City of Willcox. 
    "Approved" or "approval" means approved in writing. 
    "Area under development" means the area of land for which physical improvements are planned and for which sewer service is requested by the applicant. 
    "A.R.S." means Arizona Revised Statutes. 
    "Assignment" means the conveyance of sewer connection fee credits by the credit holder to a subsequent purchaser of all or any part of the area under development specified in the credit agreement. 
    "Augmentation" means the construction of public sewerage facilities adjacent to or to replace existing public sewerage facilities for the purpose of increasing the capacity of the public system. 
    "Base sewerage/facility size" means the minimum capacity sewerage facility which is required to convey or treat the predicted peak wet weather wastewater flow from the area under development. 
    "(BOD) biochemical oxygen demand test" means a procedure that measures the rate of oxygen use under controlled conditions of time and temperature. 
    "CCF" means 100 cubic feet. 
    "Chemical oxygen demand (COD)" means the chemically oxidizable material in wastewater as represented by the reduction of dichromate ion, measured in accordance with "standard methods." 
    "City" means the City of Willcox. 
    "City manager" means the City Manager of Willcox, or designee. 
    "Commercial/industrial" means a property zoned or used for recognized commercial and industrial uses. Commercial/industrial uses service stations, barber shops, beauty salons, hospitals, utilities, car washes, medical and dental laboratories, pet clinics, bakeries, industries, manufacturing, machinery and meat packing. 
    "Connection fee" means the fee paid to the City of Willcox for permission to connect to the public sewerage system, as set forth by resolution. 
    "Connection fee credit" means a credit for eligible engineering and construction costs of oversizing public sanitary sewerage facilities to be applied against an applicant's sewer connection fees. 
    "Credit agreement" means an agreement between an applicant and the City of Willcox for reimbursement for the costs of over-sizing public sewerage facilities by connection fee credits. 
    "Department" means the City of Willcox Public Services Department. 
    "Director" means the Director of Public Services for the City of Willcox. 
    "Disposal systems" means a system for disposing of wastes, either by surface or underground methods, and includes sewerage systems, treatment works, disposal wells, and other system. 
    "Fixture unit" means a unit of measure which expresses the load-producing effects of different kinds of plumbing fixtures on the plumbing system. 
    "Flow through" means sewers within a development which provide capacity for other future upstream development. Future sections of the same development are not considered future upstream development. 
    "Individual disposal system" means a privately owned and maintained device of system for the treatment or disposal of sewage from a single housing unit. 
    "Improvement district" means a district formed under the provisions of A.R.S. Title 11, Chapter 5, Article 1. 
    "Industrial" or "commercial wastes" means the liquid, gaseous, or solid wastes produced as a result of any industrial or commercial operation. 
    "Milligrams per liter (mg/l)" means a weight-to-volume relationship; for dilute agueous solutions, the milligram per liter relationship is closely equivalent to parts-per-million. 
    "Multi-family residence" means a residential complex designed for use by more than one family unit, including apartments, mobile home or manufactured home developments, schools, school dormitories, churches, townhouses, and condominium projects, excepting commercial/industrial components thereof. For other establishments or portions of establishments which provide overnight accommodations, those that provide private bathroom facilities with access only from the individual guest rooms shall be considered to be included in this category for purposes of fee determination, and those establishments or portions of establishments which do not fit this criteria shall be considered to be commercial for purposes of fee determination. 
    "Non-participating rate fee" means the rate charged an applicant for connection to the public sewerage system which is not defined as a participating rate connection fee. 
    "Off-site sewerage improvements" means all sewerage construction necessary to connect "on-site" facilities to an existing public sanitary sewer system as required by the department. 
    "On-site sewerage improvements" means all sewerage facilities within any plat, improvement plan, development plan or other development. 
    "Over-sizing" means the increase in size of a public sewerage facility which is required to serve property not owned by those who will construct the sewerage facility. 
    "Owned" means including processing options to purchase. 
    "Participating rate connection fee" means the rate charged an applicant for connection to the public sewerage system when the owner of the property to be served constructs the following types of improvements to the public sewerage system: 
a.	A public outfall sewer serving the units in an area under development when the existing public sewerage system capable of serving the unit is more than 300 feet from the property boundary of the development. 
b.	More than 300 feet of augmentation of existing public sewer, or an equivalent value of augmentation of other sewerage facilities, serving the units within an area under development. 
c.	Public sewers serving units within the development, which provide flow-through capacity an stubbed-out points of connection at the boundary of the development for future connection by other property not owned by the developer. 
d.	Sewerage facilities which are eligible for a rebate. 
e.	Sewerage facilities which are eligible for a credit. 
f.	Sewerage facilities which are not required to serve the development. 
    "Person" means the State of Arizona, a municipality, county or other political subdivision of the State of Arizona, a cooperative, institution, corporation, company, firm, partnership or individual person. 
    "Pollution" means contaimination or other alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of any waters of the substance into any waters, onto, or under any land within the City of Willcox that creates a nuisance or renders such waters or land harmful or injurious to public health, safety, or welfare, to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other lawful beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    "Private sanitary sewer system" means a sewer constructed at the expense of the property owner in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of Willcox or in accordance with construction plans approved by the City of Willcox. The ownership and responsibility for maintenance and operation of the private sewer systems rests with the owner of the private property or an authorized homeowner's association. The limits of said responsibility extends from the actual point of its connection to the public sewer system through to the plumbing fixtures within the connected building. 
    "Public sanitary sewerage system" means the system owned by the City of Willcox including all gravity sewer mains, sewage lift stations and pressure mains, treatment and disposal facilities, and all appurtenances required to collect, transport, treat, store and discharge the liquid and solid phases of wastewater. The city engineer or his designated representative is authorized to decide whether a new sanitary sewerage system will be accepted into the public system. 
    "Rebate" means the repayment to a developer by the City of Willcox of the cost of a public sewerage facility installed by the developer. The repayment shall be funded from non-participating rate connection fees paid by other developments which connect to the rebate-eligible facility. 
    "Rebate line" means a lien constructed to provide service to an area under development which also provides at least 51 percent of its capacity to currently unsewered properties which did not participate in the cost of its construction. 
    "Renters (third parties)" are those persons who have made legal arrangements to use or occupy residential or commercial units subject to this section of the City Code. 
    "Residual capacity" means the remaining capacity in a sewerage facility after the predicted peak wet weather flow from the development constructing the facility has been subtracted from the theoretical full flow capacity of the facility. 
    "Sewage" means the wastes from toilets, baths, sinks, lavatories, laundries, and other plumbing fixtures in residences, institutions, public and business buildings, mobile homes, and other places of human habitation, employment, or recreation. 
    "Sewage service rental" as used in this chapter, means that rental charged for each unit of service connected with the sewer system of the city. 
    "Single-family residence" means a building designed to be used as a home and shall be the only dwelling located on a parcel of ground with the usual accessory buildings. This single residential dwelling may be a mobile or manufactured home. 
    "Standard methods" means the most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
    "Subdivisions" means the division of a parcel of land into four or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development, or, if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land, provided that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels of five acres or more and not involving a new street shall not be deemed a subdivision. The terms includes resubdivision, and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
    "Total solids" means the total solids content of wastewater which is all the matter that remains as residue from a sample upon evaporation at 103 degrees to 105 degrees C. 
    "Transfer" means the ability to use connection fee credits on any property owned by the credit-holder in the City of Willcox except as otherwise specified or limited in a credit agreement. 
    "Unit" means a unit of development, either dwelling, fixture, or building, which can be identified as an individual entity for purposes of wastewater flow calculations and connection fee assessment. 
    "Unit of service" as used in this chapter, means each separate occupancy, house, store or building so situated upon any lot or lots within the city that is now served by the city's sewer system, or, in the opinion of the city staff or regulatory board, could be served separately from any other occupancy, residence, house, store or building upon the same lot or lots, irrespective of the number of residences, houses, stores or buildings upon said lot or lots, even though two or more of said occupancies, residences, houses, stores or buildings are held or owned by the same person or persons; and that the determination of the city staff or regulatory board as to whether any house, occupancy, residence, store or building comes within the meaning of this chapter so as to require a separate sewage connection, shall be final; provided, however, that the owner or occupant of said premises shall have the right to appeal from any such decision of the city staff or regulatory board to the city council at its next regular meeting, and that in the event of any such appeal being taken, the determination of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
    "Wastewater" means sanitary sewage and other water-borne discharges from units of development. 
    "Wastewater treatment facility" means any plan, disposal field, lagoon, pumping station, incinerator, or other works used to treat or stabilize sewage or industrial wastes. 
    "Waters of the city" means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground, natural or artificial, public or private which are contained with, flow through, or border upon the City of Willcox or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. NS126, 1986; Ord. NS148, § 1, 1991; Ord. NS309, § 2, 2011) 
13.08.021 - Establishment of a fund. 
    There is hereby established an enterprise fund for the purpose of collecting monies and making payments for the operation of the sewer system of the city. Such fund shall be operated as an "enterprise fund" as that term is defined by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA). ARS 9-511 A. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-08-21), 2011) 
State Law reference- Sanitary sewers; A.R.S. 9-276 et seq; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.08.022 - Establishment of rates. 
A.	The city council shall review the estimated expenses, incomes, reserves, and fund balance annually in April for the fiscal year to begin the next July 1. 
B.	The city council shall set such fees and late charges, by resolution, that shall produce the sufficient estimated revenues that combined with available fund balances are sufficient to pay all of the estimated costs in the ensuing fiscal year and provide an operational reserve of three months. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-08-22), 2011) 
State Law reference- Sanitary sewers; A.R.S. 9-276 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.08.023 - Responsibility for payment of charges. 
A.	The property owner is responsible for the payment of sewer charges under this section of the City Code. 
B.	If the property is residential property; the person(s) residing at the property is responsible for the payment of all charges under this section of the City Code. A property owner, at its sole discretion, may contract for wastewater service with a municipality and shall provide payment for those services. 
C.	The administrator may pursue collection of outstanding amounts by all legal means possible, including but not limited to; use of deposits, liens on property, and denial of hook ups or initiation of service, when there are outstanding amounts owed to the city by the parties requesting the hookup. 
D.	The person who has opened the account and the city have a responsibility to monitor the service provided and to make any claims for payment in a timely manner. 
E.	The city will not pursue any charges for services for which a bill has not been issued by the city for a period of six months. This does not erase past debts owed the city under [section] 13.08.023. 
C.	The purpose of this section is for errors in billing. 
F.	The maximum time that the city will permit for refunds, misbillings, or incorrect charges for service of any type relating to sewer service is six months. 
G.	Each person opening a sewer service account shall be required to post a security deposit. 
1.	If the person is the owner of the property, they shall be required, prior to the initiation of service; to post a deposit in the estimated amount of one month's sewer charges. 
2.	If the charges for sewer service are being collected by the city through the city's billing department; and the property is rented to a third party; or the account is opened by any party other than the person receiving the services; or in the case of residential property, the party residing at the property is some person other than the owner of the property; there shall be deposited with the city, prior to service being initiated: a security deposit equaling twice the estimated monthly sewer charge. 
H.	Security deposit requirements may be waived when: 
1.	The person has an existing history of no delinquent payments with the City of Willcox for the last two years. 
2.	The person is moving from one physical location to a different physical location and has a deposit on file which has sufficient amount in it to cover the new location. 
3.	The person provides the City of Willcox with a letter of reference from a similar type utility showing a history of no delinquent payments for a two-year period. The history must be within the last four years. 
I.	No interest will be paid on deposits. 
J.	Deposits may be credited to the account upon: 
1.	Closure of the account. 
2.	Maintenance of a two-year history with no delinquencies. 
K.	If an account becomes delinquent more than two times in a 12-month period or if the account is shut off for delinquency, after the deposit has been credited to the account as per [subsection] (J) above: A new deposit shall be required to continue or reestablish service. 
L.	Renters (third parties) establishing accounts must comply with requirements of [subsection] (B), but may use the provisions above in [subsection] (H). 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-08-23), 2011) 
State Law reference- Sanitary sewers; A.R.S. 9-276 et seq; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.08.030 - Terms and conditions. 
    Sewer service may be supplied by the city to users upon the terms and conditions prescribed in this chapter, and not otherwise. 
(Prior code § 13.08.030) 
13.08.040 - Exemption from charges. 
    All residents of the city receiving public assistance through the Arizona State Department of Public Welfare and all widows who are residents of the city and are receiving public assistance according to the standards set by the Arizona State Department of Public Welfare, shall be except from the charges imposed by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 13.08.040) 
13.08.050 - Liability-Lien for rental. 
    All sewer service rental levied by the city council against property under this chapter from the date of the assessment shall be a lien against the property upon which said lien shall continue until such rental is paid, provided the property owner may file at the office of the city clerk, a letter stating that occupant of his property shall be liable for service charge. The city then shall require that occupant pay one month service in advance and such occupant will be billed one month in advance on current bill, and the owner shall not be liable for such rental in such event. 
(Prior code § 13.08.050) 
13.08.060 - City not liable for discontinued service. 
    It is declared that the City of Willcox shall not be held liable for any damage that may result from its inability to provide adequate sewer service or from a discontinuance thereof for any cause. 
(Prior code § 13.08.060) 
13.08.070 - Penalty for delinquent payments. 
A.	A charge of one and one-half-percent per month for delinquent payments for sewer service shall be accumulated on unpaid delinquent accounts for such services. 
B.	Said delinquent charge shall be assessed against all accounts upon which payment is not received in the utility offices of the City of Willcox at the close of business hours on the twentieth day from the date of said billing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, if the twentieth day falls on a business holiday recognized by the city, payments received before the close of business hours of the next following day shall be deemed timely received, and such payment shall be credited before assessing any penalty. 
(Added during 1981 codification) 
13.08.100 - Sewer impact fees. 
A.	Purpose. This chapter relates to sewerage and sewage disposal regulating sewage collection, treatment and disposal; establishing connection fees and charges. 
B.	Application for Approval. Before any person shall construct or contract for the construction of a sewerage system, sewerage system extension, or wastewater treatment facility, or shall install any such process, device or equipment, either in whole or in part, an application for approval to construct the contemplated facility shall be made to the department on forms provided by the department. The department shall act on the application upon by the receipt thereof by designating either approval or disapproval. In case of a disapproval, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing. No permit for construction shall be issued until approval has been obtained from the department. All public and private connections to the public sanitary sewer system shall be accomplished in accordance with current department policies and directives. 
C.	Fees for Connection to Sanitary Sewers. 
1.	Connection Fees Relating to Participating Property in Areas Under Development: 
a.	Single-family residential for service of participating single-family residential property and residential improvement districts the connection fee shall be charged at the rate set by resolution, and shall be determined per fixture unit, in accordance with subsection (c)4, 5, and 6 of this Code. Said fee shall be payable in cash, by check or money order at the time of permit application. 
b.	Multifamily residential for service of participating multifamily residential property and residential improvement districts, the connection fee shall be charged at the rate set by resolution, and shall be determined per fixture unit, in accordance with subsections (C)4, 5 and 6 of this section. Said fee shall be payable in cash, by check or money order at the time of permit application. 
c.	Commercial and industrial for service of participating commercial and industrial property, a connection fee shall be charged at the rate set by resolution and shall be determined per fixture unit in accordance with subsections (C)4, 5 and 6 of this section. Said fee shall be payable in cash, by check or money order at the time of permit application. 
2.	Connection Fees Relating to Non-participating Property in Areas Under Development: 
a.	Single-family residential for service of non-participating single-family residential property, the connection fee shall be charged at the rate set by resolution and shall be determined per fixture unit in accordance with subsections (C)4, 5 and 6 of this section. Said fee shall be payable in cash, by check or money order at the time of permit application. 
b.	Multifamily residential for service of non-participating multifamily residential property, the connection fee shall be charged at the rate set by resolution and shall be determined per fixture unit in accordance with subsections (C)4, 5 and 6 of this section. Said fee shall be payable in cash, by check or money order at the time of permit application. 
c.	Commercial and industrial for services of non-participating commercial and industrial property, said fee shall be charged at the rate set by resolution and shall be determined per fixture unit in accordance with subsections (C)4, 5 and 6 of this section. Said fee shall be payable in cash, by check or money order at the time of permit application. 
3.	Special Facilities. If the property is to be connected to the sanitary sewer system, necessitating the construction of special facilities required to handle the waste, the department may require the applicant to provide these special facilities at his own expense. 
4.	Fixture Unit Equivalents (from Uniform Plumbing Code). Most current edition as adopted and amended by the City of Willcox. The unit equivalent of plumbing fixtures shown in Table 1 shall be based on the size of the trap required, and the unit equivalent of fixture and devices not shown in Table 1 shall be based on the rated discharge capacity in GPM (gallons per minute) in accordance with Table 2. 
Maximum trap loadings for sizes up to four inches are as follows: 
  
11/4? - 1 unit 11/2? - 3 units 2? - 4 units 3? - 6 units 4? - 8 units  
  
TABLE 1 
Kind of Fixture Minimum Trap and Trap Arm Size Units _____Bathtubs 11/2? 2 Bidets 11/2? 2 Dental units or cuspidors 11/4? 1 Drinking fountains 11/4? 1 Floor drains 2? 2 *Interceptors for grease, oil, solids, etc. 2? 3 *Interceptors for sand, auto wash, etc. 3? 6 Laundry tubs 11/2? 2 Clothes washers 2? 2 *Receptors (floor sinks) indirect waste receptors for refrigerators, coffee urn, water stations, etc. 11/2? 1 *Receptors, indirect waste receptors for commercial sinks, dishwashers, etc. 2? 3 Showers, single stalls 2? 2 *Showers, gang (one unit per hear) 2? Sinks, bar, private (11/2? min. waste) 11/2? 1 Sinks, bar, commercial (2? min. waste) 11/2? 2 Sinks, commercial or industrial, schools, etc. including dishwashers, wash up sinks and wash fountains (2? min. waste) 11/2? 3 Sinks, flushing rim, clinic 3? 6 Sinks, and/or dishwashers (residential) (2? min. waste) 11/2? 2 Sinks, and/or garbage disposals (residential) (2? min. waste) 11/2? 3 Sinks, service 2? 3 Mobile home park traps (one for each mobile home) 3? 11 Recreational vehicle park traps (one for each vehicle) 3? 9 Urinals, pedestal, trap arm only 3? 6 Urinals, stall 2? 2 Urinals, wall (2? min. waste) 11/2? 2 Urinals, wall trough (2? min. waste) 11/2? 3 Wash basins (lavatories) single 11/4? 1 Wash basins, in sets 11/2? 2 *Water closet tank type, trap arm only 3? 4 Water closet flush valve type, trap arm only 3? 6  
*NOTE-The size and discharge rating of each indirect waste receptor and each interceptor shall be based on the total rated discharge capacity of all fixtures, equipment or appliances discharging thereinto in accordance with Table 2. 
Drainage piping serving batteries of appliances capable of producing continuous flows shall be adequately sized to provide for peak loads. Clothes washers in groups of three or more shall be rated at six units each for the purpose of common waste pipe sizing. 
Tank type toilets shall be computed as six fixture units when determining septic tank size. 
Trap sizes shall not be increased to a point where the fixture discharge may be inadequate to maintain their self-scouring properties. 
TABLE 2 
DISCHARGE CAPACITY (in gals. per min.) 
For Intermittent Flow Only Up to 71/2 Equals 1 unit 8 to 15 Equals 2 units 16 to 30 Equals 4 units 31 to 50 Equals 6 units Over 50 gallons shall be determined by the city engineer  
For a continuous flow into a drainage system, such as from a pump, sump ejector, air conditioning equipment, or similar device, two fixture units shall be allowed for each gallon per minute of flow. 
5.	High Strength and/or High-Volume Commercial and Industrial Connections. The department shall evaluate the effect on the conveyance and treatment systems caused by each new commercial establishment connection having any of the following characteristics: (1) flows greater than 1,000 ccf/month, (2) total solids greater than 1,200 mg/liter, or (3) chemical oxygen demand greater than 1,000 mg/liter. An individual fixture unit rate shall be set for each such user. 
6.	Prevailing Rate. The connection fee to be charged shall be at the rate prevailing under this chapter and any amendment hereto at the time of application for and issuance of a plumbing and/or building permit. Credit shall be given for any prepaid connection fees. 
D.	Construction of Public Sewer Systems. 
1.	Application. Upon written application, the department may permit construction of permanent sanitary sewer systems where no existing sewer is available. Said sewer will be constructed at the sole expense cost of the applicant within street, avenues, alleys and right-of-way pursuant to grants of easements. The applicant will be required to construct all "on-site" and "off-site" facilities large enough to provide service to his development and in no case shall a line be less than eight inches in internal diameter. 
2.	Permits for Construction. Prior to the commencement of the construction of public sanitary sewerage facilities under this section, the applicant must obtain a sewer construction permit from the department. Said permit shall not be issued until the following requirements have been met by the applicant: 
a.	Submission of plans and specifications for the proposed construction duly certified by a registered profession engineer, said plans and specifications being subject to approval by the department. 
b.	Submission of letter of application and affirmation of cost for review and approval by the department. 
c.	Submission of signed copies of itemized bids from a minimum of three qualified contractors in those instances where the applicant is eligible for connection credits on a portion of the construction. 
d.	Submission of evidence that all required easements have been approved and recorded. 
e.	Receipt of inspection fee which shall be two and one-half percent of the attested contract price for construction of said sanitary sewer facilities. 
f.	Receipt of an "approval to construct" for the respective sewer project from the Arizona Department of Health Services or their delegated representative. 
3.	Bill of Sale. Upon completion of construction of the sanitary sewer facilities and final approval of same by the department, applicant shall convey all of its right, title and interest in and to said sewer facilities to the City of Willcox, free and clear of any and all liens, claims, charges, and encumbrances attaching thereto. Said transfer of the right, title and interest in and to said sewer facilities shall be accomplished by a "bill of sale" prepared by the City of Willcox. 
The applicant shall warrant that all work shall be free from any defects due to poor workmanship or materials for a period of one year from the acceptance of a "bill of sale" by the City of Willcox. Should any defect be discovered within such period, applicant shall make necessary repairs as determined by the city at applicant's sole cost and expense. 
E.	Credits and Rebates for Installing Public Sewerage Facilities. 
1.	Credits. The city may enter into a credit agreement with an applicant for sewer service for the additional design and construction costs incurred for the installation of a public sanitary sewerage facility of a size larger than would be required to collect or treat the waste from the area under development. The department shall determine the base sewerage facility size for the area under development and the additional required sewerage facility size. The credits shall be applied an as off-set to construction fees to be paid by the applicant. The credits shall not be in the form of a cash refund or rebate. The credits shall be usable for ten years from the execution of the agreement by the City of Willcox. The city may designate a longer usable life for the credits for good cause. The agreement shall specify either that the credits are granted to the applicant for use on any property owned by the applicant within the City of Willcox, except as otherwise specified or limited in the credit agreement, or that the credits are usable only within the area under development and are assignable to future owners. The credits awarded for such over sizing shall not exceed the total connection fees to be collected from the area under development as set forth in section 39.08.030. 
2.	Rebates. In the event an applicant installs a public sanitary sewerage system which provides at least 51 percent residual capacity for property other than the area under development, an agreement for refund of the cost of said sewerage system may be made with the applicant. The refund shall be made until the full sum due the applicant has been paid, or for a maximum of ten years from the date of the refund agreement, whichever shall first occur. The the event the full sum due the applicant has not been refunded within the aforesaid ten-year period, any balances remaining shall be considered cancelled, and the city shall be fully discharged from any further obligation under the agreement. 
F.	Permits for Temporary Installation for Areas Not Contiguous to Sewers. The director may, upon written application, issue a permit authorizing an area not contiguous in any downstream gravity draining sewer to be temporarily connected to a nearby sewer. All permits issued and installations made pursuant to this section shall be on a temporary basis only, and shall be subject to the following terms and conditions: 
1.	The area shall be subject to section 13.08.100(B) and section 13.08.100(C) of this Code. 
2.	The temporary line referred to in this section shall be only at such locations as shall be approved by the director. 
3.	All such installations shall be made, maintained and operated without cost of expense to the city. 
4.	Upon the installation of permanent sewers contiguous to the area being serviced by such temporary installations, the said temporary line shall be abandoned, and connection shall be made to the permanent sewers at no cost to the City of Willcox. 
5.	All charges and expenditures, including rental charges incurred or paid by the applicant in installing and maintaining such temporary line, shall in no manner be considered as having been incurred or paid with respect to any permanent sewer improvement district, private contract authorized by this resolution, or any sewer installed by the city. 
Chapter 13.09 - USE OF MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM 
Sections: 
Public Sewers 
Private Disposal 
PUBLIC SEWERS 

13.09.010 - Connection required, generally. 
    The use of any premises in the city in such a manner as to create sewage thereon not discharged into the public sewer system of this city is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Every water closet or privy connected and used in any building, not connected with the public sewer system, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. This section shall be inapplicable to premises where connection with said sewerage system is not feasible. Such connection with the public sewer system is hereby declared to be feasible as to any premises within 300 feet and adjacent to any public sewer. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.020 - Connection of new buildings. 
    If any new house, building or structure to be used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes is constructed on any property within the boundaries of the city and if any point of said property is located within 300 feet and adjacent to a public sewer, the owner or builder of such house, building or structure shall be required, at his own expense, to construct suitable toilet facilities thereon and to connect such facilities thereon directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.030 - Connection of existing buildings. 
    If any house, building, structure or property presently exists within the boundaries of the city and is used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes; and if any point of the property which said house, building, or structure is located is within 300 feet and adjacent to any public sewer; and if the present sewage facilities for said house, building or structure are deemed to be defective, insufficient and ineffective by the director; the owner shall be required, at his own expense, to connect the toilet facilities therein to the public sewer of the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.040 - Permission required. 
    No person shall uncover any public sewer in the city for any purpose or make any connection thereto or uncover any of the connecting branches thereof or open any manholes or flush tanks therein except on written permission from the director. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.050 - Unpolluted waste prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into the sanitary sewer system any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff water, subsurface drainage, runoff water from ground or paved areas, cistern overflow or water from industrial cooling operations. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.060 - Connecting cesspools, privies, etc. 
    No person or persons shall connect to any sanitary sewer any private building cesspool, underground drain, privy, privy vault or any other channel conveying water. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.070 - Combined sewers prohibited. 
    Combined sewers of storm water and sanitary wastes shall not be constructed within the city. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.080 - Harmful, dangerous wastes prohibited. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes in any public sewer. 
A.	Any liquid or vapor discharged from an industrial plant having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit; 
B.	Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 parts per million by weight of fat, oil or grease; 
C.	Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases; 
D.	Any garbage or vegetable parings of any kind; not to include discharges from domestic garbage disposals; 
E.	Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage treatment plant; 
F.	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths or higher than nine or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the structure, equipment and personnel of the sewage treatment plant; 
G.	Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process so as to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
H.	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character or quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant; 
I.	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance; 
J.	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
K.	Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant exceeds the limits of acceptability for such wastes established by the director for such materials; 
L.	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances in such concentrations as may exceed limits which may be established by the director and to meet the requirements of the state or federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction of such discharge to receiving waters; 
M.	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with state or federal regulations; 
N.	Materials which exert or cause: 
1.	Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
2.	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
3.	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorination requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.090 - Discharge of cyanide, cyanogen compounds. 
    Any person engaged in a manufacture or process, including deactivation of processes, in which cyanide or cyanogen compounds are used, shall have each and every room where said compounds are stored or used so constructed that none of said compounds can escape therefrom by means of any building sewer or drain or otherwise enter, either directly or indirectly, any sanitary sewer or storm sewer except as specifically permitted in this section. 
    Any person wishing to discharge cyanide or cyanogen compound-bearing wastes to a sanitary sewer shall submit detailed plans of the waste collection system and, where necessary of a pretreatment system to the director for his approval. Subsequent to receiving the approval of the director and to the issuance of a permit to the city for said applicant by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (A.D.E.Q.) certain dilute wastes may be discharged to the sanitary sewer providing the cyanide and cyanogen compound in the waste does not at any time exceed a concentration of two milligrams per liter. The maximum rate at which such wastes may be discharged to the sewer shall be fixed by a specific agreement between the city and such person. Discharge without such agreement is prohibited. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.100 - Industrial wastes bearing metallic ions. 
    Industrial wastes bearing metallic ions proposed to be discharged into a city sewer shall be controlled as follows: 
A.	When the maximum rate of flow of such wastes is less than 50 gallons per minute, the maximum concentration of metallic ions which may be present at any time is: 
Cadmium ..... 5.0 mg/l 
Chromium ..... 5.0 mg/l 
Copper ..... 5.0 mg/l 
Zinc ..... 5.0 mg/l 
B.	When the maximum rate of flow of such wastes is more than 50 but less than 100 gallons per minute, the maximum concentration of metallic ions which may be present at any time is: 
Cadmium ..... 2.5 mg/l 
Chromium ..... 2.5 mg/l 
Copper ..... 2.5 mg/l 
Zinc ..... 2.5 mg/l 
C.	When the maximum rate of flow of such wastes will exceed 100 gallons per minute, the maximum concentration of metallic ions which may be present at any time shall be established by the director for each specific case, but he shall not permit concentrations higher than those shown in subsection (B) above. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.110 - Separators and interceptors. 
A.	Grease separators shall be required in all buildings or sewers servicing meat packing plants and/or hotels, motels, restaurants and any institution or place in which meals are served. 
B.	Grit interceptors shall be required in all buildings sewers servicing garages, filling stations, automobile laundries, and other establishments where grit is a factor. 
C.	Maintenance and operation of both grease separators and grit interceptors shall be performed in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
D.	Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, and in a continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.120 - Wastes subject to review, approval, pretreatment. 
    The admission into sanitary sewers of any waters or wastes having the following characteristics: 
A.	A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or 
B.	Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
C.	Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in sections 13.09.080 and 13.09.090; or 
D.	Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily flow of the city. 
shall be subject to review and approval of the director and the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be required to: 
1.	Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
2.	Reduce objectionable characteristics and constituents to within the maximum limits provided in sections 13.09.080 and 13.09.090; or 
3.	Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.130 - Corrective precautions authorized. 
A.	If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this division and which in the judgment of the director may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the director may: 
1.	Reject the wastes; 
2.	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.	Require control over quantities and rate of discharge; and/or 
4.	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by the existing sewer charges under provisions of a resolution of the city council. 
B.	If the director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of such facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the director and to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. No such wastes or waters shall be permitted to be discharged in to the public sewers of the city until the plans and designs for such pretreatment facilities have been approved by the director. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.140-13.09.190 - Reserved. 
PRIVATE DISPOSAL 
13.09.200 - Required. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, as provided for in this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.210 - Abandonment when sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in this chapter, within six months of such availability, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter. Any septic tanks and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and removed from use as approved by the director. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.220 - Operation, maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.230 - Privies, cesspools prohibited. 
    Use or construction of privies, privy vaults and cesspools is prohibited. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.240 - Disposal of waste material; permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any waste material pumped from any septic tank or other private sewage disposal facilities into the public sewer system without obtaining a permit for such discharge from the director. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.250 - Permit fee. 
    Permits for the discharge of approved waste materials shall be issued upon the payment of a fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.260 - Permit regulations. 
    The director is authorized to promulgate and issue such other regulations for the issuance of private waste disposal permits as are necessary for the safe and lawful operation of the city sewer system. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
13.09.270 - Superiority of state, county regulations. 
    Requirements that may be imposed by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality or the Cochise County Health Department controlling the construction, use or maintenance of private sewage disposal systems shall supersede sections 13.09.200, 13.09.220, and 13.09.230 to the extent that conflict may arise. 
(Ord. NS148, § 2, 1991) 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER REGULATIONS AND FEES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. NS309, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, repealed §§ 13.12.020-13.12.100 and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Former §§ 13.12.020-13.12.100 pertained to water department; meter fees and water rates generally; meter fees and water rates enumerated; reconnection fee; installation and connection fees; extension of water lines on a force account basis; defective meters; payments-disposition of delinquent bill; application for service-deposit; and derived from prior code §§ 13.12.020-13.12.100. 

13.12.010 - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    "Administrator" means the city manager or designee. 
    "A.R.S." means Arizona Revised Statutes. 
    "City" means the City of Willcox. 
    "City manager" means the City Manager of Willcox, or designee. 
    "Consumer," "user" and "customer" as used in this chapter, mean as the context requires, the person or legal entity which purchases water or requests other services under this chapter from the city or the ultimate consumer of said water or services. 
    "Developer" or "subdivider" mean any persons or legal entity either: 
1.	Engaged in the requesting and financing of a water main extension beyond the city water mains; or 
2.	The owner or person in control of any land or lands of an unsubdivided nature and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Extension reimbursement charge" means that charge assessed for the purpose of reimbursing a developer, subdivider or any other person who has paid for the cost of the installation of water mains or extensions. 
    "Meter connection fee" means that fee set by the city for the purpose of paying the cost of the materials and labor required for the installation of a water meter in connecting same to the water distribution system and consumers system. 
    "Monthly service charge" means that charge established by the city for the purpose of paying a portion of the costs of repairing, replacing and operating the water distribution system of the city. 
    "Person" is any natural individual or any organization which has legal status. 
    "Reconnection fee" means that fee set by the city for the service of reconnecting a meter disconnected for nonpayment of fees and charges. 
    "Renters (third parties)" are those persons who have made legal arrangements to use or occupy residential or commercial units subject to this section of the City Code. 
(Prior code § 13.12.010; Ord. NS309, § 2, 2011) 
13.12.020 - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.	Protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city; 
B.	Protect the environment by establishing minimum standards for the safe and sanitary delivery of potable water; 
C.	Establish necessary fees for the operation of the city's water system; to recover the city's costs to provide such services. As authorized by A.R.S. 9-511.01. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-12-20), 2011) 
State Law reference- Municipal water; A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.12.021 - Establishment of a fund. 
    There is hereby established an enterprise fund for the purpose of collecting monies and making payments for the operation of the water system of the city. Such fund shall be operated as an "enterprise fund" as that term is defined by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA). A.R.S. 9-511A. 
State Law reference- Municipal water; A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.12.022 - Establishment of rates. 
A.	The city council shall review the estimated expenses, incomes, reserves, and fund balance annually in April for the fiscal year to begin the next July 1. 
B.	The city council shall set such fees and late charges, by resolution, that shall produce the sufficient estimated revenues that combined with available fund balances are sufficient to pay all of the estimated costs in the ensuing fiscal year and provide an operational reserve of three months. 
State Law reference- Municipal water; A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.12.100 - Responsibility for payment of charges. 
A.	The property owner is responsible for the payment of water charges under this section of the City Code. 
B.	If the property is residential property; the person(s) residing at the property is responsible for the payment of all charges under this section of the City Code. A property owner, at its sole discretion, may contract for water service with a municipality and shall provide payment for those services. 
C.	The administrator may pursue collection of outstanding amounts by all legal means possible, including but not limited to; use of deposits, liens on property, and denial of hook ups or initiation of service, when there are outstanding amounts owed to the city by the parties requesting the hookup. 
D.	The person who has opened the account and the city have a responsibility to monitor the service provided and to make any claims for payment in a timely manner. 
E.	The city will not pursue any charges for services for which a bill has not been issued by the city for a period of six months. This does not erase past debts owed the city under subsection (C). The purpose of this section is for errors in billing. 
F.	The maximum time that the city will permit for refunds, misbillings, or incorrect charges for service of any type relating to water service is six months. 
G.	Each person opening a water service account shall be required to post a security deposit. 
1.	If the person is the owner of the property, they shall be required, prior to the initiation of service; to post a deposit in the estimated amount of one month's water charges. 
2.	If the charges for water service are being collected by the city through the city's billing department; and the property is rented to a third party; or the account is opened by any person other than the person receiving the services; or in the case of residential property, the person residing at the property is some person other than the owner of the property; there shall be deposited with the city, prior to service being initiated: a security deposit equaling twice the estimated monthly water charge. 
H.	Security deposit requirements may be waived when: 
1.	The person has an existing history of no delinquent payments with the City of Willcox for the last two years. 
2.	The person is moving from one physical location to a different physical location and has a deposit on file which has sufficient amount in it to cover the new location. 
3.	The person provides the City of Willcox with a letter of reference from a similar type utility showing a history of no delinquent payments for a two-year period. The history must be within the last four years. 
I.	No interest will be paid on deposits. 
J.	Deposits may be credited to the account upon: 
1.	Closure of the account. 
2.	Maintenance of a two-year history with no delinquencies. 
K.	If an account becomes delinquent more than two times in a 12-month period or if the account is shut off for delinquency, after the deposit has been credited to the account as per subsection (J) above: A new deposit shall be required to continue or reestablish service. 
L.	Renters (third parties) establishing accounts must comply with requirements of subsection (B), but may use the provisions above in subsection (H). 
State Law reference- Municipal water; A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.12.110 - Installation and connection fees. 
A.	Before the water department will install a new service and meter, the applicant for water service shall pay to the water department installation, connection and service fees as established by resolution of the city council. The council may classify such fees upon the basis of size of the meter used. If installation costs exceed the minimum established by resolution of the council, then in lieu thereof the applicant shall be required to pay the actual installation costs plus 15 percent. 
B.	The charges provided for in this section shall be made on all installations within the city. On all installations outside the city, the charges shall be an additional 50 percent above what the charge would have been within the city. 
C.	On all new water meter installations a gate valve shall be installed on the customer's side of the meter, the cost of the same to be included in the above mentioned charges. 
D.	When a new meter and service are installed under this section, meter service charges shall be made from the date of installation, regardless of whether any water is used. 
E.	Where multiple installation of service is to be made, as by a subdivider, charges for installation of services and meters may be reduced or waived to the extent that the subdivider or user furnishes meters, materials or labor. Such revised or waived charges shall be set by the director of public works and the city manager, subject to the approval of the city council. 
F.	Meters other than those furnished by the city shall be approved by the director of public works before installation thereof. 
(Prior code § 13.12.110) 
13.12.120 - Extensions of water lines. 
A.	Any person desiring the extension of water service to one or more parcels of property created either by record of survey, regular subdivision or any other manner, and which property has not received, or by virtue of its alteration does no longer receive, water service directly through a service connection with the water department, shall make written application to the water department, setting forth the legal description of the property to be served, and upon demand shall submit a sketch or map of the proposed development showing pertinent facts and information. 
B.	When an application under this section has been received by the water department, and if the city at its sole option and election elects to perform the construction on a force account basis, the applicant shall make payment in advance to the city in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. The city may classify these payments upon the basis of paved and unpaved streets. 
C.	Where mains larger than six inches are required to serve the property of applicant, applicant shall bear the cost of eight-inch mains. Where in the judgment of the city engineer the overall distribution system of the city requires mains larger than six inches, but six-inch mains would satisfactorily serve the property of the applicant, the city shall bear the additional cost attributable to installing eight-inch or larger mains. 
D.	Until the expiration of ten years from the date of acceptance by the city, whenever any new main line is constructed and paid for under the provisions of this section or constructed by and at the expense of the subdivider, additional connections shall not be made to said main line until the person requesting such connection shall have paid his proportionate share of the original cost of such line as calculated by the city engineer. Such proportionate share of the costs shall be collected by the city and paid to the person at whose expense such main line was first constructed, or his heirs, administrators, executors, successors or assigns. 
E.	All charges set forth in this section are for users or consumers within the city. For users or consumers located outside of the city, the charges shall be as set forth in this chapter plus 50 percent. The city reserves, however, the right to refuse service outside the city or to grant service upon other terms and conditions. 
F.	If and when, in the option of the city manager and the director of public works, the welfare of the water department and its consumers warrants, and special considerations exist, the water department may propose to the city council a special contract relating to cost sharing or refunds upon such terms as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
G.	Main line extensions and service connections including engineering design therefor may be made by the contractor under the subdivision regulations of the city; provided that all main lines, valves, service connections, fire hydrants, etc., shall not be less than the minimum standards as established under this chapter, and provided further that all plans are subject to the approval of the city engineer or the city manager. Inspection of all such work installed by the contractor shall be paid for by the contractor. The inspector shall be furnished or selected by the director of public works or the city manager. 
(Prior code § 13.12.120) 
13.12.130 - Pavement repair fee. 
    Any construction of water lines which is not covered by this chapter and which necessitates a breaking of an existing pavement shall subject the person to whose benefit the break is made to a pavement repair fee as established by the city council. 
(Prior code § 13.12.130) 
13.12.140 - Approval of construction plans and materials. 
    All new water lines to be installed in the future shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city engineer or city manager and constructed of materials of a quality not less than standards as established by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 13.12.140) 
13.12.150 - Approved systems to become property of city water department. 
    All water distribution system extension when approved and accepted by the city, including main lines, service connections, meters, fire hydrants and all other parts and materials shall become the property of the city. Such water distribution system extensions shall be granted, sold, given or conveyed to the city by such documents approved by the city, and free and clear of all lines, charges and encumbrances of every nature and description. The city shall require such grant, gift, sale or conveyance as a condition precedent to its acceptance and approval of the water distribution system. 
(Prior code § 13.12.150) 
13.12.160 - Discontinuance of water service. 
    The supply of city water may be discontinued at any time without notice to water consumers, when required by the necessities of the service of the water department, and the city shall in no way be liable for damage resulting from such discontinuance. 
(Prior code § 13.12.160) 
13.12.170 - Unlawful acts. 
A.	No person, except a duly authorized agent of the water department, shall turn the water on or off from any building or premises, and no person shall tap, cut, or remove any water pipe laid in any streets, alleys or easements, unless written permission to do so has been granted by the city manager, the director of public works or the water department. 
B.	Any duly authorized agent of the water department shall be allowed free access to make personal examination of the premises of any applicant or consumer of water for the inspection of water, pipes and equipment connected therewith. 
(Prior code § 13.12.180) 
13.12.180 - Disputed water charges. 
    In the event of disputes arising involving any charges made by the water department for any service, they shall be settled by the director of public works, subject to the approval of the city manager. If such disputes cannot be settled amiably they may be referred, in writing, to the city council for review and decision. Such decisions shall be final and binding. 
(Prior code § 13.12.180) 
13.12.190 - Delinquent utility payment charge. 
A.	There is established a charge of one and one-half percent per month for delinquent payment for water, gas, sewer and garbage utilities and services, calculated on the unpaid delinquent amounts for such utilities and services. 
B.	The delinquent charge shall be assessed against all accounts upon which payment is not received in the utility offices of the City of Willcox prior to the close of business hours on the twentieth day of each month. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, if the twentieth day of the month falls on a business holiday recognized by the city, payments received before the close of business hours on the next following business day shall be deemed to have been timely received, and such payments shall be credited before assessing any penalty. 
(Ord. NS-19 §§ 1, 2, 1973) 
Chapter 13.13 - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL 
Sections: 

13.13.010 - Definitions. 
    "Department," as used in this chapter, means the municipal water department for the City of Willcox. 
    "UPC," as used in this chapter, means the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by section 15.12.010 of the Willcox Municipal Code. 
    "Willcox Water," as used in this chapter means the municipal water department for the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 12-28-1993) 
13.13.020 - Purpose. 
A.	To protect the public water supply of Willcox Water from the possibility of contamination or pollution from the backflow of contaminants and pollutants into the public potable water supply system. 
B.	To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, with a customer's internal potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems. 
C.	To provide for a continuing program to monitor, control, and prevent cross-connection contamination or pollution of the public potable water supply system. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 12-28-1993) 
13.13.030 - Backflow prevention required. 
A.	An approved backflow prevention method shall be utilized or installed at every service connection when it is determined by Willcox Water that the public potable water system may be subject to contamination, pollution or deterioration of its sanitary quality or condition. 
B.	The backflow prevention method to be utilized or installed shall be determined by Willcox Water. The method of backflow prevention which an applicant will be required to use shall be of a nature sufficient to protect the public potable water supply against potential hazards from contamination or pollution. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.040 - Hazard potential. 
    The degree of hazard potential to the public potable water supply and system from a customer's water supply system shall be determined using the following hazard factors: 
A.	Contamination. Any condition, device or practice which, in the judgement of Willcox Water, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the potable water customers. 
B.	Cross-connection. An actual or potential plumbing connection that is not properly protected by an approved backflow prevention method. 
C.	Hazard. An actual or potential threat of backflow which may cause severe damage to the physical facilities of the public potable water supply system or which may have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
D.	Pollution. An actual or potential threat to the physical facilities or the public potable water supply system or to the public potable water supply which would constitute a nuisance or cause objectionable odor, taste, or discolor or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.050 - Backflow prevention methods; list. 
A.	A backflow prevention method shall be any assembly or others means designed to prevent backflow. The following are the recognized backflow prevention methods which Willcox Water may require under section 13.13.030 or 13.13.060. 
1.	Air Gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the opening of the pipe or faucet supplying potable water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved air gap shall be at least double the diameter or the supply pipe or faucet and in no case less than one inch. 
2.	Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly (hereinafter "RPA". An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves, and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks. 
3.	Double Check Valve Assembly (hereinafter "DCVA"). An assembly composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test cocks. 
4.	Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assembly (hereinafter "PVB". An assembly containing an independently operating, loaded check valve and an independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly shall be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly. 
B.	Willcox Water shall maintain a list of approved backflow prevention assemblies, by type and manufacturer. The list shall be available to any customer required to install a backflow prevention assembly. 
C.	A backflow prevention method may be approved by Willcox Water if it has received the approval of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California and, for assemblies, has a local manufacturer's parts and service center. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.060 - Backflow prevention methods required. 
A.	Whenever the following items exist or activities are conducted on premises served by the public potable water system, a potential hazard to the public potable water supply shall be presumed, and a backflow prevention method of the type specified herein for that item or activity must be utilized or installed at each service connection for that premise. The type and size of the assembly shall be determined by Willcox Water. The bases for these requirements are contained in the Willcox Water Manual of backflow prevention and cross-connection control program as is further set forth in section 13.13.180. 
1.	Cooling tower, boiler, condenser, chiller, and other cooling systems utilizing potable water: RPA. 
2.	Tank, vessel, receptacle, and all other water connections including mobile units without approved air gap (except emergency vehicles and private swimming pools): RPA 
3.	Ice maker (other than a residential service): RPA 
4.	Water cooled equipment, boosters, pumps or autoclaves: RPA 
5.	Water treatment facilities and all water processing equipment (other than residential water softeners): RPA 
6.	Bottle washer, bedpen washer, garbage can washer: RPA 
7.	Pesticide, herbicide, fertilizer, and chemical applicators (other than typical in-home use): RPA 
8.	Aspirator: RPA 
9.	Commercial dishwashers, food processing and/or preparation equipment, carbonation equipment, or other food service processes utilizing potable water: RPA 
10.	Decorative fountain, baptismal, or any location water is exposed to atmosphere: RPA 
11.	X-ray equipment, plating equipment, or any other photographic processing equipment utilizing potable water: RPA 
12.	Auxiliary water supply and/or connections to unapproved water supply systems: RPA 
13.	Reclaimed water customers: RPA 
14.	Recreational vehicle dump stations (sewer), or any other location where potable water may be exposed to bacteria, virus, or gas: RPA 
15.	Any premises on which chemicals, oils, solvents, pesticides, disinfectants, cleaning agents, acids or other pollutants and/or contaminants are handled in a manner by which they may come in direct contact with potable water, or their is evidence of the potential to contact potable water (other than typical, infrequent in-home applications): RPA 
16.	Materials and piping systems unapproved by the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) or Environmental Protection Agency for potable water usage (for fire systems see the following listings: (20), (21) and (22): Contaminant: RPA-Pollutant: DCUA 
17.	Separately metered or unprotected irrigation systems, and construction water services: RPA or PVB as allowed. 
18.	Any premises where a cross-connection is maintained or where internal backflow protection is required pursuant to the Uniform Plumbing Code: RPA 
19.	Multi-metered properties with more than one meter connected to another or any building three stories or greater than 34 feet in height from service level: DCVA 
20.	Fire systems - American Water Water Works Association Classes 1 and 2 and all systems constructed of a piping material not approved for potable water pursuant to the Uniform Plumbing Code as adopted by the City of Willcox: DCVA or Double Detector CVA. Furthermore, fire systems, Classes 1 and 2, that are under the jurisdiction of the City of Willcox Department of Public Safety Fire Division or a fire district that requires periodic sprinkler system testing similar to the city's are exempt from this ordinance: DCVA 
21.	Fire systems - American Water Works Association Classes 3, 4, 5, 6: RPA or RPA with detector 
22.	Fire systems which require backflow protection and where backflow protection is required on the industrial/domestic service connection that is located on the same premises, both service connections will have adequate backflow protection for the highest degree of hazard affecting either system: RPA - (Requirement may be waived by Willcox Water.) 
B.	When two or more of the activities listed above are conducted on the same premises and served by the same service connection or multiple service connections, the most restrictive backflow prevention method required for any of the activities conducted on the premises shall be required to be utilized or installed at each service connection. The order of most restrictive to least restrictive backflow prevention methods shall be as follows: 
1.	Air gap (most restrictive). 
2.	Reduced pressure principle assembly (RPA). 
3.	Double check valve assembly (DCVA). 
4.	Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB) (least restrictive). 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.070 - Backflow assembly installation requirements. 
A.	Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed by the customer, at the customer's expense and in compliance with the standards and specifications adopted by the City of Willcox, at each service connection. The assembly shall have a diameter at least equal to the diameter of the service connection. 
B.	The assembly shall be in an accessible location approved by Willcox Water. The reduced pressure principle assembly, pressure vacuum breaker assembly, and the double check valve assembly shall be installed above ground. 
C.	When a customer desires a continuous water supply, two backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed parallel to one another at the service connection to allow a continuous water supply during testing of the backflow prevention assemblies. When backflow prevention assemblies are installed parallel to one another, the sum of the cross sectional areas of the assemblies shall be at least equal to the cross sectional area of the service connection. 
D.	No person shall alter, modify, bypass or remove a backflow prevention method without the approval of Willcox Water. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.080 - Installation of backflow prevention assemblies for fire systems. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 13.13.060 the following shall also apply. 
A.	Fire Systems. Fire protection systems consist of sprinklers, hose connections, and hydrants. Sprinkler systems may be dry or wet, open or closed. Systems of fixed-spray nozzles may be used indoors or outdoors for protection of flammable-liquid and other hazardous processes. It is standard practice, especially in cities, to equip automatic sprinkler systems with fire department pumper connections. 
A meter (compound, detector check) should not normally be permitted as part of a backflow prevention assembly. An exception may be made, however, if the meter and backflow prevention assembly are specifically designed for that purpose. 
For cross-connection control, fire protection systems shall be classified on the basis of water source and arrangement of supplies as follows: 
1.	Class 1. Direct connections from public water mains only; no pumps, tanks, or reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no antifreeze or other additives or any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to atmosphere, dry wells, or other safe outlets. 
2.	Class 2. Same as Class 1, except that booster pumps may be installed in the connections from the street mains. Booster pumps do not affect the potability of the system; it is necessary, however, to avoid drafting so much water that pressure in the water main is reduced below 20 psi. 
3.	Class 3. Direct connection from public water supply main plus one or more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking suction from aboveground covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks (all storage facilities are filled or connected to public water only, the water in the tanks to be maintained in a potable condition. 
4.	Class 4. Directly supplied from public mains similar to Classes 1 and 2, and with an auxiliary water supply on or available to the premises; or an auxiliary supply may be located within 1,700 feet of the pumper connection. Class 4 systems will normally require backflow protection at the service connection. The type (air gap or reduced pressure) will generally depend on the quality of the auxiliary supply. 
5.	Class 5. Directly supplied from public mains, and interconnected with auxiliary supplies, such as: pumps taking suction from reservoirs exposed to contamination, or rivers and ponds; driven wells, mills or other industrial water systems; or where antifreeze or other additives are used. Classes 4 and 5 systems normally would need maximum protections (air gap or reduced pressure) to protect the public potable water system. 
6.	Class 6. Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump suction tanks. Class 6 system protection would depend on the requirements of both industry and fire protection, and could only be determined by a survey of the premises. 
B.	When a backflow prevention assembly is required for a water service connection supplying water only to a fire system, the assembly shall be installed on the service line in compliance with standard specifications adopted by the City of Willcox. (Installation of DCVA's or DDCVA's in a vertical position on the riser may be allowed on fire systems with Willcox Water approval.) 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.090 - Inspections. 
    A customer's water system shall be available at all times during business operations for premises inspection by Willcox Water. The inspection shall be conducted to determine whether any cross connection or other hazard potentials exist and to determine compliance with this chapter and modifications, if any, pursuant to section 13.13.120. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.100 - Permit required. 
A.	Installation permits for the installation of all backflow prevention assemblies required by Willcox Water shall be obtained from Willcox Water prior to installation. A separate permit shall be obtained for each required backflow prevention assembly to be installed. A separate permit shall be required for replacement of a backflow prevention assembly which has been previously installed. 
B.	Notification. It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify Willcox Water, orally or in writing, that said work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given not less than 24 hours before the work is to be inspected and shall be given only if there is reason to believe that the work done will meet Uniform Plumbing Code and University of Southern California standards, as are referenced in the backflow prevention manual. 
C.	Stop Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of the UPC or this Code, Willcox Water or an authorized representative may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by Willcox Water to proceed with the work. 
D.	Suspension or Revocation. Willcox Water or any authorized employee may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this Code, whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation of any provision of the UPC or this Code. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.110 - Test, maintenance, records. 
A.	The customer shall test and service backflow prevention assemblies at least once a year. If the testing reveals the assembly to be defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall perform any necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the assembly, if necessary, which will return the assembly to satisfactory operating condition. 
B.	If Willcox Water or a customer learns or discovers, during the interim period between tests, that an assembly is defective or in unsatisfactory operating condition, the customer shall perform any necessary repairs, including replacement or overhaul of the assembly, if necessary, which will return the assembly to satisfactory operating condition. 
C.	The annual testing shall be performed by an individual certified to conduct such testing by an agency approved by Willcox Water. A list of certified, approved and recognized individuals will be maintained by Willcox Water and will be available upon request to all persons required to install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly. A certification issued to a backflow prevention assembly tester may be revoked or suspended for improper testing, maintenance, reporting or other improper practices. 
D.	The customer shall maintain records, on forms approved by Willcox Water, of the results of all tests and all servicing, repairs, overhauls or replacements of the backflow prevention assembly. A copy of the records shall be promptly submitted to Willcox Water after completion of the activity for which the record is made. 
E.	Fire systems shall not be out of service for more than eight consecutive hours due to testing, maintenance, or repairs. The Willcox Department of Public Safety Fire Division shall be notified immediately of any testing, maintenance, or repairs that place a fire system out of service. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.120 - Modification of backflow prevention requirements. 
    If Willcox Water determines, after inspection of the customer's system, that a backflow prevention method less restrictive than that required in section 13.13.060 will provide adequate protection of the public potable water supply from the degree of hazard potential by the customer's water system, the customer may appeal to the backflow and cross connection hearing committee for relief as provided in section 13.13.140. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.130 - Discontinuance of water service. 
A.	If Willcox Water discovers that a customer's required backflow prevention method has been improperly tested or maintained, the water service to that service connection shall be disconnected if the situation is not remedied within the time specified in the notice sent to the customer as required by this section. The service shall not be restored until the condition is remedied. 
B.	Water service to a fire sprinkler system shall be subject to disconnection under this section. If a situation, which will result in discontinuance of water service in subsection (A) above, is not remedied within the time provided in the notice sent to the customer, multiple violations will accrue. 
C.	Prior to disconnecting any water service because a condition set forth in subsection (A) above exists, Willcox Water shall issue a notice to the customer describing the condition and notifying the customer that the condition must be remedied within 15 days form the initial inspection date. If there is no immediate action on the part of the customer, a second notice by certified mail shall be sent ten days after the initial inspection date stating that water service will be disconnected within five days of the second notice. If there is still no action, a turn off notice shall be sent to the customer stating that service will be disconnected on a date certain (approximately two days from the date of the turn off notice) (For retrofit notification procedures, see section 13.13.160.) 
D.	Willcox Water may disconnect, without notice, water service to any customer when Willcox Water discovers that a direct, contaminated cross connection exists in the customer's water system or that a backflow prevention method has been bypassed or removed. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.140 - Administrative appeal. 
    An administrative appeal may be requested whenever a violation or disputed of any of the requirements of this chapter is determined, whether during construction or at the plan review stage, and the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the staff because of code interpretation, unreasonable hardship or other acceptable reasons. The appeal may be made to the backflow and cross connection hearing committee as follows: 
1.	The applicant shall file a written appeal on the forms provided by the Willcox Director of Public Works and Services. 
2.	The appeal will be heard by the hearing committee within seven days, at regular specified time. 
3.	The hearing committee shall consist of the director of public works and services, the City of Willcox Building Inspector, and the cross connection supervisor. Additional inspectors or other technical persons may be added for a particular appeal, at the discretion of the director of public works and services. 
4.	Adequate information shall be provided by the applicant in order to fully describe the conditions in question. 
5.	The applicant may, but is not required to, personally attend the hearing committee meeting. 
6.	If an appeal is denied by the hearing committee, the applicant shall comply or appeal to the Willcox City Council within ten days of a denial by the hearing committee. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.150 - Violation a civil infraction. 
    It shall be a civil infraction punishable pursuant to section 1.04.010 of the Willcox Municipal Code for any person, enterprise, or corporation to violate any of the requirement of this chapter. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.160 - Retroactive application. 
A.	The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all new water customers or users and all water customers or users existing prior to the enactment date of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for multiple-metered premises presenting only a pollution hazard as defined in section 13.13.040 existing as of the effective date of this chapter, only one new or additional backflow prevention assembly shall be required to be installed within 18 months from the initial inspection notice and thereafter only one additional backflow assembly installation shall be required during any 12-month period. Noncompliance may result in discontinuance or water service without further notice. 
B.	Backflow prevention assemblies installed prior to enactment of this chapter, and which do not comply with the requirements set forth herein, shall be replaced with assemblies which comply with the standards set forth herein, within 18 months from initial inspection notice. 
C.	The initial backflow assembly installation permit fee required by section 13.13.170 shall be waived by Willcox Water for retrofit backflow prevention assemblies only. 
D.	Meters documented as running backwards or contamination conditions as defined in section 13.13.040 shall be immediately addressed under the provisions of section 13.13.130, subparagraph (D). 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.170 - Fees. 
    The fee for any permit required pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
13.13.180 - Backflow and cross connection manual incorporated by reference. 
A.	All information not specifically set forth in this chapter (standard details, etc.) will be a matter of public record and will be contained in the following document: 
CITY OF WILLCOX, ARIZONA WILLCOX WATER MANUAL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM DATED, ____________ OR THE LATEST REVISION THERETO 
which is adopted by this reference as part of this chapter and which shall be available to the public during Willcox Water's normal business hours for inspection and purchase. Three copies of said manual shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. NS149, § 1, 1993) 
Chapter 13.14 - SEWER PRETREATMENT 
Sections: 
General Provisions 
Definitions 
Sewer Usage 
Pretreatment of Wastewater 
Violation 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 

13.14.101 - Purpose and policy. 
A.	This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Willcox, hereinafter referred to as "city" and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are to: 
1.	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation and efficient functioning of its parts; 
2.	Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
3.	Protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
4.	Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge away from the publicly owned treatment works; 
5.	Enable the city to comply with its Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject; 
6.	Promote waste minimization and pollution prevention; and 
7.	Protect the environment. 
B.	This chapter shall apply to all persons discharging to the publicly owned treatment works. This chapter establishes discharge prohibitions/limitations; authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.102 - Intent. 
    This chapter is intended to: 
A.	Establish pollutant discharge limits for wastewater discharged into the publicly owned treatment works; 
B.	Establish the authority for the city manager to designate a director of public works to implement and enforce the provisions of this Code; 
C.	Establish a requirement for pretreatment of wastewater that does not meet the pollutant limitations; 
D.	Establish steps the city will use to monitor and enforce the discharge limitations to protect water and bio-solids resources; and 
E.	Establish special procedures for receiving and processing discharges from septic pumpers. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.103 - Administration. 
A.	The provisions of this Code shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or the designated director of public works, and such other officers or employees of the city as the city manager may approve, direct, or designate. 
B.	The designated director of public works shall be responsible to develop, implement and enforce policies, procedures, and/or guidelines to ensure the water reclamation facility pretreatment design, permitting, and discharge limitation requirements are met by all users of sewer system. 
C.	As such, a written inventory or survey of each significant industrial user will be conducted to determine permit status. 
D.	Results of the survey or inventory will be analyzed and appropriate measures will be established, in the form of an industrial wastewater permit, to ensure the publicly owned treatment works is protected. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.104 - Authority to enforce. 
    Authorization for the regulations set forth in this chapter is granted to the City of Willcox pursuant to A.R.S. 9-240(B)(5)(a) as such may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.105 - Enforcement jurisdiction of city. 
    Jurisdiction for enforcement of the regulations set forth in this chapter is granted to the City of Willcox pursuant to A.R.S. 9-240(B)(28)(b) as such may be amended from time to time and all proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, whether civil or criminal, shall be in the City of Willcox Magistrate Court. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
DEFINITIONS 
13.14.201 - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings: 
 ADEQ - Arizona Department of Environmental Quality  AZPDES - Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  BMPS - Best Management Practices  BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations  COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand  EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  gpd - gallons per day  IU - Industrial User  mg/l - milligrams per liter  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System  POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works  RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act  SIU - Significant Industrial User  TSS - Total Suspended Solids  µg/l - micrograms per liter  U.S.C. - United States Code  
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.202 - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
    "Alert level" means the concentration or loading at which a contaminate in the liquid or solid products of the POTW must be reported to regulators prior to a violation in the permit. 
    "AZPDES" means the Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
    "Best management practices" or "BMPS" means schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention, waste minimization, educational practices, maintenance procedures, or other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the amount of pollutants entering the publicly owned treatment works. 
    "Biochemical oxygen demand" or "BOD" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    "By-pass" means the intentional diversion of wastewater flows from any portion of a treatment process or the POTW. 
    "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    "Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 United States Code § 1251 et seq. 
    "Concentration" means the chemical and physical results indicating the amount of a characteristic in a defined unit of mass. 
    "Contaminant" means any chemical, biologic mass, metal or non-metal that at some concentration may become a pollutant or combine with any other characteristic of the wastewater to become a pollutant. 
    "Control manhole" means an access point into the sanitary sewer for the purpose of collecting a representative sample of wastewater discharge to determine compliance with this chapter. Access points used as control manholes will be approved by the water utilities manager. 
    "Discharge" means the disposal of sewage, pollutants, suspended solids, wastewater or any liquid from any user into the wastewater sewer and treatment system of the city. 
    "Discharge limit" means the concentration or loading defining the limitation of acceptable discharge of a contaminant in the liquid or solid products to a POTW. 
    "Environmental protection agency" or "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the federal agency charged with enforcement of the Clean Water Act. 
    "Existing source" means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    "Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    "Grease trap or interceptor" means a device used to separate oil, grease, and sand or any flammable wastes from wastewater. 
    "Indirect discharge" or "discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under any laws, rules or regulations of the United States, the State of Arizona or any political subdivision thereof. 
    "Industrial process water" means any liquid, pollutants, regulated substance, free-flowing waste, including polluted cooling water, resulting from any industrial or manufacturing process or from the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, with or without suspended solids, discharged from any non-single-family residential source. 
    "Industrial user" means any facility that discharges wastewater into the city's sewer system, including industrial facilities, commercial businesses, government agencies, food service and medical facilities, wastewater haulers, multi-family housing units consisting of five or more units, and or any other facility that is not designated as a single-family residential user. 
    "Interference" means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of any applicable NPDES or AZPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    "Nondomestic source" means discharges of any substances other than human excrement and household gray water derived from the ordinary living process of residential family homes. 
    "Pass through" means a contaminant or pollutant that may pass through and exit the POTW in concentrations that result in a violation or an alert of any end disposition of the liquid or solid products of the POTW. This shall include any contaminant or pollutant that may combine with any other characteristic of the wastewater and pass through the POTW that results in a violation of any end disposition of the liquid or solid products of the POTW. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all users and all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    "pH" means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    "Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, commercial food waste including but not limited to fats, oils, and grease, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    "Pretreatment" means any concentration of contaminants that exceeds the established discharge limits, including but not limited to: solid waste; incinerator residue; sewage screenings; sewage sludge; chemical wastes; biological materials; radioactive materials; pesticides; herbicides; fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals; munitions; petroleum products; heat, rock, sand, and industrial, municipal and agricultural garbage; wrecked or discarded equipment; cellar dirt and mining waste; industrial, municipal and agricultural wastes; or any other liquid, solid, gaseous, or any other hazardous substances discharged into the POTW. 
    "Pretreatment device" means equipment, material or structures to reduce, eliminate, or alter the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater before, or in lieu of, introducing pollutants into the POTW. 
    "Pretreatment sludge" means the waste byproduct from a commercial or manufacturing process that is removed as the result of cleaning the pretreatment device, including but not limited to plating sludge, decant water, lint, sand, fats, oil and grease and solids. 
    "Pretreatment standards" or "standards" means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits as may have been established pursuant to the laws or regulations of the United States, the State of Arizona, or of the city. 
    "Prohibited discharge standards" or "prohibited discharges" means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances and limitations on others; these prohibitions appear in section 13.14.302 of this chapter. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means garbage that has been shredded to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in sanitary sewers, with no particle greater than one-quarter-inch in any dimension. 
    "Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" means a "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) in which the city owns an interest. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    "Septic pumpers" means any mobile wastewater collection provider or contractor in the business of removing and disposing of septic waste. 
    "Septic tank waste" means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    "Severe noncompliance" means any willful, negligent or major violation of this Code, or the documented, habitual failure of any sewer system user to comply with the meaning or intent of this Code. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit that carries sewage to the publicly owned treatment works. 
    "Significant industrial user" means: 
1.	Any industrial user that is designated as such and required to obtain a permit by the director of public works, on the basis that the industrial user has the potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement; or 
2.	Any industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards as established by the EPA; or 
3.	Any industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewaters; or 
4.	Any industrial user that contributes a process waste stream that makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW. 
    "Significant noncompliance" means any single, accidental discharge resulting in an upset, or bypass caused by a user of the sewer system, or any minor failure of any sewer system user to comply with the meaning or intent of this chapter. 
    "Severe noncompliance" means multiple, meaning more than two, accidental discharges resulting in an upset, or bypass caused by a user of the sewer system, or minor failures of any sewer system user to comply with the meaning or intent of this chapter. 
    "Stormwater" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    "Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering or measurable by laboratory process. 
    "Upset" means any incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with discharge limits or alert limits because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset is the chemical, biochemical, biological or physical failure of a process to properly treat or control the quality of the wastewater discharged to a sewer, or the liquid and solid products discharged from a POTW. An upset does not include a failure due to consistent operational error, improper design of treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, inadequate preventative maintenance, or careless operation. 
    "User" or "industrial user" or "nondomestic user" means a source of discharge into the POTW from a nondomestic use. 
    "Wastewater" means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    "Wastewater," "sludge" or "biosolid" means the solids or semisolids, residues and precipitate separated from or created in wastewater. 
    "Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
SEWER USAGE 
13.14.301 - User requirements. 
A.	No person shall uncover, make any connections with, open into, use, alter or disturb any part of the POTW, or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining written approval from the city. 
B.	No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any part of the POTW, or appurtenance thereof. 
C.	All users of the POTW within the city shall be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.	Users of the sewer system will be required to follow, at their own expense, any policies, procedures or guidelines established by the city to ensure adherence to the proper pretreatment and discharge limitation requirements. 
E.	No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, swimming pool water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer, without complying with the requirements of this chapter. 
F.	No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass-through or interference of the treatment process. 
G.	Any person considered a non-residential or industrial user shall not discharge, or cause to be discharged, any industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW, without first meeting with city staff to complete an inventory or survey of discharges and potential discharges, then staff shall determine if the user shall be categorized as: 
1.	Non-significant industrial user: After conducting the survey, if city staff determines the user to be a non-significant industrial user, the user may discharge wastewater into the POTW, providing they remain in compliance with this chapter in its entirety; or, 
2.	Significant industrial user: 
a.	After conducting the survey, if city staff determine the user to be a significant industrial user, the user will be required to obtain an industrial wastewater permit, and to comply with all of its requirements, before discharge of wastewater into the POTW can occur; and 
b.	Additionally, any costs associated with adhering to the permit, such as testing, pretreatment, maintenance of facility equipment, and reporting shall be at the user's expense. 
H.	No wastewater hauler or septic pumper shall discharge septic waste or other wastes into the POTW without first obtaining approval from the city based upon the following: 
1.	Wastewater haulers or septic pumpers shall be required to discharge hauled waste at city-designated disposal points only; 
2.	The director of public works shall develop and administer specific guidelines as to the procedure that shall be followed by wastewater haulers; and 
3.	Guidelines shall include, at a minimum, the current fee schedule, disposal procedure, testing requirements, and designation of a disposal site. 
I.	It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone to discharge wastewater, industrial wastes, industrial process waters, or hauled wastewater anywhere within the city limits other than at a designated POTW disposal site or connection as outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.302 - Prohibited discharges. 
A.	General Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all persons discharging to the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
B.	Specific Prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
1.	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F at the point of discharge, or 104 degrees F at the treatment plant headworks. 
2.	Any water or waste that may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter by weight, including: fat, mineral, organic oil, grease, or any waste that may form persistent oil emulsions. 
3.	Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gases: 
a.	Waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (or 60 degrees C), using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261.61; or 
b.	Pollutants that exceed ten percent of the lower explosive limit at any point within the POTW for any single reading, or more than five percent for any two consecutive readings. 
4.	Any solid waste or viscous matter: 
a.	Any garbage or vegetable parings of any kind; not to include discharges from domestic garbage disposals; or 
b.	Any ashes, cinder, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, grits such as brick, cement, stone carbide, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of wastewater treatment facilities. 
5.	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than nine, or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of wastewater treatment facilities. 
6.	Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, that will cause interference with the POTW. 
7.	Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facilities. This includes noxious or malodorous liquids, solids or gases that, either singly or by interaction with other wastes: 
a.	Are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life; or 
b.	Are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair; or 
c.	May result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; or 
d.	Are sufficient to cause the effluent (alone or in conjunction with other sources) to fail a toxicity test. 
8.	Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of a character or quantity that requires unusual attention or expense for their handling in the wastewater treatment facilities. 
9.	Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
10.	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
11.	Any wastewater, pollutants or septage trucked or hauled at discharge points that have not been designated and permitted by the department of public works. 
12.	Any waste or water containing metals, such as lead, mercury, chromium and cadmium, that cannot be destroyed or broken down through treatment. 
13.	Any waste or water containing toxic organic chemicals, such as solvents, pesticides, dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyl chemicals (PCBs), that cause interference or pass-through. 
14.	Wastewater imparting color that cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart color and/or unsettleable solids to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating any applicable NPDES or AZPDES permit. 
15.	Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
16.	Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
17.	Pollutants that will cause excessive corrosive structural damage to the POTW beyond that which is normally associated with the treatment of wastewater. 
18.	Any of the following prohibited substances: 
a.	BHC-Alpha. 
b.	BHC-Beta. 
c.	BHC-Gamma (Lindane). 
d.	Chrysene. 
e.	Heptachlor Epoxide. 
f.	Polychlorinated Biphenyl Compounds (PCBs). 
g.	Phenanthrene. 
19.	More than the maximum allowable daily discharge limits of the following substances: (This subsection modifies [section] 13.09.100). 
Pollutant Mass Concentration Sampling Method Arsenic 100 ug/l Composite Barium 10 mg/l Composite Benzene 130 ug/l Grab Boron 5000 ug/l Composite Cadmium 47 ug/l Composite Chlorine (total) 10 mg/l Grab Chloroform 420 ug/l Grab Chromium 1200 ug/l Composite Copper 1200 ug/l Composite Cyanide 600 ug/l Grab Cyanide (amenable to chlorination) 200 ug/l Grab Lead 500 ug/l Composite Manganese 83 mg/l Composite Mercury 4.6 ug/l Composite Methylene Chloride 4200 ug/l Composite Nickel 3980 ug/l Composite Oil and Grease (TPH) 100 mg/l Grab Phenols 0.05 mg/l Grab Selenium 100 ug/l Composite Silver 500 ug/l Composite Sulfides 10.0 mg/l Grab Sulfides (dissolved) 500 ug/l Grab Sulfides (total) 2.0 mg/l Composite Tetrachloroethylene 530 ug/l Grab Trichloroethylene 700 ug/l Grab Zinc 5400 ug/l Composite  
  
20.	Based on fume toxicity, more than the discharge limits for the following substances (all grab samples): 
Pollutant Mass Concentration (mg/l) 1,1,1-Trichloroethane 1.55 1,1-Dichloroethane 4.58 1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene 0.43 1,2-Dichlorobenzene 3.74 1,2-Dichloropropene 3.65 1,3-Dichloropropene 0.09 1,4-Dichlorobenzene 3.54 Actrilonitrile 1.24 Aroclor 1242 0.01 Aroclor 1254 0.005 Benzene 0.13 Bromomethane 0.002 Carbon Disulfide 0.06 Carbon Tetrachloride 0.03 Chlorobenzene 2.35 Chloroethane 0.42 Chloroform 0.42 Chloromethane 0.007 Dichlorodifluoromethane 0.04 Ethyl Benzene 1.59 Ethylene dichloride 1.05 Heptachlor 0.003 Hexachloro-1,3-butadiene 0.0002 Hexachloroethanle 0.96 Methyl ethyl ketone (2-butanone) 249 Methylene chloride 4.15 Tetrachloroethylene 0.53 Toluene 1.35 Trans-1,2-Dichloroethylene 0.28 Trichloroethylene 0.71 Trichlorofluoromethane 1.22 Vinyl chloride 0.003 Vinylidene chloride 0.003  
21.	Based on nitrification inhibition, the following substances shall not exceed the discharge limits below from a composite sample: 
*ND=Not detectable 
Pollutant Mass* Concentration (mg/l) 0-Cresol .12 1-Naphthylamine 45 2,2'-Bipyridine 23 2,4-Dinitrophenol ND 8-Hydroxyquinoline 7.5 Acetone 220 Allyl alcohol 1.9 Allyl chloride 18 Allyl isothicyanate ND Aniline ND Benzidine diHCI 12 Benzocaine ND Benzothiazole disulfide .38 Benzylamine ND Carbon disulfideCarbon disulfide .35 Chloroform .18 Diallyl ether 10 Dicyandiamide 25 Diguanide 5 Dimethylgloxime ND Dithiooximide ND Dodecylamine ND Ethanol 240 Ethylenediamine 41 Guanidine carbonate .16 Hexamethylene diamine 20 Hydazine 5.8 Mercaptobenzothiazole .03 Methyl isothiocyanate ND Methyl thiuronium sulfate .06 Methylamine hydrochloride 155 Monoethanolamine ND Napthylethylenediamine diHCl 29 Ninhydrin 31 Nitrapyrin ND n-Methylaniline 71 O-ethyl potassium carbonodithioate ND p-Aminopropiophenone 22 Phenol .05 p-Nitroaniline 46 p-Nitrobenzaldehyde 29 Potassium thiiocyanate 30 p-Phenylazoaniline ND Skatol .07 Sodium dimethyl dithiocarbamate ND Sodium methyl dithicarbamate 1.3 Tannic Acid ND Tetramethyl thiuram disulfide 3.0 Thioacetamide ND Thiosemicarbazide ND Thiourea ND Triethylamine ND Trihalomethyl-1,3,5-triazine ND Trimethylamine 11.8  
22.	Water or wastes that exceed the categorical pretreatment limits listed in 40 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Subch. N, pt. 405-471. 
23.	Biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 mg/l and/or total suspended solids greater than 350 mg/l by weight, unless approved by the public works director through an industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
24.	Materials which exert or cause: 
a.	Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); or, 
b.	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorination requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
25.	Other prohibited pollutants: 
a.	Inflows of any storm water, runoff, groundwater, street drainage, roof drainage, yard drainage, water from fountains, ponds, pools, and lawn sprays are not permitted to be discharged with the POTW; or 
b.	Any single-pass cooling or heating water, any blow-down or bleed water from HVAC, which causes problems with hydraulic loading are not permitted. 
26.	An increase in process water or any attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment, to achieve compliance with a discharge limit, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. 
27.	Any item containing any combined quantity of substances having any characteristics described in this section. 
28.	Healthcare-related waste that shall not be discharged to the sewer system by any means: 
a.	Any potential liquid wastes generated in the rooms of patients who are isolated because of a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease; or 
b.	Recognizable portions of the human anatomy; or 
c.	Equipment, instruments, utensils and other materials of a disposable nature that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms, and that are used in the rooms of patients with a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease, which by its nature requires their isolation by public health agencies; or 
d.	Wastes excluded by the other provisions of this Code, state laws and or federal regulations. 
29.	Any person engaged in a manufacture or process, including deactivation of processes, in which cyanide or cyanogen compounds are used, shall have each and every room where said compounds are stored or used so constructed that none of said compounds can escape therefrom by means of any building sewer or drain or otherwise enter, either directly or indirectly, any sanitary sewer or storm sewer except as specifically permitted in this section. Any person wishing to discharge cyanide or cyanogen compound-bearing wastes to a sanitary sewer shall submit detailed plans of the waste collection system and, where necessary of a pretreatment system to the director of public works for his approval. Subsequent to receiving the approval of the director and to the issuance of a permit to the city for said applicant by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (A.D.E.Q.) certain dilute wastes may be discharged to the sanitary sewer providing the cyanide and cyanogen compound in the waste does not at any time exceed the concentrations set forth in this section. The maximum rate at which such wastes may be discharged to the sewer shall be fixed by a specific agreement between the city and such person. Discharge without such agreement is prohibited. 
30.	Recreational vehicle wastewater shall be tested and treated as necessary to meet the requirements of this section. 
31.	Future revisions in state or federal law regarding the operation and protection of POTWs that may also effect the provisions of [section] 13.14.302 shall supersede any requirements of this section, and will become enforceable under the provisions of this chapter. 
32.	Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.303 - Local limits. 
A.	All persons owning or operating facilities or engaged in activities that will or may reasonably be expected to result in pollutants entering the City of Willcox sanitary sewer system or affecting the sanitary sewer system or affecting the POTW, shall undertake all practicable best management practices identified by the director of public works to minimize the discharge of pollutants. Such measures shall include the requirements imposed by this chapter, any applicable NPDES or AZPDES permits, and any written guidelines promulgated for general use by the director of public works. 
B.	The director of public works shall have the authority to: 
1.	Establish limitations for individual users or classes of users for various pollutants, materials, waters, or wastes that can be accepted into the sanitary sewer system; 
2.	Specify those pollutants, materials, waters, or wastes that are prohibited from entering the sanitary sewer system; 
3.	Identify those pollutants, materials, waters, or wastes that shall be controlled with best management practices; and 
4.	Require individual users or classes of users to implement best management practices for any pollutant. 
C.	All affected individual users or classes of users shall comply with the prohibitions and effluent limitations established pursuant to this section, and with any best management practices required by the director of public works. 
D.	All prohibitions and effluent limitations so established and all best management practices identified by the director of public works will be placed on file with the city clerk and will become effective and enforceable on the thirty-first day after the date of filing. (Ordinance adoption). 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.304 - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish new, additional or more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
13.14.401. - Pretreatment facilities. 
A.	Pretreatment Required. 
1.	Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 13.14.302 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the director of public works, whichever is more stringent. 
2.	Where necessary, as determined by the director of public works, the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, the pretreatment needed resulting from the following: 
a.	BOD of over 300 mg/l and suspended solids over 350 mg/l by weight; 
b.	Objectionable constituents above the levels listed under the discharge limitations; and/or 
c.	Excessive quantities and rates of discharges of such waters or wastes. 
3.	Whenever deemed necessary, the director of public works may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
4.	The director of public works may require any user discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
B.	Pretreatment Method and Plans. 
1.	The method of pretreatment and plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed pretreatment facilities shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer familiar with such treatment, and registered in the state; 
2.	Two copies shall be submitted to the city's public works department, who shall review each submittal and shall be the sole approving authority; 
3.	The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and, 
4.	Installation shall be at the user's expense unless the city has been contracted for treating the wastes. 
C.	Maintenance and Inspection of Pretreatment Facilities. 
1.	Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any industrial waters or wastes, the owner shall maintain them continuously in satisfactory and effective operation, at the owner's expense; and, 
2.	Any such pretreatment facilities may also be subject to inspection by the city. 
D.	Grease Traps and Grease Interceptors. 
1.	The director of public works may require users to install grease, lint, sand/oil interceptors, oil/water separators, hair or grease trap(s) as needed for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of fats, oils, grease, lint or sand; except that such interceptors or traps shall not be required for residential users. Requirements for the proper handling of fats, oils, grease, lint, sand and solids in wastewater are as follows: 
a.	Grease interceptors and grease traps shall be required, installed, and maintained as specified in this chapter and the director of public work's policies and procedures for the sizing and cleaning of interceptors and traps for the food service industry. 
b.	Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be provided by all new and or existing laundries, restaurants, service stations, auto repair shops, car washes and other industrial users when, in the opinion of the city, grease traps or interceptors are necessary. 
c.	Generally, no facility shall discharge into the POTW any wastewater containing any fat, mineral, organic oil, grease or any waste that may form persistent oil emulsions more than 100 milligrams per liter by weight, or any sand or flammable wastes. 
d.	Such grease traps and grease interceptors shall not be required for domestic users. 
e.	Facilities established prior to the execution of this chapter amendment will have one year, from the execution date of this chapter, to conform with the requirements to have or install a grease trap or grease interceptor, as deemed necessary by the director of public works, provided they comply with the discharge limitations established herein. 
f.	Facilities that cannot meet these standards, however, must install grease traps immediately, or arrange for offsite disposal of their grease. 
g.	All grease traps and grease interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and in compliance with the International Plumbing Code and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
h.	Where installed, all grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained by the industrial user, at his or her expense, in efficient operating condition at all times. 
i.	The owner shall keep written records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and maintenance required to demonstrate compliance. Such records shall be available for inspection by the director of public works upon request. 
2.	The method for determining the size of traps or interceptors is the drainage fixture unit value. The minimum size for all interceptors is a capacity of 1,500 gallons and the maximum size for all interceptors is a capacity of 2,500 gallons. Interceptors must be constructed with at least three chambers. Sizing for all traps is a minimum of a 50-gallon per minute, 100-pound capacity with the flow control valve installed in a manner that provides access at all times. The appropriate size for interceptors and traps is determined as follows: 
a.	Interceptor Sizing. The interceptor shall be sized using the drainage fixture-unit value as defined in the following table. Using the drain outlet or trap size, these sizes are converted to discharge rates on the basis that one fixture-unit equals 7.5 gpm. 
Fixture Outlet or Trap Size (Inches) Drainage Fixture-Unit Value Gpm Equivalent 11/4 1 7.5 11/2 2 15.0 2 3 22.0 21/2 4 30.0 3 5 37.5 4 6 45.0 Floor drains (all sizes) 2 15.0 Dishwashers Double size  
b.	Calculating Interceptor Size. The formula to calculate the size of the interceptor is: 
i.	Determine total fixture-unit value by multiplying fixture type count by drainage value; 
ii.	Total all values; 
iii.	Determine total flow by multiplying total value by flow rate of three gpm; 
iv.	Multiply total flow by 12; and 
v.	Round up to the next nearest size interceptor. 
c.	Requirements for Interceptors. The interceptor shall be: 
i.	Constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature; 
ii.	They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers; 
iii.	Constructed with the appropriate traffic rated cover. The cover(s) shall be gastight and watertight and must not be marked with any wording indicating it is owned by the City of Willcox; 
iv.	A minimum of 1,500 gallon capacity, three chamber concrete container (fiber glass and/or other type material must be approved by the director of public works; 
v.	Constructed with inlet piping with a 90-degree elbow and minimum of an 18-inch down spout; 
vi.	Constructed with outlet piping with a tee connection and a threaded cover with a minimum of an 18-inch down spout; and 
vii.	Installed with a two-way clean-out within five feet before and five feet after the intercepton. 
d.	Grease Trap Installation and Sizing. Grease traps are allowed only when there are four or fewer than four fixtures used for food preparation. Any facility installing a dishwasher shall install a grease interceptor. For the purpose of sizing a grease trap, a fixture means the entire unit, e.g., a three compartment sink is considered one unit. Grease traps must be installed as follows: 
i.	A grease trap shall be installed whenever a three-compartment sink is required by Cochise County; 
ii.	The minimum size grease trap to be installed shall be rated no smaller than 50 gallon-per-minute with a 100-pound grease capacity; and, 
iii.	A flow restriction valve shall be installed upstream of the grease trap and vented properly. If placed below floor level the flow restriction valve must be installed in a manner which allows for inspection and maintenance. 
e.	Except for domestic sources, users shall not install or replace equipment designed to convert garbage or solid waste into liquefied waste and introduce such waste into the POTW by means of a garbage grinder/disposal. Disposal of garbage and solid waste shall be disposed of as solid waste. 
f.	Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
E.	Grit Interceptor. 
1.	The director of public works may require users to install grit interceptors as needed for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of lint or sand; except that such interceptors or traps shall not be required for residential users. Requirements for the proper handling of lint, sand and solids in wastewater are as follows: 
a.	Grit interceptors shall be provided by all new and or existing laundries, service stations, auto repair shops, car washes and other industrial users when, in the opinion of the city, grit interceptors are necessary; 
b.	All grit interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and in compliance with the International Plumbing Code and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection; 
c.	Where installed, all grit interceptors shall be maintained by the industrial user, at his or her expense, in efficient operating condition at all times; and 
d.	The owner shall keep written records and documentation of all cleaning, repair, calibration and maintenance required to demonstrate compliance. Such records shall be available for inspection by the director of public works upon request. 
F.	Control Manholes. 
1.	Where required by the city and to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer; 
2.	When required, the manhole shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city; 
3.	The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
13.14.402 - Disposal of pretreatment sludge. 
    Any sludge or other material removed from the industrial waste by a pretreatment facility shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(Ord. NS313, § II, 2013) 
VIOLATION 
13.14.501 - Significant noncompliance a civil violation. 
A.	It shall be a civil infraction punishable pursuant to the Code of the City of Willcox for any person, enterprise, or corporation to violate any of the requirement of this chapter which shall be considered significant noncompliance. 
B.	Significant noncompliance shall be considered any single, accidental discharge, upset, bypass or toxic overload caused by a user of the sewer system, or any single failure of any sewer system user to comply with the meaning or intent of this chapter, including failure to maintain any required pretreatment device, such as a grease trap or grease interceptor, upon first inspection by the city. 
C.	If a user of the sewer system is identified as being in significant noncompliance, the city may decide, at the discretion of the director of public works, to implement compliance remedies commensurate to the violation. 
D.	Measures may include, but are not limited to: 
1.	Notice of violation; 
2.	Right of the city to suspend a business license; 
3.	Suspension or revocation of discharge permit; 
4.	Consent order; 
5.	Cease and desist order; 
6.	Emergency suspension; 
7.	Right to bring civil suits, including but not limited to injunctive relief and/or damages; and 
8.	A fine up to $500.00. 
E.	If a user originally identified as a non-significant industrial user during the initial survey or inventory becomes noncompliant, the city may direct such user to comply with the permitting requirements of a significant industrial user, until such time that the director of public works deems this action no longer necessary. 
(Ord. NS313, § III, 2013) 
13.14.502 - Severe noncompliance a criminal violation. 
A.	Severe noncompliance shall be considered any willful violation of this Code and any person who commits a violation of this chapter after having previously been found responsible by the city magistrate for committing two or more civil violations of this chapter within a 24-month period, whether by admission, by payment of the fine, by default, or by judgment after hearing shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor. The city attorney is authorized to file a criminal misdemeanor complaint in the magistrate court against a habitual or severe non-compliance offender who violate this chapter. In applying the 24-month provision, the dates of which the offender was found responsible shall be the determining factor, irrespective of the sequence of the commission of the offense. 
B.	Those POTW users identified as habitual non-compliers or in severe non-compliance shall be subject to the following remedies: 
1.	Reimbursement to the city for repairs; 
2.	Liens imposed on the property; 
3.	Removal of sewer connection; 
4.	Right to bring civil suits, including but not limited to, injunctive relief and/or damages; 
5.	Cease and desist order (immediate closure of facility); and 
6.	Criminal charges, including a fine of $2,500.00 for each uncorrected occurrence or failed inspection 30 days after the initial inspection, each day constituting a separate violation. 
(Ord. NS313, § III, 2013) 
13.14.503 - Interference with enforcement procedure. 
    Any person who interferes, prevents, or attempts to interfere or prevent, an individual employed by the city or other person contracted for by the city, from investigating an alleged violation of this chapter or from correcting or abating a violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a class three misdemeanor and shall be subject to 30 days in jail, one year probation and a $500.00 fine plus surcharges. 
(Ord. NS313, § III, 2013) 
Chapter 13.16 - GAS RATES[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. NS309, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, repealed the former ch. 13.16, § 13.16.010, and enacted a new ch. 13.16 as set out herein. The former ch. 13.16 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. NS-82, § 2, adopted in 1980. 

13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    "Administrator" means the city manager or designee. 
    A.R.S. means Arizona Revised Statutes. 
    "City" means the City of Willcox. 
    "City manager" means the City Manager of Willcox, or designee. 
    "Person" is any natural individual or any organization which has legal status. 
    "Renters (third parties)" are those persons who have made legal arrangements to use or occupy residential or commercial units subject to this section of the City Code. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-16-10), 2011) 
State Law reference- Power to engage in business of public nature, A.R.S. 9-511 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.16.020 - Purpose and scope. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.	Protect the health and safety of the citizens of the city; 
B.	Protect the environment by establishing minimum standards for the safe and sanitary delivery of natural gas; 
C.	Establish necessary fees for the operation of the city's gas system; to recover the city's costs to provide such services. As authorized by A.R.S. 9-511.01. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-16-20), 2011) 
State Law reference- Power to engage in business of public nature, A.R.S. 9-511 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.16.021 - Establishment of a fund. 
    There is hereby established an enterprise fund for the purpose of collecting monies and making payments for the operation of the gas system of the city. Such fund shall be operated as an "enterprise fund" as that term is defined by the Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA). ARS 9-511A. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-16-21), 2011) 
State Law reference- Power to engage in business of public nature, A.R.S. 9-511 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.16.022 - Establishment of rates. 
A.	The city council shall review the estimated expenses, incomes, reserves, and fund balance annually in April for the fiscal year to begin the next July 1. 
B.	The city council shall set such fees and late charges, by resolution, that shall produce the sufficient estimated revenues that combined with available fund balances are sufficient to pay all of the estimated costs in the ensuing fiscal year and provide an operational reserve of three months. 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-16-22), 2011) 
State Law reference- Power to engage in business of public nature, A.R.S. 9-511 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01. 
13.16.100 - Responsibility for payment of charges. 
A.	The property owner is responsible for the payment of gas charges under this section of the City Code. 
B.	If the property is residential property; the person residing at the property is responsible for payment of all charges under this section of the City Code. A property owner, at its sole discretion, may contract for gas service with a municipality and shall provide payment for those services. 
C.	The administrator may pursue collection of outstanding amounts by all legal means possible, including but not limited to; use of deposits, liens on property, and denial of hook ups or initiation of service, when there are outstanding amounts owed to the city by the parties requesting the hookup. 
D.	The person who has opened the account and the city have a responsibility to monitor the service provided and to make any claims for payment in a timely manner. 
E.	The city will not pursue any charges for services for which a bill has not been issued by the city for a period of six months. This does not erase past debts owed the city under section 13.12.100.C. The purpose of this section is for errors in billing. 
F.	The maximum time that the city will permit for refunds, misbillings, or incorrect charges for service of any type relating to gas service is six months. 
G.	Each person opening a gas service account shall be required to post a security deposit. 
1.	If the person is the owner of the property, they shall be required, prior to the initiation of service; to post a deposit in the estimated amount of one month's gas charges. 
2.	If the charges for gas service are being collected by the city through the city's billing department; and the property is rented to a third party; or the account is opened by any person other than the person receiving the services; or in the case of residential property, the party residing at the property is some person other than the owner of the property; there shall be deposited with the city, prior to service being initiated: a security deposit equaling twice the estimated monthly gas charge. 
H.	Security deposit requirements may be waived when: 
1.	The person establishing or who will be residing at the proposed location, has an existing history of no delinquent payments with the City of Willcox for the last two years. 
2.	The person is moving from one physical location to a different physical location and has a deposit on file which has sufficient amount in it to cover the new location. 
3.	The person provides the City of Willcox with a letter of reference from a similar type utility showing a history of no delinquent payments for a two-year period. The history must be within the last four years. 
I.	No interest will be paid on deposits. 
J.	Deposits may be credited to the account upon: 
1.	Closure of the account. 
2.	Maintenance of a two-year history with no delinquencies. 
K.	If an account becomes delinquent more than two times in a 12-month period or if the account is shut off for delinquency, after the deposit has been credited to the account as per [subsection] (J) above: A new deposit shall be required to continue or reestablish service. 
L.	Renters (third parties) establishing accounts must comply with requirements of [subsection] (B), but may use the provisions above in [subsection] (H). 
(Ord. NS309, § 2(13-16-100), 2011) 
State Law reference- Power to engage in business of public nature, A.R.S. 9-511 et seq.; HB 2193, an Act amending 9-511.01 
TITLE 16 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Chapters: 16.04 Title and Purposes 16.08 Recording Procedure 16.12 Definitions 16.16 Approval Procedure 16.20 Vicinity and Preliminary Plans 16.24 Streets-Alleys-Culs-de-sac and Easements 16.28 Blocks 16.32 Lots 16.36 Design Specifications 16.40 Parks and Playgrounds 16.44 Improvement Requirements 16.48 Costs and Charges for Development 16.52 Platting 16.56 Guarantee of Performance 16.60 General Requirements 16.64 Within Three Miles of City Limits 16.68 Unauthorized Transfers-Penalty  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal subdivision regulations, A.R.S. 9-463 et seq. 

Chapter 16.04 - TITLE AND PURPOSES 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Designated. 
A.	This title shall be entitled the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Willcox, Arizona," and may be so cited and pleaded. 
B.	The purposes of this title shall be to promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city; to facilitate orderly growth and development of the city; to facilitate the transfer of land having accurate legal descriptions; to bring about the development of a more attractive and wholesome environment within and about the city; and to establish the rights, duties, and responsibilities of subdividers with respect to land subdivision. 
(Prior code § 16.04.010) 
Chapter 16.08 - RECORDING PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - Land to be subdivided before recording. 
A.	The sale of an entire lot or parcel which is part of a previously approved and recorded plat shall not fall within the scope of this title. From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or in part within the city, nor shall any person sell, exchange, or offer for sale, or purchase, or offer to purchase any parcel of land which is any part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land located wholly or in part within the city, nor shall any person offer for recording any deed conveying a parcel of land or any interest therein unless he shall first have or cause to have made a plat thereof, which plat must be approved by the city council and recorded in the office of the Cochise County recorder before such sale or exchange or purchase is effected. The approval of the final plat shall be obtained by complying with all of the requirements of this title. 
B.	Land lying within three miles of the corporate limits of the city is subject to provisions of chapter 16.64. 
(Prior code § 16.08.010) 
Chapter 16.12 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "Arterial street" means a street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve as a major trafficway, and is designated as a major street on the master street plan. 
    "Collector street" means a street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to an arterial street and serves, or is intended to serve, between neighborhoods or areas within the city. 
    "Easement" means the quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or advantage in land without profit, existing distinct from the ownership of the land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public. 
    "Final plat" means a map or chart of the land division which has been accurately surveyed, and such survey marked on the ground, so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots, and other divisions thereof can be identified. 
    "Intervening property" means property located between the existing service facility and the property under development. 
    "Metes and bounds" means the description of a lot or parcel of land by courses and distances. 
    "Minor street" means a street, existing or proposed, which is supplementary to a collector street and of limited continuity which serves, or is intended to serve, the local needs of a neighborhood. 
    "Off-site facilities" means facilities designed or located so as to serve other property outside of the boundaries of the subdivision, usually lying between the development and existing facilities. 
    "On-site facilities" means facilities installed within or on the perimeter of the subdivision or development site. 
    "Over-size facilities" means facilities with added capacity designed to serve other property, in addition to the land within the boundaries of the subdivision or development site. 
    "Preliminary plan" means a map or chart of a proposed land-division. 
    "Subdivider" means any person or legal entity laying out or making a land-division for the purpose of sale, offering for sale, or selling for himself or others a subdivision or any part thereof. 
    "Subdivisions" or "subdivided lands" means improved or unimproved land or lands divided or proposed to be divided for the purpose of sale or lease, or for cemetery purposes, whether immediate or future, into five or more lots or parcels. This paragraph shall not apply to the division or proposed division of land located in the state of Arizona into lots or parcels, each of which is, or will be, 36 acres or more in area including to the centerline of dedicated roads or easements, if any, contiguous to the lot or parcel. 
    "Vicinity plan" means a map or chart showing the relationship of streets and lands within a proposed subdivision to streets and lands in the surrounding area. 
(Prior code § 16.12.010) 
Chapter 16.16 - APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Designated. 
    The following steps or procedure must be followed in order to obtain approval of a subdivision: 
    Step 1. Subdivider notifies city manager. City manager furnishes subdivider with platting requirements affecting the land to be subdivided. 
    Step 2. Subdivider prepares vicinity plan and submits to the planning and zoning commission (three copies). Subdivider may also prepare and submit preliminary plan and engineering drawings with vicinity plan (six copies). 
    Step 3. Planning and zoning commission approves, disapproves, or requires modification of vicinity plan. 
    Step 4. Subdivider prepares preliminary plan and engineering drawings if he has not already done so and submits to planning and zoning commission (six copies). 
    Step 5. Planning and zoning commission then submits copies of plan to city engineer and utility companies, then approves, disapproves, or approves plan with modifications. City engineer and utility companies advise planning and zoning commission. 
    Step 6. Subdivider prepares and submits final plat to planning and zoning commission. (One tracing, one permanently reproducible copy, and three prints.) 
    Step 7. Planning and zoning commission approves, disapproves, or approves final plat with modifications. (City engineer advises planning and zoning commission.) 
    Step 8. Subdivider posts bond with city guaranteeing required improvements. 
    Step 9. Subdivider submits final plat to city council for approval. 
    Step 10. Subdivider records plat in office of county recorder within 90 days. 
(Prior code § 16.16.010) 
16.16.020 - Step one-Notification of proposed development. 
    Any person wishing to subdivide land within the city shall notify the city manager, or other authorized representative, of such intention. The city manager shall furnish information pertaining to the city's plan of streets, parks, drainage, and zoning, and the extent of improvements which the subdivider will be required to construct along with other requirements affecting the land to be subdivided. 
(Prior code § 16.16.020) 
16.16.030 - Step two-Preparing vicinity plan. 
    After the subdivider has discussed his proposed development with the city manager, he shall then prepare a vicinity plan at a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 500 feet, and shall submit three copies of the same to the city planning and zoning commission. 
(Prior code § 16.16.030) 
16.16.040 - Step three-Approval of vicinity plan. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall review and shall approve or disapprove the layout of the subdivision, or approve it subject to modifications. 
(Prior code § 16.16.040) 
16.16.050 - Step four-Preparing preliminary plan and engineering drawings-Checking fee. 
A.	Upon approval of the vicinity plan by the planning and zoning commission, the subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plan of the subdivision and shall submit three copies of the plan to the planning and zoning commission, and one copy each to the electric and telephone utility companies and to the city engineer. The subdivider shall also submit a like number of engineering drawings showing: 
1.	Typical cross-sections of streets; 
2.	Typical cross-sections and proposed locations of curbs, gutters, sidewalks; and 
3.	Location and size of both "on-site" and "offsite" water and sewer mains, and any other information or material required by the planning and zoning commission. 
B.	In the case of subdivisions located within the city, a checking fee as follows: 
$35.00 for each subdivision containing up to and including 100 lots; 
$50.00 for all subdivisions containing 101 lots to 200 lots; 
$75.00 for all subdivisions containing 201 lots to 400 lots; and 
$100.00 for all subdivisions containing over 400 lots. 
    The above fee is payable to the city, shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission along with the preliminary plan and engineering drawings. 
C.	Where a subdivider owns or controls more land than he wishes to develop immediately, the planning and zoning commission may require that a preliminary plan of the whole area be submitted, in which case the subdivider shall indicate on the preliminary plan the portion to be developed immediately and the portion to be held for future development. Whenever final approval has been obtained on any part of an approved preliminary plan, approval of the remaining part of the preliminary plan shall remain in effect for a period of one year. 
(Prior code § 16.16.050) 
16.16.060 - Step five-Approval of preliminary plan. 
A.	The planning and zoning commission shall obtain recommendations from the city engineer with respect to the plan and the utility companies with respect to easements for utilities. The planning and zoning commission shall then review and approve, disapprove, or approve the plan with modifications, and shall report their action to the city council. Approval or denial of the plan shall be based upon compliance with the city's comprehensive plan and with the standards and conditions of approval, as set forth in this chapter. Failure to act within 30 days shall be deemed approval of the preliminary plan. 
B.	Action of the planning and zoning commission shall be written on the face of three copies of the plan, two of which shall be retained in the files of the city clerk and one of which shall be returned to the subdivider. Approval of the preliminary plan by the planning and zoning commission constitutes authorization for the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of the final plat. If disapproved, the planning and zoning commission shall express its reasons therefor to the subdivider. The city council shall have the power to overrule the planning and zoning commission's approval or disapproval. 
C.	The preliminary plan, along with the engineering drawings, may be presented to the planning and zoning commission at the same time as the vicinity plan. 
(Prior code § 16.16.060) 
16.16.070 - Step six-Final plat preparation and presentation. 
A.	After the preliminary plan has been approved, the subdivider shall then prepare and submit one tracing, one permanently reproducible copy, and three prints of the final plat of the subdivision to the planning and zoning commission. A written application for approval of the final plat on forms furnished by the planning and zoning commission shall also be submitted with the final plat. 
B.	The permanently reproducible copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 16.16.070) 
16.16.080 - Step seven-Approval of final plat. 
A.	The planning and zoning commission shall obtain the recommendation of the city engineer with respect to the final plat and shall review, approve, disapprove, or approve the plat with modifications. Approval of the final plat shall be based upon compliance with the preliminary plan and with the standards and conditions of approval as set forth in this chapter and in the comprehensive plan. 
B.	Minutes of the planning and zoning commission shall show the action taken. If approved, the chairman or his authorized representative shall sign the plat and shall return the same to the subdivider. 
(Prior code § 16.16.080) 
16.16.090 - Step eight-Assurance of performance. 
    Before approval of the final plat by the city council, the subdivider shall post a bond or other assurance with the city clerk in an amount as determined by the city manager, after recommendation by the city engineer, guaranteeing that the improvements will be installed and paid for without cost to the city within two years from the date of approval. 
(Prior code § 16.16.090) 
16.16.100 - Step nine-Approval of final plat. 
    The final plat must then be submitted to the city council for its approval or disapproval. 
(Prior code § 16.16.100) 
16.16.110 - Step ten-Recording plat. 
    Upon approval of the final plat by the city council, the subdivider shall submit the final plat tracing bearing all required signatures and approvals to the Cochise County recorder. Final plats must be recorded in the office of the county recorder not more than 90 days from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council, and no lot shall be sold within such subdivision until the plat has been so approved and recorded. A final plat of any subdivision which is not recorded within 90 days from the date of approval by the city council shall be null and void. Approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission shall not be deemed as the acceptance of the dedication of any street, public way, or ground by the city. Such dedication shall occur upon the recording of the plat as approved, by the city council. 
(Prior code § 16.16.110) 
Chapter 16.20 - VICINITY AND PRELIMINARY PLANS 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Vicinity plan. 
    The vicinity plan shall show a simple sketch of the proposed layout of streets, lots, and other features, in relation to the existing and planned streets within one-fourth-mile of the subdivision. The plan may be a pencil sketch, or may be made directly on an aerial photograph. The plan shall be prepared at a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 500 feet. 
(Prior code § 16.20.010) 
16.20.020 - Preliminary plan. 
    The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and shall show: 
A.	The proposed name of the subdivision; 
B.	The location of the subdivision as forming a part of a larger tract or parcel where the plan submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract; 
C.	The names and addresses of the subdivider, the engineer, or surveyor of the subdivision, and the owner of the land immediately adjoining the land to be subdivided; 
D.	Information sufficient to locate accurately the property shown on the plan, with reference to survey markers or monuments; 
E.	Contour map at one-foot intervals; 
F.	The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided; 
G.	The location, width, and other dimensions of all existing or platted streets and other important features such as watercourses, exceptional topography and buildings within the tract and within 200 feet of the tract to be subdivided; 
H.	Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, water supply mains, and bridges within the tract, or within 200 feet thereof; 
I.	The location, width, and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, and other open spaces, with proper labeling of spaces to be dedicated to the public; 
J.	North point, scale and date; 
K.	Engineering drawings, including typical cross sections, and plans or written statements regarding the width and type of proposed pavement; location, size, and type of proposed off-site and on-site water mains; sanitary sewers; drainage facilities, and other proposed improvements, such as sidewalks, curbs and gutters, parks and fire hydrants. 
(Prior code § 16.20.020) 
Chapter 16.24 - STREETS-ALLEYS-CULS-DE-SAC AND EASEMENTS 
Sections: 

16.24.010 - Street widths. 
    Arterial and collector streets shall conform to the width assigned on the arterial and collector street plan wherever a subdivision falls in an area for which an arterial and collector street plan has been adopted. For territory where such street plan has not been completed at the time the preliminary plan of the subdivision is submitted to the planning and zoning commission, street dedications shall be provided as follows: 
A.	Minor street dedications shall have a minimum width of 50 feet; 
B.	Collector street dedications shall have a minimum width of 60 feet; 
C.	Arterial street dedications shall have a minimum width of 80 feet or as shown on the arterial and collector street plan, whichever is greater; 
D.	Minimum width of roadway wherever curb and gutters are installed (face to face of curb) shall be as follows: 
1.	For minor or local streets, 36 feet, 
2.	For collector streets, 40 feet, or conform to collector street plan, whichever is greater, 
3.	For arterial streets, 36 feet, or conform to arterial street plan, whichever is greater. 
(Prior code § 16.24.010) 
16.24.020 - Alleys. 
A.	Alleys shall be provided in residential and business areas, except that the commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
B.	The width of alleys shall be 16 feet in residential areas and 20 feet in business areas. 
C.	Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided. 
(Prior code § 16.24.020) 
16.24.030 - Culs-de-sac. 
    Culs-de-sac (dead-end streets) shall be used only where unusual drainage or land ownership configurations exist which make other designs undesirable. Each cul-de-sac shall have a minimum dedicated width of 50 feet, and must be terminated by a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter, from curb to curb. Dedication of turnaround shall be not less than 114 feet in diameter. Surface water must drain away from the turnaround, except that where surface water cannot be drained along the street away from the turnaround, due to the grade, necessary catch basins and drainage easements shall be provided. 
(Prior code § 16.24.030) 
16.24.040 - Easements. 
    Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than eight feet on each side of all rear lot lines and side lines will be required where necessary for poles, wire, conduits, storm or sanitary sewers, gas and water mains, and other public utilities. Easements of greater width may be required along property lines where necessary for surface overflow or for the extension of main sewers or similar utilities. 
(Prior code § 16.24.040) 
16.24.050 - Reverse curves. 
    Reverse curves shall have a tangent of at least 100 feet, unless in the opinion of the planning and zoning commission such is not necessary. 
(Prior code § 16.24.050) 
16.24.060 - Street intersection. 
    Streets shall intersect each other as near as possible at right angles. Minor streets shall approach the arterial or collector streets at an angle of not less than 80 degrees. Off-sets in street alignment between ten feet and 120 feet shall be prohibited. 
(Prior code § 16.24.060) 
16.24.070 - Street grades. 
    Minimum street grades of one-tenth of one percent will be required, except that the planning and zoning commission shall have the power to require a steeper grade when in the opinion of the city engineer the best development of the land is thereby secured. 
(Prior code § 16.24.070) 
16.24.080 - Street curves. 
    Where the street lines within a block deflect from each other at any one point more than ten degrees, there should be a connecting curve. The radius of the curve for the inner street line shall be not less than 350 feet for arterial streets, 250 feet for collector streets, and 100 feet for minor streets. 
(Prior code § 16.24.080) 
16.24.090 - Curbs. 
    Curbs at all intersections shall be rounded with curves having a minimum radius of 25 feet. Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a curve where necessary. 
(Prior code § 16.24.090) 
16.24.100 - Street names. 
    New street names shall not duplicate those already existing. A street, obviously a continuation of another already in existence, shall bear the same name. 
(Prior code § 16.24.100) 
16.24.110 - Street dedications. 
    All streets shall be dedicated for public use. The dedication of half streets in any subdivision is prohibited, except on the borders of subdivisions. 
(Prior code § 16.24.110) 
16.24.120 - Relations to adjoining street system. 
    The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall make provision for the continuation of the existing streets in adjoining areas (or their proper protection where adjoining land is not subdivided) at the same or greater width (but in no case less than the required minimum width) unless variations are deemed necessary by the planning and zoning commission. Where the planning and zoning commission determines that it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property in order to provide an orderly development of a street system, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. 
(Prior code § 16.24.120) 
Chapter 16.28 - BLOCKS 
Sections: 

16.28.010 - Length. 
    The maximum length of blocks shall be 1,300 feet and the minimum length of blocks shall be 400 feet. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the subdivider shall dedicate a passageway or alley through the block at appproximately the center of the block. Such passageway or alley shall not be less than 16 feet in width. 
(Prior code § 16.28.010) 
16.28.020 - Width. 
    The width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots. 
(Prior code § 16.28.020) 
16.28.030 - Use. 
    Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed especially for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities. 
(Prior code § 16.28.030) 
Chapter 16.32 - LOTS 
Sections: 

16.32.010 - Building sites. 
    The lot arrangement, design, and shape shall be such that lots will provide a compact body of land for buildings and be properly related to topography and conform to requirements set forth in this chapter. Lots shall not contain peculiarly shaped elongations solely to provide necessary square footage which would be unusable for normal purposes. 
(Prior code § 16.32.010) 
16.32.020 - Lot sizes. 
    All lots shown on the subdivision plat must conform to the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance, for the zone in which the subdivision is located. 
(Prior code § 16.32.020) 
16.32.030 - Lots to abut on public streets. 
    Each lot shall abut on a street dedicated by the subdivision plat or an existing publicly dedicated street which is more than 26 feet wide, except when approved by the planning and zoning commission as a planned unit subdivision or development. Interior lots having frontage on two streets shall be prohibited, except where topographic conditions make such design desirable. 
(Prior code § 16.32.030) 
16.32.040 - Corner lots. 
    Corner lots shall have dimensions sufficient for the maintenance of required building setback lines on both streets, along with sufficient area to comply with area requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Prior code § 16.32.040) 
16.32.050 - Angle of lots. 
    Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles, or radial to the street line, except where conditions make it advisable to have side lot lines deflect at sharper angles. 
(Prior code § 16.32.050) 
16.32.060 - Parts of lots. 
    All remnants of lots below minimum size, left over after subdividing a larger tract, must be attached to adjacent lots, rather than be allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(Prior code § 16.32.060) 
16.32.070 - Divided lots. 
    Where the land covered by a subdivision includes two or more parcels in separate ownership and the lot arrangement is such that a property ownership line divides one or more lots, the land in each lot so divided shall be transferred by deed to single ownership before approval of the final plat, and such transfer recorded in the county recorder's office before being certified to the planning and zoning commission by the subdivider. 
(Prior code § 16.32.070) 
16.32.080 - Duty to procure and display address numbers. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of each dwelling or building now existing or which shall be erected or shall become located within the city to procure the correct address number or numbers assigned by the department of public services and works to that dwelling or building and to immediately display as provided by this section, the number or numbers so assigned. No permit required by any provision of the Willcox City Code shall be issued for any dwelling or building until the owner has procured from the department of public services and works the designation of the proper number or numbers assigned to the premises concerned. No certificate of occupancy or final approval shall be granted for any dwelling or building relocated, erected, repaired, altered or modified within the city until the address number or numbers assigned to the premises have been displayed. Numbers shall be visible and legible from the street or road fronting the property and may be illuminated or reflective. Additionally, numbers shall not be less than three inches in size. 
    For those dwellings and building now existing within the city limits, a 60-day period of time, from the date of ordinance adoption, will be granted to allow for owners to comply with said section. 
(Ord. NS236, 2001) 
Chapter 16.36 - DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 
Sections: 

16.36.010 - Designated. 
    Specifications for the design of street sub-base, base, hard-surfacing, curb and gutters, sidewalks, and the treatment of drainage courses shall comply with standard specifications as adopted by the city. 
(Prior code § 16.36.010) 
Chapter 16.40 - PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS 
Sections: 

16.40.010 - Procedure. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the city that adequate parks and playgrounds be acquired and developed concurrently with urban development. To this end, all subdividers will be required to negotiate in good faith with the city through its planning and zoning commission for the provision of parks and playgrounds. Such provision may be met by the subdivider dedicating at least ten percent of the land within the subdivision for park and playground purposes in a location approved by the planning and zoning commission. When approved by the planning and zoning commission, the provision for parks and playgrounds may be made by the subdivider contributing an equivalent amount of other land or cash toward the acquisition and development of a public park within the city in a location that will benefit the land within the subdivision. No subdivision shall be given final approval until the planning and zoning commission has certified to the city council that this requirement has been met. 
(Prior code § 16.40.010) 
Chapter 16.44 - IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

16.44.010 - Designated. 
    The city council shall not approve a final plat until the subdivider provides a bond or other assurance satisfactory to the city that improvements will be installed. The purpose of the bond or other assurance is to insure construction of the required improvements within two years from date of approval, without cost to the city. The required improvements shall include: 
A.	The grading, graveling, hard-surfacing (unless such hard-surfacing is not required under the zoning ordinance), and installation of culverts in compliance with standards and specifications as adopted by the city; 
B.	The installation of water lines, fire hydrants, water meters, sewer and gas lines in compliance with provisions of this Code or its ordinances; 
C.	Unless not required under the zoning ordinance, the construction of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks on both sides of all streets, except along the outer side of a street which borders on the subdivision, in compliance with the standards and specifications as adopted by the city; 
D.	Electric and telephone lines shall be located underground except when the subdivider can show the planning and zoning commission that underground lines are not feasible; 
E.	The installation of survey monuments in accordance with standards and specifications as adopted by the city; 
F.	The construction of parks and playgrounds as required by the city council after recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
(Prior code § 16.44.010) 
Chapter 16.48 - COSTS AND CHARGES FOR DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 

16.48.010 - Designated. 
    Cost of improvements which are required under the provisions of this chapter, as well as the cost of other improvements which the developer may install, shall be shared between the developer and the city, according to the following schedule: 
Facility Developer City A. Easements and rights-of-way "on-site" and "off-site" 100% 0% B. Grading and drainage of streets "on-site" 100% for all minor and collector streets 100% for all grading and drainage required by city over costs of grading & drainage of collector streets C. Grading and drainage of streets "off-site" Special negotiations with city council Special negotiations with city council D. Bridges 100% for all minor streets 0% E. Street paving 100% for all minor streets and for collector and arterial streets up to 40' of pavement width All required width of paving over 40' for major streets when required by the city F. Curb and gutter, and curb cuts 100% 0% G. Sidewalk 100% 0% H. Street signs 100% of cost as per city specifications City may make and install signs at cost, to developer I. Street lighting 100% for easements and rights-of-way Maintenance after installation by utility company J. Electric utilities 100% for easements and rights-of-way 0% K. City utilities Cost of city utility extensions shall be borne as provided by this Code or its ordinances L. Storm drains, canal & flood channel protection 100% 0% M. Parks 10% of land within subdivision must be dedicated to city for park or an equitable amount of cash may be given city in lieu thereof and earmarked for park use City will develop and maintain equivalent land in park of city's choosing N. Monuments 100% 0%  
(Prior code § 16.48.010) 
Chapter 16.52 - PLATTING 
Sections: 

16.52.010 - Requirements-Final plats. 
A.	A final plat shall be prepared on all subdivisions. The plat shall consist of a sheet of approved tracing linen or mylar having outside or trim line dimensions of 24 by 26 inches. The border line of the plat shall be drawn in heavy lines, leaving a margin of at least one and one-half inches on the left-hand side of the sheet for binding, and at least one-half inch on the other three sides of the sheet. The plat shall be so drawn that the top of the sheet either faces north or west, whichever accommodates the drawings better. All lines, dimensions, and markings shall be made on the tracing linen with approved waterproof black India drawing ink, or equivalent. The actual map shall be made on a scale of one inch equals 100 feet unless approved otherwise by the planning and zoning commission. Details and the workmanship on finished drawings shall be neat, clean cut, and readable. 
B.	The subdivider shall also furnish the planning and zoning commission with one permanently reproducible copy and three prints of the final plat when submitting the tracing. 
C.	The final drawings or plats shall contain the following information: 
1.	Subdivision name and the general location of the subdivision; 
2.	A north point and scale on the drawing and the date; 
3.	Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper bearings and dimensions of all boundary lines of the subdivision, properly tied to public survey monuments. These lines should be slightly heavier than street and lot lines; 
4.	The names, widths, lengths, bearings, and curve data on center lines of proposed public streets, alleys or easements; also the boundaries, bearings, and dimensions of all portions within the subdivision, as intended to be dedicated to the use of the public; the lines, dimensions, bearings, and numbers of all lots; blocks and parks reserved for any reason within the subdivision. All lots and blocks are to be numbered consecutively under a definite system. All proposed streets shall be named or numbered in accordance and in conformity with the street naming and numbering system of the city; 
5.	The location of public utilities which are within or in close proximity to the proposed subdivision, together with existing watercourses of other constructed features that are involved; 
6.	The location of all required monuments; 
7.	The description and locations of all monuments set and established by the county or the United States Government that are adjacent or near the proposed subdivision; 
8.	The standard forms approved by the planning and zoning commission lettered for the following: 
a.	Description of land to be included in subdivision, 
b.	Registered professional engineer and/or land surveyor's "Certificate of Survey," 
c.	Owner's dedication, 
d.	Notary public's acknowledgment, 
e.	Planning and zoning commission's certificate of approval, 
f.	The city council's certificate of acceptance, attested by the city clerk. 
(Prior code § 16.52.010) 
Chapter 16.56 - GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE 
Sections: 

16.56.010 - Type-Amount. 
    The type of guarantee shall be in the form of a performance bond or other assurance equal to the cost of the required improvements, plus ten percent as determined by the city. The subdivider shall furnish an estimate of the cost of constructing the required improvements. Said estimate shall be prepared by an engineer registered to practice in the State of Arizona and approved by the city engineer. 
(Prior code § 16.56.010) 
16.56.020 - Duration. 
A.	The duration of the surety bond or other assurance shall be for two years from the date of approval of the final plat of the subdivision by the city council. 
B.	An extension of time may be granted by the city council upon application by the subdivider, provided such application is submitted at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the bond, and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance. 
(Prior code § 16.56.020) 
16.56.030 - Default. 
    In the event the subdivider is in default or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within two years from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council, or to pay all liens in connection therewith, the city council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the city may install or cause the required improvements to be installed, using the proceeds of the collection of the bond or other assurance to defray the expense thereof. 
(Prior code § 16.56.030) 
16.56.040 - Final inspection-Release. 
    The subdivider shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the work, or not less than ten days prior to the release date of the bond, the city manager or authorized representative shall make a preliminary inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the city council, setting forth the conditions of such facilities. If all liens are paid, and other conditions thereof are found to be satisfactory, the city council shall release the bond. If the condition of materials or workmanship shows unusual depreciation or does not comply with the standards of the city, or if any outstanding liens are not paid, the city council may declare the subdivider in default. 
(Prior code § 16.56.040) 
Chapter 16.60 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

16.60.010 - School sites-Other public spaces. 
    In subdividing property, consideration shall be given to sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other areas for public use, as shown on the comprehensive plan. Any provision for such open spaces shall be indicated on the preliminary plan in order that it may be determined in what manner such areas will be dedicated to, or acquired by, the appropriate agency. 
(Prior code § 16.60.010) 
16.60.020 - Construction-Maintenance of private roads and driveways prohibited. 
A.	The city shall not open, grade, pave, or perform any maintenance work on any private or undedicated street or alley, the city shall refrain from laying utility lines in any street which has not: 
1.	Been accepted by the city as a public street or alley; or 
2.	Which has not received the approval of the city council as part of a final plat of a subdivision, unless an easement is granted therefor. 
B.	The city shall not accept or maintain streets or other public ways unless said streets have been constructed in accordance with standards and specifications which have been adopted by the city council. 
(Prior code § 16.60.020) 
16.60.030 - Work to be done by engineer or surveyor. 
    All engineering work or surveying of property must be done by or under direction of a registered professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of Arizona. 
(Prior code § 16.60.030) 
16.60.040 - Continuity of dead end streets. 
    Whenever a proposed subdivision has a street which terminates against private property of an individual, other than the subdivider, a strip of land at least one foot wide across the entire end of the subdivider's proposed street and on the subdivider's property, must be platted as a lot, and said lot shall be deeded to the city as a lot in the proposed subdivision for future street purposes. 
(Prior code § 16.60.040) 
Chapter 16.64 - WITHIN THREE MILES OF CITY LIMITS 
Sections: 

16.64.010 - Written notice of intent to subdivide. 
    When the owner of land, the whole or part of which is in the unincorporated area within three miles of the corporate limits of the city, desires to subdivide the land into lots for the purpose of selling it by reference to a map or plat, he shall first give written notice of such intent to subdivide. 
(Prior code § 16.64.010) 
16.64.020 - Contents of written notice. 
    The written notice of intention to subdivide shall name or describe the land so that it may be identified upon the ground. 
(Prior code § 16.64.020) 
16.64.030 - Submission of tentative plat. 
    In addition to the written notice, the owner shall submit a tentative plat of the land showing the manner in which he desires to subdivide the land. 
(Prior code § 16.64.030) 
16.64.040 - Projection of streets and alleys-Costs. 
    The city may, if it desires that the streets or alleys of the tract conform with the projected streets or alleys of the city, or of an adopted plan, project the lines of such streets and alleys to the nearest outer boundary lines of the subdivision and thereon mark the same. The city shall supply the owner with the courses of the lines. The city shall bear the costs of projecting said lines and establishing the courses thereof. 
(Prior code § 16.64.040) 
16.64.050 - Written report by city. 
    The city may submit a written report to the owner, recommending changes in the submitted plat of the location or dimension of streets, alleys, parks, easements for rights-of-way or property intended to be devoted to the use of the public. One copy of such report shall be furnished to the board of supervisors of Cochise County. 
(Prior code § 16.64.050) 
16.64.060 - Time within which report or projections of street and alley lines must be submitted. 
    The report, or the projection of street and alley lines, or both, shall be submitted to the owner within 30 days from the date that the notice of intention to subdivide is delivered to the city. 
(Prior code § 16.64.060) 
16.64.070 - Duty of owner-Map. 
    The owner, when furnished with a written report or the projection of street and alley lines, or both, shall cause the land to be subdivided into lots, blocks, streets, alleys, parks and parkways, so as to reasonably conform to the report and projected lines and the courses thereof, and shall prepare in duplicate an accurate map or plat thereof on cloth, drawn and attested to by a civil engineer from his survey of the ground. The engineer shall in making the surveys, leave sufficient permanent monuments so that another surveyor or engineer may retrace his work. The nature and location of the monuments shall be plainly shown on the map. 
(Prior code § 16.64.070) 
16.64.080 - Additional contents of map. 
    The plat shall particularly set forth and describe: 
A.	Parcels of ground within the tract or subdivision to be used for public purposes or offered for dedication for public uses, and their dimensions, boundaries and courses; 
B.	Either by number or letter, lots intended for sale, or reserved for private use, and their dimensions, boundaries and courses; 
C.	The location of the subdivision and lots therein with reference to adjacent subdivisions, the maps and plats of which have been previously recorded, or if none, then with reference to corners of a United States survey, or if on land unsurveyed by the United States, then to some prominent artificial monument established for such purpose. 
(Prior code § 16.64.080) 
16.64.090 - Filing of map or plat. 
    One copy of the map or plat shall be filed with the city clerk and the other copy filed with the board of supervisors of Cochise County, together with a petition for the approval of the map or plat. 
(Prior code § 16.64.090) 
16.64.100 - Hearing by the board of supervisors. 
    Pursuant to statutes, the board of supervisors shall set the petition for hearing not less than 15 nor more than 30 days from the date of the filing of the map or plat, and petition, with the board, and shall cause written notice thereof to be given to the city, as provided in A.R.S. 9-475. 
(Prior code § 16.64.100) 
16.64.110 - Appearance by city. 
    The city may appear at the hearing and show cause why the petition should not be granted. 
(Prior code § 16.64.110) 
16.64.120 - Approval by the board of supervisors. 
    Pursuant to statutes, if it appears to the board of supervisors that the plan or map reasonably conforms to legal requirements, it shall approve and endorse the approval upon the map or plat, and transmit it to the county recorder for filing. 
(Prior code § 16.64.120) 
16.64.130 - Amendments to plat. 
    If on the hearing it is determined by the board that corrections, additions or amendments in any respect shall be made to the map or plat, then a map or plat shall be prepared by the owner in accordance with the amendments, corrections or additions, and the consent of the owner and the board shall be endorsed thereon and filed with the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 16.64.130) 
16.64.140 - Nonacceptance by owner-Projection expenses. 
    If the owner declines to accept the amendments, additions or corrections, he shall pay to the city the actual engineering expenses incurred in the preparation of the projections. 
(Prior code § 16.64.140) 
16.64.150 - Subdivision name. 
    Upon the plat or map shall be endorsed a name, title or designation of the subdivision and the acknowledgment by the owner or some person for him duly authorized thereunto by deed. 
(Prior code § 16.64.150) 
16.64.160 - Limitation of name of subdivision. 
    No title, name or designation shall be given that is the same as that of a subdivision in a city or town in the same county of which a plat or map has been recorded. 
(Prior code § 16.64.160) 
16.64.170 - Title to property reserved to public use. 
    Upon the filing of the plat or map, the fee of all streets, alleys, parks and other parcels of ground reserved therein to the use of the public, shall vest in the public. 
(Prior code § 16.64.170) 
16.64.180 - Acceptance of plat by recorder. 
    No plat or map shall be accepted by the county recorder for filing unless it complies with the provisions of A.R.S. Title 9, Article 7, but if an owner has given to the city or town written notice of intention to subdivide and the city or town has failed or refused within the time specified in said article above-mentioned to project the lines of its streets and alleys and to supply the courses thereof, then the owner may file with the county recorder the plat or map of the subdivision in conformity with law, attaching thereto the sworn statement of the owner of the proceedings. 
(Prior code § 16.64.180) 
16.64.190 - Conveyance by reference to plat-Restriction. 
    No property shall be sold or described in a conveyance or other instrument by reference to any map or plat of a subdivision comprehended within the provisions of A.R.S. Title 9, Article 7, unless the map or plat has been prepared and filed under the provisions of said article. 
(Prior code § 16.64.190) 
Chapter 16.68 - UNAUTHORIZED TRANSFERS-PENALTY 
Sections: 

16.68.010 - Designated. 
A.	Any person, firm, or corporation who transfers or sells any lot or land in a subdivision, as defined in this title, which subdivision has not been approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council of the city and recorded in the office of the Cochise County recorder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold; and the description of such lot or parcel of land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring, shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties, or from the remedies provided in this title. The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by action for injunction brought in any court of equity jurisdiction, or may recover the penalty by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
B.	Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in section 1.04.010. The imposition of any sentence or fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this title. 
(Prior code § 16.68.010) 
TITLE 17 - ZONING[1] 
Chapters: 17.04 General Provisions 17.08 Definitions 17.10 Citizen Review Process 17.12 Supplementary Requirements and Procedures Applicable Within Zones 17.14 Fences, Walls and Screening Devices 17.16 General Land and Building Provisions 17.18 Medical Marijuana 17.20 Zone Establishment 17.24 R-1 Residential Zone 17.28 R-2 Residential Zone 17.32 R-3 Residential Zone 17.36 R-3-A Residential Zone 17.40 R-3-M Residential Zone 17.44 R-4 Residential Zone 17.48 R-5 Large Scale Development Zone 17.52 HP-1 Historical Preservation Zone 17.56 H-1 Highway Service Zone 17.60 CC-1 Central Commercial Zone 17.64 CC-2 Central Commercial Zone 17.68 GC-1 General Commercial Zone 17.72 I-1 Industrial Zone 17.76 I-2 Industrial Zone 17.80 RR-1 Recreational Residential Zone 17.81 RU, Rural Zoning Districts 17.82 SR, Single-Household Residential Zoning Districts 17.84 Size Regulations 17.88 Large Scale Development 17.92 Administration and Enforcement 17.96 Violations  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal zoning, A.R.S. 9-462 et seq. 

Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.04.010 - Title. 
    This ordinance is known as, and is entitled "The Revised Zoning Ordinance of the City of Willcox, Arizona" and may be so cited and pleaded. 
(Prior code § 17.04.010) 
17.04.020 - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent and purpose of this title is to promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city by guiding development within the city in accordance with a comprehensive plan which plan has been designed: 
A.	To encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development in the area; 
B.	To create conditions favorable to prosperity, civil activities, and recreational, educational and cultural opportunities; 
C.	To facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
D.	To reduce the waste of physical, financial, and human resources resulting from excessive scattering of population; 
E.	To secure safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards, and other dangers; 
F.	To lessen congestion in the streets, prevent the overcrowding of land and provide adequate light and air; 
G.	To stabilize and improve property values; and 
H.	To promote a more attractive and wholesome environment. 
(Prior code § 17.04.020) 
17.04.030 - Application. 
    The regulations and restrictions as set forth in this title shall be so interpreted and applied as to further the purpose of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.04.030) 
17.04.040 - Declaration. 
    In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof, and regulations and restrictions applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration was given to the suitability of the land for particular uses, and to the character of the zones, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city. 
(Prior code § 17.04.040) 
17.04.050 - Interpretation. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, said provisions thereof shall be held to be the minimum requirements needed to promote the public health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. Except as specifically provided herein, it is not intended by the adoption of the ordinance codified herein to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the erection, construction, establishment, moving alteration or enlargement of any building or improvement; nor is it intended by this title to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that in cases in which this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by other existing provisions of law or ordinance, then in such case the provisions of this title shall govern. 
(Prior code § 17.04.050) 
Chapter 17.08 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

17.08.010 - Intent. 
    For the purpose of this title certain words and terms are defined as follows in this chapter: Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. Also, the term "planning commission" is synonymous with the term "planning and zoning commission," and the term "building inspector" is synonymous with the terms "zoning administrator" and "planning and zoning administrator." 
(Prior code § 17.08.010) 
17.08.020 - Agriculture. 
    "Agriculture" means the growing of soil crops in the customary manner in the open. It shall not include livestock raising activities; nor shall it include retailing of products on the premises. 
(Prior code § 17.08.020) 
17.08.030 - Apartment house (multiple dwelling). 
    "Apartment house (multiple dwelling)" means any building or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, or leased, let, or hired out to be occupied or which is occupied as the home or residence of three or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking on the premises. 
(Prior code § 17.08.030) 
17.08.040 - Boardinghouse-Lodging house. 
    "Boardinghouse" or "lodging house" means a building containing not more than one kitchen, where for compensation, meals are provided pursuant to previous arrangements on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis as distinguished from a hotel, cafe, or rooming house. 
(Prior code § 17.08.040) 
17.08.050 - Building. 
A.	"Building" means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
B.	"Accessory building" means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building. 
C.	"Main building" means one or more of the principal buildings upon a lot. 
D.	"Building line" means a line designating the minimum distance which buildings must be set back from a street or lot line. 
(Prior code § 17.08.050) 
17.08.060 - Carport. 
    "Carport" means a structure not completely enclosed by walls which is for the shelter of automobiles. 
(Prior code § 17.08.060) 
17.08.070 - Clinic. 
    "Clinic" means a building used for the diagnosis and treatment of ill, infirm or injured persons, but which building does not provide board, room or regular hospital care and services. 
(Prior code § 17.08.070) 
17.08.080 - Club. 
    "Club" means a building used, occupied, and operated by an organized association of persons for social, fraternal, religious, or patriotic purposes, whose activities are confined to the members and their guests, but shall not include any organization, group or association, the principal activity of which is to render a service usually and ordinarily carried on as a business. 
(Prior code § 17.08.080) 
17.08.090 - Common area. 
    "Common area" means an area designated to serve two or more dwelling units or separate uses with convenient access to the area. 
(Prior code § 17.08.090) 
17.08.100 - Comprehensive plan-Master plan. 
    "Comprehensive plan" or "master plan" means a coordinated plan which has been prepared and adopted for the purpose of guiding development, including but not limited to a plan or plans of land use, resources, circulation, housing, and public facilities and grounds. 
(Prior code § 17.08.100) 
17.08.110 - Conditional use. 
    "Conditional use" means a use which requires approval of the board of adjustment, planning commission, or city council before the zoning administrator may issue a permit therefor. Generally, it includes uses which require individual consideration of surrounding conditions and circumstances to carry out the intent and purpose of the land use plan. 
(Prior code § 17.08.110) 
17.08.120 - Convalescent home. 
    For "convalescent home," see "rest home" (section 17.08.510). 
(Prior code § 17.08.120) 
17.08.130 - Convenience centers. 
    "Convenience centers" means establishments which are designed and intended to serve the daily or frequent trade or service needs of surrounding population. Such establishments include grocery stores, variety stores, drug stores, coin-operated laundry and drycleaning establishments, beauty shops, barber shops, or combination thereof, but do not include repair garages, automobile sales yards, clothing stores, or drive-ins where customers consume food on the premises outside of buildings. 
(Prior code § 17.08.130) 
17.08.140 - Court apartment-Dwelling group. 
    "Court apartment" or "dwelling group" means one or more dwellings (other than mobile home parks and farm labor camps), arranged around two or three sides of a court which opens onto a street. "Court apartment" or "dwelling group" may include single-family, two-family, or multiple-family dwellings. 
(Prior code § 17.08.140) 
17.08.150 - Density. 
    "Density" means the number of dwelling units per acre of land. 
(Prior code § 17.08.150) 
17.08.160 - Drive-in, retail. 
    "Retail drive-in" means any form of merchandising, serving or dispensing of goods in which customers are served while in their automobiles. 
(Prior code § 17.08.160) 
17.08.170 - Dwelling. 
A.	"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a building designed for living purposes (bathing, eating, and sleeping) and occupied by one family, when: 
1.	The occupants do not live and eat with any other persons in the structure; 
2.	There is either: 
a.	Direct access from the outside or through a common hall; or 
b.	There is a kitchen or cooking equipment for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
B.	"One-family dwelling" means a detached residence designed for or occupied by one family. 
C.	"Two-family dwelling" means a building containing two dwelling units. 
D.	"Multiple-family dwelling" means a building containing three or more dwelling units. 
E.	"Caretaker's dwelling" means a dwelling which is occupied by an individual or family whose function it is to watch or take care of a business or industry which is located on the same premises as the dwelling. 
F.	"Farm labor dwelling" means a dwelling which is occupied by an individual, a group of individuals or a family whose primary source of income is from working directly with agriculture or with livestock. 
G.	For "dwelling group," see "court apartment" (section 17.08.140). 
(Prior code § 17.08.170) 
17.08.180 - Family. 
    "Family" means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together in a single dwelling unit and maintaining a common household. A family may include two, but not more than two nonrelated persons living with the residing family. "Family" shall not mean a group of nonrelated individuals, a fraternity, club or institutional group. 
(Prior code § 17.08.180) 
17.08.190 - Fence, sight obscuring fence. 
A.	"Fence" means a barrier to define boundaries, or to decorate, or to confine or exclude people or animals. Materials permitted may consist of timber, earth, stone, living plants, such as hedges, and metal. Interior fences shall not be subject to the provisions of this ordinance, with the exception of height restrictions and materials permitted for use. 
B.	"Sight obscuring fence" means a fence which permits vision through not more than ten percent of each square foot more than eight inches above ground. Fences or planting shall be arranged in such a way as to effectively prevent vision of objects which are screened by it. 
(Prior code § 17.08.190; Ord. NS243, 2003) 
Editor's note- Ord. NS243, adopted Feb. 3, 2003, changed the title of § 17.08.190 from "Fence, sight obscuring" to "Fence, sight obscuring fence." 
17.08.200 - Floor area. 
    "Floor area" means the sum of the areas of the several floors of the building, including basements, mezzanines, and penthouses, of headroom height (six feet), measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating buildings. The "floor area" does not include unoccupied features such as pipe trenches, exterior terraces or steps, chimneys, roof overhangs, etc. 
(Prior code § 17.08.200) 
17.08.210 - Fractional numbers or measurements. 
    In determining the requirements of this title, whenever a fraction of a number or unit is one-half or more, and whenever a fraction of a number or unit resulting from a computation is one-half or more, said fraction shall be considered as a whole number or a unit. Where the fraction is less than one-half, said fraction shall not be considered in determining the number. 
(Prior code § 17.08.210) 
17.08.220 - Garage, private. 
    "Private garage" means a building or part thereof designed for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles of the occupants of the premises. 
(Prior code § 17.08.220) 
17.08.230 - Grade. 
    "Grade" means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. 
(Prior code § 17.08.230) 
17.08.240 - Guest. 
    "Guest" means a person staying or receiving services for compensation at a hotel, motel, boardinghouse, rooming house or rest home, or similar use. 
(Prior code § 17.08.240) 
17.08.250 - Height of building. 
    "Height of building" means the vertical distance from the grade to top of the building walls. Where building walls vary in height along a side, the height of the building shall be determined by mutliplying the length of each section of said wall by its height and dividing the sum derived therefrom by the total length of said wall. 
(Prior code § 17.08.250) 
17.08.260 - Home occupation. 
    "Home occupation" means any occupation conducted within a dwelling and carried on by persons residing in the dwelling. 
(Prior code § 17.08.260) 
17.08.270 - Hospital. 
    "Hospital" means a building in which ten or more ill or injured human beings are offered board and room while being treated for such illness or injury in accordance with instructions and procedures prescribed by persons registered to practice the healing arts in the state. 
(Prior code § 17.08.270) 
17.08.280 - Hotel. 
    "Hotel" means any building used, rented, or hired out to be occupied on a daily or weekly basis for sleeping purposes by guests. 
(Prior code § 17.08.280) 
17.08.290 - Junkyard. 
    "Junkyard" means a place where scrap, waste, discarded or salvaged materials such as glass and paper are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled or stored, including auto wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment. This definition does not include places where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building or where salvaged materials are kept incidental to manufacturing operations conducted on the premises. 
(Prior code § 17.08.290) 
17.08.300 - Kennel. 
    "Kennel" means land or buildings used in the keeping of four or more dogs over four months old. 
(Prior code § 17.08.300) 
17.08.310 - Landscaping. 
    "Landscaping" means the application or use of some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers, or lawns. In addition, the combination or design may include rocks and such structural features as fountains, pools, art works, screens, walls, fences, or benches, but such objects alone shall not meet the requirements of this title. The selected combination of objects for landscaping purposes shall be arranged in a harmonious manner as determined by the zoning administrator. 
(Prior code § 17.08.310) 
17.08.320 - Land use plan. 
    "Land use plan" means a plan adopted and maintained by the city council which shows how the land should be used-an element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Prior code § 17.08.320) 
17.08.330 - Livestock corral. 
    "Livestock corral" means a place or pen where livestock are kept as part of an agricultural enterprise or operation as distinguished from a livestock feed yard. 
(Prior code § 17.08.330) 
17.08.340 - Livestock feed yard. 
    "Livestock feed yard" means a feeding operation on a parcel of land where livestock are kept or exchanged in corrals or yards on a sustained basis and where the feed is brought to the yard, as contrasted to feed obtained through grazing the animals on the premises. 
(Prior code § 17.08.340) 
17.08.350 - Living open space-Usable open space. 
    "Living open space" means that portion of the yards on a zoning lot which is not used by automotive vehicles, but which is reserved for outdoor living space, recreational space and landscaping. 
(Prior code § 17.08.350) 
17.08.360 - Lodging house. 
    For "lodging house," see "boardinghouse" (section 17.08.040). 
(Prior code § 17.08.360) 
17.08.370 - Lot. 
A.	"Lot" means a single parcel or tract of land. 
B.	"Corner lot" means a lot situated at a junction of two or more public streets, or situated on a curved street or way whose radius is 35 feet or less, and where the angle formed by the intersection of the tangent is 105 degrees or less. 
C.	"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot. 
D.	"Lot of record" means a lot designed on a subdivision plat or shown by deed, duly recorded pursuant to statute in the county recorder's office. A lot of record may or may not coincide with a zoning lot. 
E.	"Zoning lot" means a parcel of land, composed of one or more recorded lots, occupied or to be occupied by a principal building or buildings or principal use or uses along with permitted accessory buildings or uses, meeting all of the requirements for area, buildable area, frontage, width, yards, setbacks, and any other requirements set forth in this title. 
(Prior code § 17.08.370) 
17.08.380 - Master plan. 
    For "master plan," see "comprehensive plan" (section 17.08.100). 
(Prior code § 17.08.380) 
17.08.390 - Mobile home. 
    "Mobile home" means a dwelling unit which rests on wheels. The term "mobile home" shall not include a house which is manufactured elsewhere and moved onto a building site, for use as a permanent house. 
(Prior code § 17.08.390) 
17.08.400 - Mobile home park. 
    "Mobile home park" means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more mobile homes. 
(Prior code § 17.08.400) 
17.08.410 - Motel-Tourist home-Motor hotel. 
    "Motel," "tourist home" or "motor hotel" means one or more buildings containing individual sleeping rooms or living units designed for use by automobile tourists or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit. 
(Prior code § 17.08.410) 
17.08.420 - Nonconforming building. 
    "Nonconforming building" means a building, structure, or portion thereof, which does not conform to the regulations of this title applicable to the zone or district in which such building is situated, but which legally existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified herein. 
(Prior code § 17.08.420) 
17.08.430 - Nonconforming use. 
    "Nonconforming use" means a use of premises which does not conform to the regulations of this title, but which existed at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Prior code § 17.08.430) 
17.08.440 - Nursery, plant. 
    "Plant nursery" means buildings, land and facilities for the cultivation of plans for subsequent replanting. It also includes the cultivation of watergrown agricultural products. 
(Prior code § 17.08.440) 
17.08.450 - Parking space. 
    "Parking space" means a space, not less than 20 feet in length and not less than eight and five-tenths-feet in width for the parking of a mobile vehicle, exclusive of driveways and ramps. 
(Prior code § 17.08.450) 
17.08.460 - Planned unit development. 
    "Planned unit development" means a tract of land which is planned and developed as a single entity wherein the zoning requirements applying to buildings and improvements are modified to conform to the approved plan. 
(Prior code § 17.08.460) 
17.08.470 - Planting plan. 
    "Planting plan" means a plan showing the location and dimensions of planting beds, irrigation equipment, curbs and other protective features around the edge of the planting beds and the location and species of plants to be planted in the beds. 
(Prior code § 17.08.470) 
17.08.480 - Premises. 
    "Premises" means a zoning lot together with buildings and structures located thereon. 
(Prior code § 17.08.480) 
17.08.490 - Premises occupation. 
    "Premises occupation" means an occupation conducted on the premises outside of a dwelling, by persons residing on the premises. 
(Prior code § 17.08.490) 
17.08.500 - Public parks and playgrounds. 
    "Public parks and playgrounds" means a tract of land which is owned by a public agency and which has been partially or totally developed or designated for recreational purposes. 
(Prior code § 17.08.500) 
17.08.505 - Recreational vehicle (RV). 
    Definitions. "Recreational vehicle (RV)" is a large enclosed piece of equipment with wheels, which may or may not be self-propelled, designed to be temporary lodging. RV's may be further described as one of the following: 
A.	Truck Camper. A unit affixed to the bed or chassis of a pickup truck. 
B.	Folding Camping Trailer (Pop-up Trailer). A light-weight unit with sides that collapse for towing and storage. 
C.	Travel Trailer. A unit with rigid sides designed to be towed on a bumper or frame hitch. 
D.	Fifth-Wheel Travel Trailer. Designed to be towed by a vehicle equipped with a special fifth-wheel hitch. 
E.	Motorhome. 
  Class A Motorcoach. Constructed on a specially designed motor vehicle chassis, typically resembling a bus. 
  Class B Campervan. Built using a conventional van, to which a raised roof has been added. 
  Class C Mini-motorhome. Built on an automotive manufactured chassis with an attached van cab section. 
F.	Toterhome. A motor home built around a semi truck chassis and is an enlarged sleeper quarters affixed to the semi tractor. 
(Ord. NS271, § 1(Exh. A), 2006; Ord. NS272, § 1(Exh. A), 2006; Ord. NS274, § 1, 2006 
17.08.510 - Rest home, nursing. 
    "Nursing rest home" means a building for the care and keeping of elderly or infirm people afflicted with infirmities or chronic illness. 
(Prior code § 17.08.510) 
17.08.520 - Rooming house. 
    "Rooming house" means a building where, for compensation, sleeping accommodations are provided pursuant to previous arrangements on a daily or weekly basis as distinguished from a boardinghouse or hotel. 
(Prior code § 17.08.520) 
17.08.530 - Salvage yard. 
    For "salvage yard," see "junkyard" (section 17.08.290). 
(Prior code § 17.08.530) 
17.08.540 - Setback. 
    "Setback" means the shortest distance between the property line and the foundation, wall, or main frame of the building. 
(Prior code § 17.08.540) 
17.08.550 - Sign. 
A.	"Sign" means any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject shown thereon to the attention of the public, but not including a flagpole. Neither should a "welcome-type" greeting, facing in a northerly direction on the city's water tank be considered as a "sign" in this definition. 
B.	"Accessory sign" means a sign which directs attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises. 
C.	The "area of a sign" includes all lettering, wording and accompanying designs or symbols together with any background material or freestanding supports. Where a sign consists of individual letters attached to or painted on a building or wall or window, the area of the sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters or symbols. 
D.	"Nonaccessory sign" or "billboard" means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment, conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than on the premises, and only incidentally on the premises, if at all. 
E.	"Freestanding sign" means a sign which is not attached to or part of a building. 
(Ord. NS-31, 1975; prior code § 17.08.550) 
17.08.560 - Special exception-Conditional use. 
    "Special exception-Conditional use" means a use which is not specifically permitted in a zone, e.g., an electric substation in a residential zone, but which may be permitted as a special exception, subject to compliance with conditions prescribed by the board of adjustment. 
(Prior code § 17.08.560) 
17.08.570 - Story. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and the ceiling next above it. 
(Prior code § 17.08.570) 
17.08.580 - Street, major. 
    "Major street" means any road as shown or designated on the major street plan as an arterial or collector street. 
(Prior code § 17.08.580) 
17.08.590 - Street, minor. 
    "Minor street" means any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to property, which street is not shown on the major street plan as an arterial or collector street. 
(Prior code § 17.08.590) 
17.08.600 - Travel trailer, camper or motor home. 
    "Travel trailer," "camper" or "motor home" means any trailer house or camper, used or maintained primarily as a temporary dwelling for travel, vacation or recreation purposes. 
(Prior code § 17.08.600) 
17.08.610 - Travel trailer court. 
    "Travel trailer court" means an area or tract of land used to accommodate two or more travel trailers for a short period of time (less than 30 days). 
(Prior code § 17.08.610) 
17.08.620 - Variance. 
    "Variance" means a waiver or reduction in required area of lot or yard dimension, below the requirements set forth in this title. 
(Prior code § 17.08.620) 
17.08.630 - Waste disposal site. 
    "Waste disposal site" means a tract of land devoted to the disposal of solid wastes including garbage, rubbish, trash, and other refuse material but not including earth or other totally inert material. 
(Prior code § 17.08.630) 
17.08.640 - Yard. 
A.	"Yard" means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied or unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. 
B.	"Front yard" means the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the front line of the building, excluding nonenclosed steps. On a corner lot, the front yard may be applied to either street. 
C.	"Rear yard" means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a building, measured from the rear line of the building (exclusive of steps) and the rear lot line, and extending for the entire distance of the required lot. In case of a corner lot where the building facade faces on the side street, the rear yard may be established from the side of the house to the side property line. 
D.	"Required yard" means the open space around buildings which is required by the terms of this title. 
E.	"Side yard" means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Prior code § 17.08.640) 
17.08.650 - Large scale development. 
    "Large scale development" means a planned unit development, mobile home park, mobile home subdivision, travel trailer court, group dwelling or farm labor camp which has been approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 17.08.650) 
Chapter 17.10 - CITIZEN REVIEW PROCESS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 17.10 "Citizen Review Process," three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, Willcox, Arizona, having been made a public record by Resolution No. 2014-17, passed and adopted on September 18, 2014, is hereby adopted by reference, and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in this chapter. 

Chapter 17.12 - SUPPLEMENTARY REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES APPLICABLE WITHIN ZONES 
Sections: 

17.12.010 - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to accumulate, under one heading, regulations which apply to two or more zones rather than to repeat them several times. it is not the intent of this chapter to specify uses allowed within a zone but to set forth supplementary and qualifying conditions which must be complied with in connection with such uses. 
(prior code § 17.12.010) 
17.12.020 - Yard space for one building only. 
    No required yard or other open space around an existing building, which is needed to comply with the provisions of this title, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing the yard or open space on the lot where a building is to be erected or established. 
(prior code § 17.12.020) 
17.12.030 - Yards to be unobstructed-Exceptions. 
    Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and except for ordinary and customary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features and unenclosed steps and unwalled stoops, porches, and carports, which may project up to three feet into a required yard. No projection into a required court which is provided in connection with a court apartment shall be constructed except for customary sills, belt courses, and cornices which may extend into the court not more than 16 inches. Canopies over gasoline pumps may extend into a required yard but not closer than three feet to the property lines. 
(Prior code § 17.12.030) 
17.12.040 - Every dwelling to be on a zoning lot. 
    Only one building which contains a dwelling shall be located and maintained on a zoning lot as defined in this title, except in large scale developments. 
(Prior code § 17.12.040) 
17.12.050 - Sale or lease of required space prohibited. 
    No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking, frontage on a public street, or other requirement of this title for a lot or building may be sold, bequeathed, or leased apart from such lot or building unless other space so complying is provided, nor shall any land be sold which will result in an existing or future lot for dwelling purposes that does not comply with all of the provisions of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.12.050) 
17.12.060 - Area of accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings in any residential zone shall cover not more than 25 percent of the rear yard. 
(Prior code § 17.12.060) 
17.12.070 - Accessory building prohibited as living quarters. 
    Living and sleeping quarters shall not be permitted in any accessory building in any residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.12.070) 
17.12.080 - Storage of trucks in residential zones prohibited. 
    The storage of more than one truck having a rated capacity of one and one-half tons (except farm trucks) and the storage of construction equipment such as bulldozers, graders, cement mixers, compressors, dump trucks, etc., shall not be permitted on any lot in any residential zone, provided that construction equipment may be stored on a lot during construction of a building thereon, but not to exceed one year. 
(Prior code § 17.12.080) 
17.12.090 - Storage of junk and debris in residential zones prohibited. 
    No yard or other open space surrounding an existing building in any residential zone, or which is hereafter provided around any building in any residential zone, shall be used for the storage of junk, debris, or obsolete vehicles; and no land shall be used for such purposes, except as specifically permitted herein. 
(Prior code § 17.12.090) 
17.12.100 - Additional height allowed for public buildings. 
    Public buildings and churches may be erected to any height provided the building is set back from required building setback lines a distance of at least one foot for each additional foot of building height above the maximum height otherwise permitted in the zone in which the building is located. 
(Prior code § 17.12.100) 
17.12.110 - Additional setbacks for large buildings required. 
    Side setbacks for large buildings in residential zones shall be not less than the length of the building wall measured along the side yard, added to twice the average height and divided by ten except that no dwelling shall be set back less than the minimum distance required in the zone. 
(Prior code § 17.12.110) 
17.12.120 - Mutual garages across lot lines. 
    An accessory building such as a detached carport or garage may be constructed across a common lot line by written agreement between the two adjoining property owners when such agreement is recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 17.12.120) 
17.12.130 - Mutual dwellings across lot lines. 
    In zones in which two-family dwellings are permitted, a two-family dwelling may be constructed across a common lot line when separated on the line by a dividing wall, provided a written agreement between the two adjoining property owners is recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 17.12.130) 
17.12.140 - Minimum height of dwellings and fences. 
    No dwelling shall be erected which has a ceiling height of less than one story above the average level of the grade on which the dwelling is located. No fence or wall shall be constructed higher than four feet above the grade in any required front or side yard that fronts on a street; provided, however, that fences constructed in side yards that front on streets may be constructed to a height of six feet when located more than 50 feet from the front property line. 
(Prior code § 17.12.140) 
17.12.150 - Clear view of intersecting streets. 
    In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction which will obscure the view of automobile drivers shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points 35 feet from the intersection of the street lines. 
(Prior code § 17.12.150) 
17.12.160 - Location of barns. 
    No barn, corral, or coop shall be constructed closer than 100 feet to any existing dwelling. 
(Prior code § 17.12.160) 
17.12.170 - Drainage. 
    Surface water from roof tops shall not be allowed to drain onto adjacent lots except after written agreement between the two parties. 
(Prior code § 17.12.170) 
17.12.180 - Effect of street plan. 
    Wherever a front or side yard is required for a building, which building abuts on a proposed street which has not been constructed but which has been designated by the planning and zoning commission as a future street, the depth of such front or side yard shall be measured from the planned street lines. 
(Prior code § 17.12.180) 
17.12.190 - Exception to front and side setback requirements. 
    The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two existing dwellings in any residential zone may be the same as the average for said two existing dwellings, provided the existing dwellings are on the same side of the street, and are located within 150 feet of each other. 
(Prior code § 17.12.190) 
17.12.200 - Concessions in public parks and playgrounds. 
    Concessions, including but not limited to amusement devices, recreational buildings, and refreshment stands, shall be permitted in a public park or playground when approved by the city council. 
(Prior code § 17.12.200) 
17.12.210 - Sewage disposal. 
    Where domestic sewage facilities are to be used which are not connected to a public sewer, approval of such facilities shall be obtained from the city manager before a building permit may be issued. 
(Prior code § 17.12.210) 
17.12.220 - Location of gasoline pumps. 
    Gasoline pump islands shall be set back not less than 18 feet from any street line to which the pump island is vertical and 12 feet from any street line to which the pump island is parallel and not less than 12 feet from any residential zone boundary line. If the pump island is set at an angle on the property, it shall be so located that automobiles stopped for service will not extend over the property line. In no case shall pumps be set closer than 12 feet to any street line, nor closer than 12 feet to any side or rear property line. Lots from which gasoline is dispensed to customers at retail shall be not less than 75 feet in width nor less than 100 feet in length. 
(Prior code § 17.12.220) 
17.12.230 - Off-street parking and loading. 
    The following regulations are established to increase safety and lessen congestion in the public streets, to provide adequately for parking needs associated with the development of land and increased automobile usage, to set standards for off-street parking according to the amount of traffic generated by each use, and to reduce on-street storage of vehicles. 
A.	Number of Spaces. The following required off-street parking spaces for the particular use are minimum requirements: 
1.	a.	Residential structures, not including boarding and rooming houses, shall have at least one off-street parking space per dwelling unit. 
b.	As a means of encouraging the occupants of multiple dwellings to use the required off-street parking space in preference to on-street parking space, entrances to buildings containing multiple dwellings shall be provided in locations that are as direct and convenient to the required off-street parking spaces as are the fronting streets; 
2.	Boardinghouses shall have one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor space devoted to bedrooms or one space for each two persons' domiciles in the premises, whichever is greater; 
3.	Convalescent, nursing, and other such institutions shall have one visitor parking space per three patient beds, plus one parking space for each employee at work in the home during daylight hours; 
4.	Hotels and motels shall have one parking space per room or suite, plus one parking space for each employee at work on the premises during daylight hours; 
5.	Private clubs and lodge halls shall have one parking space per three members, based on the design capacity of the facility; 
6.	Churches shall have one parking space per five seating spaces in the main assembly room; 
7.	Theaters, auditoriums, sports arenas, and places of assembly shall have one parking space per two people based on the design of the structure; 
8.	Mortuaries or funeral parlors shall have 20 parking spaces or one space for each 25 square feet of floor space in all assembly rooms, whichever is greater; 
9.	Medical clinics shall have three parking spaces per staff doctor, plus one parking space for each nondoctor employee at work on the premises during daylight hours; 
10.	Restaurants, taverns, and lounges shall have one parking space per 300 square feet of floor area; 
11.	Professional offices, except clinics, shall have one parking space per 400 square feet of office floor area; 
12.	Government buildings shall have one parking space per each employee plus one space for each 400 square feet of floor area in the building; 
13.	Retail stores and personal service shops and other business buildings not specifically mentioned elsewhere in this subsection shall have parking space at the rate of three spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area; 
14.	Drive-ins (retail) shall have at least 12 off-street parking spaces, or sufficient off-street parking spaces to accommodate all patrons or customers, whichever is greater. No patron or customer may be served in automobiles which are parked on public streets; 
15.	Industrial, manufacturing, and wholesale establishments shall have one parking space per two employees based on the largest shift; 
16.	Uses Not Mentioned. The required off-street parking for any building, structure or use of land of a type which is not listed in this subsection shall be determined by the board of adjustment under its power of interpretation. The board of adjustment shall be guided by comparison with the requirements for similar uses which are listed. 
B.	Location and Control of Parking Facilities. Off-street parking facilities required by this title shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve, except that in cases of practical difficulty for uses other than dwellings, the board of adjustment may approve a substitute location which meets the following conditions: 
1.	All or part of substitute location must be on an adjacent lot or within 200 feet from the main use measured along or across a public street; 
2.	The substitute lot must be in the same possession as the use it is intended to serve and must be maintained as long as the use or structure exists. Such possession may be by deed or long-term lease (at least 20 years). Where parcels or tracts of land are not a part of the plot on which the principal use lies, the applicant shall submit with his application for a building permit an instrument duly executed and acknowledged, which subjects said parcels or tracts of land to parking uses in connection with the principal use for which it is made available. The applicant shall deposit the necessary recording fee, and upon the issuance of a building permit, the zoning administrator shall cause said instrument to be recorded in the office of the county recorder; 
3.	Not more than 30 percent of the area contained within a required front yard or side yard adjacent to a street in any residential zone may be used for driveways or for the parking of automobiles. 
C.	Computation of Required Parking Spaces. For the purpose of computing off-street parking spaces which are required by this title, the following rules shall apply: 
1.	"Floor area" means gross floor area, unless otherwise specified for a particular use; 
2.	In stadiums, sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly in which benches or pews are used in place of seats, each 18 inches of length of such benches or pews shall be counted as one seat. 
D.	Combined Parking Areas. The required off-street parking and loading facilities may be provided collectively for two or more buildings or uses, provided that the total number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for each of the individual uses. 
E.	Mixed Uses. In the event that two or more uses occupy the same zoning lot, or parcel of land, the total requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
F.	Access to Parking Facilities. 
1.	Access driveways shall be provided for ingress to and egress from all parking and loading facilities. Each parking and loading space shall be easily accessible to the intended user; 
2.	Forward travel to and from parking facilities from a dedicated street or alley shall be required for all uses, except for parking which has been provided in connection with one and two-family dwellings. The parking area shall be adequate to facilitate the turning of vehicles to permit forward travel upon entering a street; 
3.	Access to all off-street parking facilities shall be designed in a manner which will not interfere with the movements of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
G.	Circulation Within a Parking Area. Circulation within a parking area shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.	Parking area with more than one aisle must be so arranged that a car need not enter the street to reach another aisle within the same parking area; 
2.	Directional signs shall be required to differentiate between entrances and exits to the street. 
H.	Location of Parking Facilities Restricted. Parking and loading facilities may be located any place on the premises except for areas that are required to be landscaped. Off-street parking space which is required in connection with a use shall be construed to be part of that use and shall not be located within another zone unless expressly permitted therein. 
I.	Lighting of Parking Areas. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking facilities or vehicle sales areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the adjoining premises in any residential zone. 
J.	Continuing Obligation. The required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the property owner so long as the use requiring vehicle parking or loading space continues. It is unlawful for an owner of any building or use to discontinue or dispense with the required vehicle parking or loading space without providing other vehicle parking or loading space which meets the requirements of this title. 
K.	Plot Plan Approval Required. At the time a building permit is requested for any building or structure, or at the time the use of land is changed which requires additional off-street parking space, a plot plan shall be submitted showing the location and layout of such required space along with access aisles, roadways, curbs and curb cuts. The zoning administrator shall disapprove such plans if he finds that the required spaces are not usable for standard sized automobiles or do not comply with the requirements for off-street parking as set forth in this title. 
L.	Landscaping Required. Except in commercial zones, all off-street parking lots for five or more vehicles shall be bordered by a curb and hedge as directed by the zoning administrator. A landscaped strip at least three feet in width may be substituted in lieu of a hedge. 
M.	Off-street Loading Space Required. For every building having a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or more to which goods, material, merchandise, or supplies are received or distributed by vehicle, there shall be provided at least one off-street loading space. One additional loading space shall also be provided for each additional 20,000 square feet of gross floor area of such building or for each vehicle which must be loaded or unloaded at the same time, whichever requirement is greater. Each required off-street loading space shall be not less than ten feet in width, 25 feet in length, and 14 feet in height. 
(Prior code § 17.12.230) 
17.12.240 - Motor vehicle access. 
    Access to all lots and parcels of land having frontage on a public street shall be controlled as follows: 
A.	Access shall be by not more than two driveways from any one street; 
B.	Driveways shall be not closer to each other than 20 feet unless a greater distance is required elsewhere in this title; 
C.	Each driveway shall be not more than 30 feet in width in any commercial or industrial zone measured at right angles to the centerline of the driveway, except as increased by permissible curb return radii. In residential zones, driveways shall be not more than 20 feet in width, except as may be approved for a large-scale development; 
D.	On corner lots, no driveway shall be closer than 25 feet to the point of intersection of the front property line with the side property line which abuts upon a street; 
E.	Where there is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalk, a curb or fence may be required by the city. 
(Prior code § 17.12.240) 
17.12.250 - Landscaping required. 
    Front yards and side yards of all dwellings which front on public streets must be landscaped except for the area which is devoted to driveways and off-street parking space. 
(Prior code § 17.12.250) 
17.12.260 - Intent of landscaping requirements. 
A.	The purpose of the landscaping requirements in this title shall be to enhance, conserve, and stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings and thus create the necessary atmosphere for the orderly development of a pleasant community. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise, and glare through the proper placement of green plants and trees. 
B.	Required landscaping areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly, and healthful condition. This includes proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacement of dead plants and the regular watering of all plantings. All landscaped areas for multiple-family dwellings shall be provided with piped water lines terminating in an appropriate number of sprinklers or hose bibs to insure a sufficient amount of water to sustain plants within the landscaped areas, except as otherwise permitted by the zoning administrator; 
B.	Landscaped screening shall consist of evergreen shrubs, closely spaced and maintained at substantially the specified height. Screening shall consist of mature shrubs and shall be maintained at a height of from four to six feet, unless otherwise permitted; 
C.	Where landscaping is required in this title, a planting plan showing the location and name of plant materials, or other materials, and watering system shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, except that a planting plan shall not be required for one-family dwellings. The same plot plan used to show parking layout or other requirements for the issuance of a building permit may be used to show landscaping, provided all proposed landscaping is detailed adequately on said plot plan. The zoning administrator may disapprove such plans if he determines that they are not consistent with the intent of this title; 
D.	Any use of property, which, on the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, is nonconforming only as to the regulations relating to landscaping may be continued in the same manner as if the landscaping were conforming. 
(Prior code § 17.12.260) 
17.12.270 - Signs. 
    Advertising signs shall be regulated as follows: 
A.	Signs in Residential Zones. No advertising signs of any kind shall be permitted in any residential zone, except signs pertaining to the sale or lease of residential property, and except for name plates or signs indicating the existence of a home occupation. Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of residential property shall not exceed 36 square feet. Name plates and/or signs used in connection with a home occupation shall not exceed 226 square inches; 
B.	Setback. All signs or parts thereof shall be set back from public streets a distance at least equal to the distance that buildings are required to be set back within the zone in which said signs are located; 
C.	Free-standing Signs. All free-standing and accessory signs which are not attached to main buildings shall be maintained in accordance with city standards; 
D.	Signs Restricted. All nonaccessory signs which are located within 660 feet from the right-of-way of any federal or state highway must first be approved by the State Highway Department before a permit therefor shall be given by the zoning administrator. This regulation shall not be construed to affect the use of signs which are not visible from such highways. 
(Prior code § 17.12.270) 
17.12.280 - Temporary uses and structures. 
    The following regulations shall govern the operation of certain transitory or seasonal uses: 
A.	Application for a temporary use permit shall be made to the zoning administrator, and shall contain the following information: 
1.	A description of the property to be used, rented, or leased for the temporary use, including all information necessary to accurately portray the property; 
2.	A description of the proposed use; 
3.	Sufficient information to determine the yard requirements, sanitary facilities, and availability of parking space to service the proposed use. 
B.	The following are temporary uses and are subject to the following specific regulations and time limits, in addition to the regulations of any zone in which the use is located: 
1.	Carnival or Circus. When authorized by the city council, a temporary use permit for a carnival or circus may be issued in any zone, for a period not longer than 15 days; 
2.	Christmas Tree Sales. A temporary use permit, when authorized by the city council, may be issued for the display and open-lot sales of Christmas trees for a period not longer than 45 days; 
3.	Contractor's Office and Equipment Sheds. In any zone, a temporary use permit may be issued for a contractor's temporary office and equipment sheds incidental to a construction project. The permit shall be valid for not more than one year but shall be renewable for one year. The office or shed shall be removed upon completion of the construction project; 
4.	Real Estate Sales Office. In any zone, a temporary use permit may be issued for a temporary real estate sales office in any new subdivision or large scale development which has been approved in accordance with city regulations. The permit for such office shall be valid for not more than one year but is renewable for up to three years. The office shall be removed upon completion of the development. A model home may be used as a temporary sales office. 
(Prior code § 17.12.280) 
17.12.290 - Provisions-Mobile homes prohibited-Exceptions. 
    No mobile home shall be placed on any lot or parcel of land within the city except in compliance with section 17.40.040 and with one or more of the following conditions: 
A.	When temporarily located on a lot on which a building is being constructed, but not to exceed one year, provided that a bond or a mortgage on the mobile home or other property in the amount of $200.00 shall first be posted with the city guaranteeing the removal of the trailer house from the lot within one year from date of permit; 
B.	When placed in an approved mobile home park or travel trailer court; 
C.	When placed in an approved mobile home subdivision; 
D.	When located in the R-3-A and R-3-M zones and all of the regulations of the R-3-A and R-3-M zones are complied with pertaining to area and width of lot, size of yards and height and size of buildings. 
E.	1.	Manufactured homes installed within the city limits of Willcox, shall be no more than 15 years old from the date of manufacture at the time the permit application is filed with the City of Willcox Building Department. 
2.	A permit to relocate a manufactured home that is older than 15 years shall not be issued to allow the manufactured home to be moved to another location within the city limits. 
3.	Any manufactured home older than 15 years that is located within the city limits at the time that it becomes 15 years old may remain in its current location unless the building official deems it out of compliance with the then existing city codes and requirements and it is not brought into compliance within a timely manner. 
(Ord. NS116, 1986; Ord. NS164, § 1, 1993; Ord. NS260, § 1, 2005) 
17.12.300 - Permit home occupations. 
    The board of adjustment may grant a permit for a home occupation subject to the following conditions: 
A.	A home occupation is permitted in the zone; 
B.	The home occupation is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is carried on in the dwelling only by members of the residing family; 
C.	The home occupation does not involve the use of any accessory buildings or yard space for storage or activities outside the dwelling not normally associated with residential use; 
D.	No commercial vehicles are used except for one delivery truck which does not exceed three-fourths-ton rated capacity; 
E.	The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the building from that of a dwelling; 
F.	Signs are limited to one sign not larger in area than 226 square inches; 
G.	Not more than the equivalent of 25 percent of the ground floor area of the dwelling is devoted to the home occupation; 
H.	The home occupation is registered with the city license division or department; 
I.	Entrance to the home occupation from outside shall be the same entrance normally used by the residing family, except when required otherwise by regulation of the state health department or other public agency; 
J.	The physical appearance, traffic and other activities in connection with the home occupation is not contrary to the objectives and characteristics of the zone in which the home occupation is located and does not depreciate surrounding values as determined by the board of adjustment. 
(Prior code § 17.12.300) 
17.12.310 - Utility buildings and structures permitted in residential zones. 
    Utility buildings and structures such as water, sewer and electric buildings and structures may be constructed in all residential zones only after approval by the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may require conditions which are reasonably necessary to protect surrounding property values and residential amenities. 
(Prior code § 17.12.310) 
17.12.320 - Dwelling sites to have frontage on a public street. 
    At least one side of each lot used as a dwelling site shall abut upon a public street which will provide access to the dwelling, except in large scale developments, and the length of such abutting side, measured at the required setback line shall be at least as great as the width required for dwelling sites in the zone in which such building site is located. The board of adjustment may permit a dwelling to be built upon a lot which does not front upon a street subject to the following conditions: 
A.	The entire front of the building can be viewed from a public street; 
B.	The building is constructed at least 24 feet from the nearest building on the same or adjoining lot; 
C.	The development will not cause undue concentration of population; 
D.	In the opinion of the board of adjustment, values in the area will be safeguarded adequately. 
(Prior code § 17.12.320) 
17.12.330 - Uses prohibited in zones unless expressly permitted. 
    Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within a zone are expressly prohibited therein, except as may be permitted by action of the board of adjustment pursuant to express authority given under the terms of this title. Where the board of adjustment determines a use to be similar to other uses permitted in the zone, such use shall thereafter be deemed to be permitted just as if it were listed therein on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Prior code § 17.12.330) 
17.12.340 - Moved buildings. 
A.	No permit shall be issued for the moving of any residential, commercial, or industrial building, which has had prior use, from one site within the city to another site within the city or from a site outside of the city to a site within the city, without first filing an application with the zoning administrator. 
B.	The following information shall be filed with the zoning administrator at the time the application is made: 
1.	Location and address of the old and new site; 
2.	Plot plan of the new location showing adjacent lots on all sides of the property; 
3.	Plans and specifications for the proposed improvements at the new location, including plans for landscape treatment. 
C.	The application shall then be submitted to the board of adjustment for approval. 
D.	Before the board of adjustment may approve an application for the moving of a building onto a lot within the city, it must find: 
1.	That the building will have no appreciable detrimental effect on the living environment and property values in the area into which the structure is to be moved; 
2.	That the building and the lot on which the building is to be located will conform to the requirements of this title and building code; 
3.	That all required dedications and improvements for streets and other facilities shall be provided in conformity with city standards. 
E.	The building and grounds shall be brought up to the standards required of new buildings before being occupied. 
F.	Before a permit to move a building may be granted, the applicant shall post a bond or other assurance as determined by the board of adjustment to cover costs of bringing the buildings and grounds up to standard. In the event of failure to comply with conditions required by the board of adjustment, the city council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and use the proceeds therefrom in performing the work. 
G.	The bond shall also cover the costs involved in cleaning up the vacated site and restoring it to a safe and sightly condition. 
(Prior code § 17.12.340) 
17.12.350 - Permit rest home. 
    The board of adjustment may permit a rest home in zones in which such uses are permitted, provided the lot is at least 100 feet wide, contains at least one-half-acre of land; the building is located at least 50 feet back from the front lot line; and in the opinion of the board, will not depreciate surrounding values. 
(Prior code § 17.12.350) 
17.12.360 - Required buffer. 
    Any new commercial development (H-1, CC-1, CC-2, GC-1, I-1, and I-2) on property adjoining a residential zone (R-1, R-2, R-3-A, and R-3-M) shall provide a sight-obscuring fence and/or other satisfactory buffer, and landscaping to insure compatibility with and provide protection to the neighboring residential zone. The buffer and landscaping which the developer proposes shall be clearly indicated on the building permits application, and shall be reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning commission before construction can begin. 
(Ord. NS-66, 1979; prior code § 17.12.360) 
Chapter 17.14 - FENCES, WALLS AND SCREENING DEVICES 
Sections: 

17.14.010 - Permit required. 
    The construction of any new fence or wall or the substantial reconstruction of all or any part of an existing wall or fence visible to public view from any city right-of-way shall be subject to first obtaining a permit from the city. A fee, set by resolution, shall be paid by any applicant for each permit issued. All work under this permit shall be completed within 180 days of issuance. All work after 180 days of the date of the permit issuance shall require a new permit. Temporary construction fences shall be excluded. Maintenance and construction of fences surrounding a construction area shall be governed by the building inspector and shall be excluded from this ordinance. 
(Ord. NS243, 2003) 
17.14.020 - Location requirements. 
A.	All fences shall be located upon the property of the person or entity constructing the fence. Adjoining property owners may agree in writing that a fence may be constructed on the property line of the respective properties, but such agreements are between the property owners and the city will not be a party to the agreement nor will the city initiate, mediate or enforce such agreements. It shall be the permit applicant's responsibility to identify the property boundary when applying for a permit to construct a fence. The city will not verify property boundary location prior to issuing a permit. The permit will be issued based on the representation of the permit applicant that the location of the fence is in compliance with this paragraph and the permit applicant shall be solely liable for errors in the location of the proposed fence. In situations where the property boundary is disputed or is difficult to determine it may be necessary for the permit applicant to obtain a survey of the location of the property boundary in order to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
B.	No fence shall be constructed within the right-of-ways granted to the city. 
(Ord. NS243, 2003) 
17.14.030 - Construction and maintenance. 
A.	All fences shall be constructed and maintained in a structurally sound manner. Fences which are structurally unsound and/or hazardous are subject to abatement. 
B.	Fences shall not be constructed with raw materials or fabricated items, new or used, which are clearly and customarily used for other purposes. Fences may also be formed of dense landscaping. Electrical fences shall have placards stating the character of the fence. The materials and the method of construction shall be approved by the City of Willcox prior to the construction of a fence within the city limits of Willcox. 
C.	Link or wire fences, wherever permitted, shall be constructed in such a manner that no barbed ends shall be at the top, except in industrial zones and shall be constructed of a minimum of 11-gauge wire. 
D.	Electrical or barbed wire fences shall be prohibited in residential zones, with the exception of recreational residential zones. 
E.	Electrical or barbed wire fences are allowed in recreational/residential and industrial zones. When used in an industrial zone(s), barbed, electrical and razor wire shall be no more than ten feet above ground level. Barbed and razor wires must not extend beyond the stationary fencing perimeter. 
F.	All shrubs, trees and vegetation material used as a fence shall be permanently maintained in a healthy growing condition. Dead, diseased and dying material shall be replaced immediately. Planted areas shall be maintained clear of rubbish and debris. 
(Ord. NS243, 2003) 
17.14.040 - Residential fences. 
    In all parts of the city zoned residential, no fence or wall shall be erected or maintained more than six feet in height and also: 
A.	No fence or supporting member shall be allowed in any residential front yard which measures more than 48 inches in height. 
B.	No fence or hedge over four feet in height shall be constructed any closer to the road than the front line of the structure or the minimum setback requirement. 
C.	Fences, walls or hedges located next to a key lot shall be no more than four feet in height on any portion of the rear one-third on a corner lot backing to a key lot by a line joining required key lot setback and street right-of-way intersection. Fences, walls or hedges shall be a maximum of three feet within the triangular area formed by measuring ten feet along the boundary or roadways and drives from the intersection thereof. Height may be increased not to exceed four feet provided such height does not hamper visibility for traffic safety. 
D.	A fence restricting access from the front to the fenced yard or from an alley to the fenced yard shall have a gate or collapsible section of fence permitting ingress from the front into the fenced yard and where applicable, from the alley into the fenced yard. 
E.	All fences will be constructed so as not to distract from the surrounding area. Consideration will be exercised when issuing a permit to construct a fence on property designated by the historical preservation commission as historical property. 
(Ord. NS243, 2003) 
17.14.050 - Commercial outdoor storage areas. 
    All permanent commercial storage areas shall be screened from view from the public street by a wall or sight obscuring fence at least six feet in height, constructed of or finished with materials approved by the office of the building inspector. 
(Ord. NS243, 2003) 
17.14.060 - Developments. 
A.	All manufactured home parks, travel trailer courts and manufactured home developments' principal and accessory uses which are situated on a parcel which abuts single-family residential zones and all commercial and industrial developments' principal and accessory uses which are situated on a parcel which abuts a residential zone, shall be screened from such a zone by an approved wall or fence six feet in height above the level of the adjacent property at the zone boundary. 
B.	Walls and fences of lesser heights or vegetation hedges may be permitted by the city if there is a finding that nature or extent of the use of the properties within the adjacent residential zone, or there is a finding that a screening of the type required by this title, would pose as a public nuisance to same properties. All required screening devices shall be designed so that they are architecturally harmonious with the principal structures on the site and they shall be properly maintained so as not to become unsightly, hazardous, or less opaque than when originally constructed. 
(Ord. NS243, 2003) 
Chapter 17.16 - GENERAL LAND AND BUILDING PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

17.16.010 - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to accumulate provisions applying to all land and buildings within the city into one chapter rather than to repeat them several times. 
(Prior code § 17.16.010) 
17.16.020 - Nonconforming buildings and uses. 
A.	In view of the fact that no further development or change in use can be undertaken contrary to the provisions of this title, it is the intent of this title that nonconforming uses shall not be increased nor expanded except where a health or safety official, acting in his official capacity, requires such increase or expansion. Such expansion shall be no greater than that which is required to comply with the minimum requirements as set forth by the health or safety official. Nevertheless, a nonconforming building or structure or use of land may be continued to the same extent and character as that which legally existed on the effective day of the applicable regulations. Repairs may also be made to a nonconforming building or to a building housing a nonconforming use. 
B.	A nonconforming building or structure and a building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, or other calamity or act of nature, may be restored, and the building or structure or use of such building, structure, or part thereof may be continued or resumed, provided that such restoration is started within a period of six months from the date of destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion. Such restoration shall not increase the floor space devoted to the nonconforming use over that which existed at the time the building became nonconforming; 
C.	A nonconforming building or structure or portion thereof or a lot occupied by a nonconforming use which is, or hereafter becomes abandoned or is discontinued for a continuous period of six months or more shall not thereafter be occupied, except by a use which conforms to the regulations of the zone in which it is located; 
D.	Any nonconforming use or nonconforming building which has been changed to a conforming use or building shall not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use or building; 
E.	A nonconforming use of a building or lot shall not be changed to another nonconforming use whatsoever. Changes in use shall be made only to a conforming use; 
F.	The provisions pertaining to nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall also apply to land and buildings which hereafter become nonconforming due to an amendment in this title; 
G.	Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit therefor, no building which becomes nonconforming upon the passage of the ordinance codified in this title or which becomes nonconforming due to an amendment to this title shall be built unless construction has taken place thereon to the extent of at least $500.00 in replaceable value by the date on which the ordinance codified herein or said amendment becomes effective. "Replaceable value" means the expenditure necessary to duplicate the materials and labor at market prices. 
(Prior code § 17.16.020) 
17.16.030 - Nonconforming lots of record. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a one-family dwelling may be constructed on any lot of record in any zone in which dwellings are permitted, even though such lot fails to meet the area or width requirements for one-family dwellings within the zone. Where two or more contiguous lots of record, having continuous frontage, are owned by the same person at the time of the passage of the controlling ordinance, the land included in the lots shall be considered to be an undivided parcel and no portion of said parcel shall be used as a dwelling site or sold which does not meet the area and width requirements of the zone in which the lot is located. Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width shall conform to the regulations of the zone in which the lot is located. 
(Prior code § 17.16.030) 
17.16.040 - Amendments to title and map. 
A.	This title, including the map, may be amended, but all proposed amendments shall be submitted first to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations, which recommendations shall be submitted to the city council for its consideration within a reasonable time. 
B.	Any person seeking an amendment of this title or map shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a written application on forms furnished by the city designating the change desired and the reasons therefor, and shall pay a filing fee of $50.00 to the city. Upon receipt of the application and the payment of the filing fee, the planning and zoning commission shall consider the request and shall certify its recommendations to the city council. Failure on the part of the planning and zoning commission to certify its recommendations to the city council within 30 days from receipt of the petition shall be deemed to constitute approval unless a longer period is granted by the city council. The fee required herein shall not be returned to the applicant. The planning and zoning commission, manager, or city council may also initiate amendments to this title without payment of the filing fee; 
C.	All amendments to this title shall be made in accordance with the comprehensive plan of land use. It is public policy that this title shall not be amended unless it can be shown that changed or changing conditions make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to the promotion of the purposes of this title; 
D.	Amendments to this title may be adopted only after a public hearing in relation thereto before the city council at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city as required by law. 
(Prior code § 17.16.040) 
Chapter 17.18 - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[3] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation authority, A.R.S. 9-240(21). 

17.18.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose for the creation of title 17, chapter 17.18, sections 17.18.010 to 17.18.060 is to implement the provisions of the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act (Act), passed by the Arizona voters on November 2, 2010. The Act allows a "qualifying patient" who has a "debilitating medical condition" to obtain an "allowable amount of marijuana" from a "nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary" and to possess and use the marijuana to treat or alleviate the debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the medical condition. The Act requires the Arizona Department of Health Services to adopt and enforce a regulatory system for the distribution for medical use, including a system for approving, renewing, and revoking the registration of qualifying patients, designated caregivers, nonprofit dispensaries, and dispensary agents. 
    The Act further requires compliance with local governmental zoning rules and regulations including local approval before a dispensary is given permission to operate, for a local law enforcement plan for the disposal of "unusable marijuana" and for reporting of missing or stolen marijuana. This newly created chapter addresses the City of Willcox code regulations related thereto. 
(Ord. NS306, § 2, 2011) 
State Law reference- Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. 36-2801 et seq. 
DHS Rule Reference: Title 9, Health Services, Chapter 17, DHS medical marijuana program. 
17.18.020 - Definitions. 
    The definitions contained in the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. 36-2801 and R9-17-101, shall serve as the primary guide for the enforcement and practices of all such related activities. In addition, definitions contained herein are intended to further assist with the enforcement of this ordinance, as follows: 
    "Allowable amount of marijuana." With respect to a qualifying patient, "allowable amount of marijuana" means two and one-half-ounces of usable marijuana; and if the patient is authorized to cultivate marijuana, the patient may grow up to 12 marijuana plants contained in an enclosed, locked [facility] as defined in A.R.S. 36-2801.01. 
    "A.R.S." means the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
    "City" means the City of Willcox, Cochise County, Arizona. 
    "Enclosed area," when used in conjunction with "enclosed, locked facility" means outdoor space surrounded by solid, ten-foot walls, constructed of metal, concrete, or stone, that prevent any viewing of the marijuana plants, with a one-inch thick metal gate as defined in DHS R9-17-101(15). 
    "Enclosed, locked facility" means a closet, room, greenhouse or other enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by a cardholder. 
    "Dispensary" means the same as "nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary" as defined in A.R.S. 36-2801(11). 
    "Dispensary agent" means the same as "nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent" as defined in A.R.S. 36-2801(10). 
    "Department" or "DBS" means the Arizona Department of Health Services or its successor agency. 
    "Marijuana paraphernalia" means equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, concealing, containing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. 
    "Marijuana" means all parts of the genus cannabis whether growing or not, and the seed of such plants as defined in A.R.S. 36-2801. 
    "Marijuana use" means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, administration, delivery, transfer or transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the patient's debilitating medical condition. 
    "Medical marijuana cultivation" means the process by which a person grows a marijuana plant. 
    "Medical marijuana cultivation site" means the one additional location where marijuana may be cultivated, infused, or prepared for sale by and for a dispensary as defined in DHS R9-17-101(10). 
    "Medical marijuana designated caregive cultivation site" means an enclosed facility that does not exceed, the square footage allowed by the department [DHS] for cultivation space, where a designated caregiver, as defined be A.R.S. 36-2801(05), cultivates marijuana if the designated caregiver's registry identification card provides that the designated caregiver is authorized to cultivate marijuana. 
    "Medical marijuana qualifying patient" means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating, medical condition as defined in A.R.S. 36-2801(13). 
    "Medical marijuana qualifying patient cultivation site" means an enclosed facility, that does not exceed the square footage allowed by the department [DHS] for cultivation, space for each location, where a qualifying patient, as defined by A.R.S. 36-2801(13), cultivates marijuana if the qualifying patients registry identification card states that the qualifying patient is authorized to cultivate marijuana. 
    "Planning and zoning commission" means City of Willcox Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. NS306, § 2, 2011) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ordinance NS 283 under Title 1, Chapter 4, Section, 1.04.020. 
State Law reference- Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, Chapter 28.1, A.R.S. 36-2801 et seq.; police regulation, A.R.S. 9-240(12); ordinances A.R.S. 9-240(28), (29); regulate construction and buildings, A.R.S. 9-240 et seq. and 9-276 et seq. 
DHS Rule Reference: Title 9, Health Services, Chapter 17, DHS medical marijuana program. 
A.A.A.C. Reference: 9 A.A.A.C. 8, Article 1. 
(Ord. NS306, § 2, 2011) 
17.18.030 - Medical marijuana dispensaries. 
    As long as the Arizona Revised Statutes remain in full force and effect to allow medical, marijuana dispensaries, a medical marijuana dispensary is permitted as a special use permit. The planning and zoning commission may include any conditions it finds reasonably necessary to conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The planning and zoning commission must include the following permit conditions for issuance of a special use permit for a medical marijuana, dispensary. 
A.	Special Use Permit Conditions. 
1.	Minimum Notification Area. The minimum notification area for a special use permit for a medical marijuana dispensary is 1,000 feet. 
2.	A medical marijuana dispensary may not be operated as a home occupation anywhere within the city limits. 
3.	An applicant for a special use permit for a medical marijuana dispensary must complete an application that includes all of the following information: 
a.	If the application is made by an agent for the owner, the agent must include a notarized certification from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is as a medical marijuana dispensary. 
b.	The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary. 
c.	The name, address, and date of birth of each principal officer and board member of the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary and the name, address, and date of birth of each medical marijuana dispensary agent. 
d.	A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. 36-2804(B)(l)(c). 
e.	A notarized certification that none of the principal officers or board members has been convicted of one of the following offenses: 
i.	A violent crime as defined in A.R.S. 13-901.03(B) that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted; 
ii.	A violation of state or federal controlled substance law that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted including an offense for which the sentence, any term of probation, incarceration or supervised release, was completed within the ten years prior to applying for the application for the dispensary or an offense involving conduct that would be immune from arrest, prosecution or penalty under A.R.S. 36-2811 except that the conduct occurred before the effective date of that statute or was prosecuted by an authority other than the State of Arizona. 
f.	A notarized certification that none of the principal officers or board members has served as a principal officer or board member for a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary that has had its registration certificate revoked. 
4.	An expiration date for the special use permit that requires reapplication or renewal of the permit after two years. 
5.	Permitted Locations. A medical marijuana dispensary is permitted in GC-1 (general commercial), CC-1 (central commercial), OC-2 (central commercial), HP-1 (historical preservation), H-l (highway service), I-1 (industrial), I-2 (industrial) zones if they meet the requirements of this chapter. 
6.	A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary comply with all applicable chapters of the Willcox Municipal Code. 
7.	Applications for a special use permit under the provisions of this chapter for a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary may only be made, received or held by a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent for a registered and certified medical marijuana dispensary as provided in A.R.S. 36-2804. 
B.	Standard Conditions for Approval. 
1.	Consumption of Marijuana. Marijuana shall not be consumed by patients on the premises of the dispensary, cultivation facility or any medical marijuana facility. Nor shall it be consumed via smoking or vaporization form in any public area within the city. The term "premises" includes the actual building, as well as any accessory structures, outdoor areas, vehicles, parking lot or parking areas which are part of the approved location. 
2.	No dispensary shall display any medical marijuana paraphernalia or any implement that may be used to administer medical marijuana in the public areas of the dispensary for general sales to the public. Related medical marijuana paraphernalia and equipment may be provided for sales to qualifying patients or designated caregivers only. 
3.	The operator shall provide patients and employees with a list of the rules and regulations governing medical marijuana dispensaries and the use and consumption of medical marijuana within, the City of Willcox. Each patient and employee shall sign a copy of the rules and regulations and the operator shall keep said copy in its business records. 
4.	The dispensary may provide consultation to qualifying patients and designate caregivers on the effects of amount and forms of ingestion of different types of marijuana for medical use. The dispensary shall not provide other nonmedical marijuana health care services or products as part of the dispensary operations. 
5.	No person under the age of 18 may be present at a medical marijuana dispensary except with a "legal guardian" and with the prior written approval of the chief of police, or designee, for good cause shown. 
6.	A strict restriction on the medical marijuana dispensary offering a service that provides off-site delivery of the medical marijuana as required by the department [DHS]. 
7.	Only persons with a registry identification card (RIC), as defined by A.R.S. 36-2801(14), authorized RIC holders, and authorized employees may be present at a medical marijuana dispensary. 
8.	A business license shall be required as provided under the provisions of title 4. 
9:	The medical marijuana dispensary shall comply with all the restrictions and requirements of the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. 36-2801 through 36-2818, together with compliance with any regulations adopted by the Arizona Department of Health. Services pursuant to same, and said regulations are incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. 
10.	No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or consumed on the premises. 
11.	Each dispensary shall display in a manner legible and visible to its clientele: 
i.	Notice that persons without a registry identification card or under the age of 18 are not allowed on the premises except as provided by the department [DHS]. 
ii.	That there be no consumption of medical marijuana on the premises of the dispensary. 
iii	Department [DHS] required postings. 
12.	Hours of operation shall be only from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. for at least 30 hours per week. 
13.	The dispensary shall be operated in compliance with regulations promulgated by the department [DHS]. The city may adopt regulations regardless of the date of the grant of a business license or the approval of a special use permit. Such regulations may be amended from time to time as the city deems appropriate and shall be deemed to be incorporated in all medical marijuana dispensary special use permits authorized hereunder. 
14.	Medical marijuana dispensaries are not allowed to advertise. 
15.	Shall have an approved disposal plan from the Willcox Police Department for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products ["unusable marijuana"] as required under R9-17-310, and not to be placed within the facility's exterior refuse containers. 
16.	Consent to Future Inspections. Acceptance of the business registration by a medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation facility from the City of Willcox constitutes consent by the registrant, owners, managers and employees to permit the city to conduct routine inspections of the licensed medical marijuana business to ensure compliance with this chapter or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
17.	Marijuana-infused edible food products dispensing facilities must comply with department [DHS] R9-17-319 and applicable requirements in 9 A.A.A.C. 8, Article 1. Such facilities shall be in compliance with all city codes, ordinances and regulations. 
C.	Development Standards. 
1.	Authorized Location: 
a.	A medical marijuana dispensary must be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle. 
b.	A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located a minimum of 2,500 feet from all other medical marijuana dispensaries measured from the parcel boundaries. 
c.	A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from schools, community service agency, activity facility and or activity where children may be enrolled, measured from the parcel boundaries. 
d.	A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a child care center, measured from the parcel boundaries. 
e.	A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a library, public community building, and a public park. 
f.	A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a church. 
g.	A medical marijuana dispensary shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility. 
2.	A medical marijuana dispensary may not have a drive-through service. 
3.	A medical marijuana dispensary may not have outdoor seating areas. 
4.	The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana dispensary shall be the square footage as required or allowed by the department [DHS]. 
5.	The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical marijuana dispensary shall be the square footage as required or allowed by the department [DHS]. 
6.	Development services director or designee may require additional ventilation and air filtration to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses. 
7.	The medical marijuana dispensary shall have an interior customer waiting area equal to 25 percent of the gross floor area or as required or allowed by the department [DHS], 
8.	Dispensary Entrance. A dispensary may have more than one means of egress from the interior so as to meet building codes and public safety concerns; however it shall have a single secure public entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana, The dispensary entrance shall be located and maintained clear of any barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions that may block the view so that the entrance and pedestrian access is clearly visible from the public street, sidewalk and parking area. Dispensaries are to be designed and constructed so that no area or portion where marijuana can be not visible from the exterior while requiring the entrance to be visible from a public street. 
9.	Security Plans. Pursuant to the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act (A.R.S. 36-2801), the DHS is responsible for promulgating regulations pertaining to dispensary security. A dispensary shall comply with DHS security requirements provide for adequate lighting, alarms, security cameras and locks in order to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft. A floorplan showing the location, dimensions and type of security measure demonstrating that the medical marijuana dispensary will meet the definition of enclosed locked facility and will be conducted completely within an enclosed, locked building. Security plans of dispensary must be approved by the City of Willcox Police Department before special permit issued. Before dispensary is open, for business, dispensary security must be inspected and approved by the City of Willcox Police Department. 
10.	A requirement that the owner secure a certification from the state fire marshall or from another acceptable entity responsible for fire safety in the area in which the medical marijuana dispensary location is to be located stating that the structure complies with all fire code requirements and supply a copy of that certification to the development services department. 
11.	Security Lighting. During all nighttime hours, dispensaries shall illuminate exterior areas of the premises, including related parking areas, sidewalks and building entrances so that all areas are readily visible. During all hours, the medical marijuana dispensary shall illuminate those areas of the interior of the building where the public has access, including the public entry, reception area, and counter area, as well as the interior hallways, other building ingress/egress locations and locations where medical marijuana may be located, stored or processed. All outdoor lighting shall be in compliance with City of Willcox Municipal Code, title 14, light pollution and regulation. 
12.	Medical marijuana dispensaries must conform to regulations for other businesses with similar zoning and all applicable building, fire and safety codes. 
13.	Medical marijuana dispensary must be issued a certificate of occupancy (C of O) from the City of Willcox Development Services Department before it opens for business. 
D.	Community Impact Assessment. The planning and zoning commission may or may not approve a medical marijuana dispensary at a site if substantial evidence is presented that locating the dispensary at the proposed site will negatively impact neighboring property values or if substantial evidence is presented that shows that locating the dispensary at the proposed site will create an unreasonable risk to the health, safety or general welfare in the area. 
E.	Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection may be enforced through the use of the City Code general penalty clause provided for by title 17, chapter 17.96 as amended pursuant to Ordinance No. NS283 under title 1, chapter 4, section 1.04.020 or by injunction or other civil proceeding as provided by the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
F.	Permit Fees. The current adopted development services department special use permit fee. 
(Ord. NS306, § 2, 2011) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ordinance NS283 under Title 1, Chapter 4, Section, 1.04.020. 
State Law reference- Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, Chapter 28.1, A.R.S. 36-2801 et seq.; police regulation, A.R.S. 9-240(12); ordinances, A.R.S. 9-240(28), (29); regulate construction and buildings, A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; 9-276 et seq. 
DHS Rule Reference: Title 9, Health Services, Chapter 17, DHS medical marijuana program. 
A.A.A.C. Reference: 9 A.A.A.C. 8, Article 1. 
17.18.040 - Medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation. 
    As long as the Arizona Revised Statutes remain in full force and effect to allow medical marijuana dispensaries, a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation is permitted as a special use permit. The planning and zoning commission may include any conditions it finds reasonably necessary to conserve and promote the public, health, safety, convenience and general welfare. The planning and zoning commission must include the following permit conditions for issuance of a special use permit for a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation. 
A.	Special Use Permit Conditions. 
1.	Minimum Notification Area. The minimum notification area for a special use permit for a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation is 1,000 feet. 
2.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation may not be operated as a home occupation anywhere within the city. 
3.	An applicant for a special use permit for a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must complete an application that includes all of the following information: 
a.	If the application is made by an agent for the owner, the agent must include a notarized certification from the owner that the owner knows that the proposed use of the property is as a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation. 
b.	The legal name of the medical marijuana dispensary. 
c.	The name address and date of birth of each principal officer and board member of the nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary and the name, address, and date of birth of each medical marijuana dispensary agent. 
d.	A copy of the operating procedures adopted in compliance with A.R.S. 36-2804(B)(1)(c). 
e.	A notarized certification that none of the principal officers or board members has been convicted of one of the following offenses: 
i.	A violent crime as defined in A.R.S. 13-901.03(B) that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted; 
ii.	A violation of state or federal controlled substance law that was classified as a felony in the jurisdiction where the person was convicted including an offense for which the sentence, any term of probation, incarceration or supervised release, was completed within the ten years prior to applying for the application for the dispensary or an offense involving conduct that would be immune from arrest, prosecution or penalty under A.R.S. 36-2811, except that the conduct occurred before the effective date of that statute or was prosecuted by air authority other than the State of Arizona. 
f.	A notarized certification that none of the principal officers or board members has served as a principal officer or board member for a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary that has had its registration certificate revoked. 
4.	An expiration date for the special use permit that requires reapplication or renewal of the permit after two years. 
5.	Permitted Locations. A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation is permitted in GC-1 (general commercial), CC-1 (central Commercial), CC-2 (central commercial), HP-1 (historical preservation), H-l (highway service), I-1 (industrial), I-2 (industrial) zones if they meet the requirements of this chapter. 
6.	A requirement that the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location comply with all applicable chapters of the Willcox Municipal Code. 
7.	Applications for a special use permit under the provisions of this chapter for a nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary may only be made, received or held by a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary agent for a registered and certified medical marijuana dispensary as provided in A.R.S. 36-2804. 
B.	Standard Conditions For Approval. 
1.	Consumption of Marijuana. Marijuana a shall not be consumed by patients on the premises of the dispensary, cultivation facility or any medical marijuana facility. Nor shall it be consumed via smoking or vaporization form in any public area within the city. The term "premises" includes the actual building, as well as any accessory structures, outdoor areas, vehicles, parking lot or parking areas which are part of the approved location. 
2.	No medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall sell any medical marijuana paraphernalia or any implement to administer medical marijuana. 
3.	The operator shall place a list of the rules and regulations governing medical marijuana dispensaries and medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations in a conspicuous place. Each employee shall read and sign a copy of the rules and regulations and the operator shall keep said copy in its business records. 
4.	No person under the age of 18 may be present at a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location except with a "legal guardian" and with the prior written approval of the chief of police, or designee, for good cause shown. 
5.	Only persons with a registry identification card (RIC), as defined by A.R.S. 36-2801(14), authorized RIC holders, and authorized employees may be present at a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location. 
6.	A business license shall be required as provided under the provisions of title 4. 
7.	The medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations shall comply with all the restrictions and requirements of the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, A.R.S. 36-2801 through 36-2818, together with compliance with any regulations adopted by the Arizona Department of Health Services pursuant to same, and said regulations are incorporated herein by this reference as if set forth in full. 
8.	No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or consumed on the premises. 
9.	Hours of operation shall be only from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. for at least 30 hours per week. 
10.	The medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be operated in compliance with regulations promulgated by the department [DHS]. The city may adopt regulations regardless of the date of the grant of a business license or the approval of a special use permit. Such regulations may be amended from time to time as the city deems appropriate and shall be deemed to be incorporated, in all medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation special use permits authorized hereunder. 
11.	Medical marijuana dispensaries off-site cultivation sites are not allowed to advertise. 
12.	Shall have an approved disposal plan from the Willcox Police Department for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products ["unusable marijuana"] as required under R9-17-310, and not to be placed within the facility's exterior refuse containers. 
13.	Consent to Future Inspections. Acceptance of the business registration by a medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation facility from the City of Willcox constitutes consent by the registrant, owners, managers and employees to permit the city to conduct routine inspections of the licensed medical marijuana business to ensure compliance with this chapter or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
14.	Marijuana-infused edible food products dispensing facilities must comply with department [DHS] R9-17-319 and applicable requirements in 9 A.A.A.C. 8, Article 1. Such facilities shall be in compliance with all city codes, ordinances and regulations. 
15.	No sale of medical marijuana to "qualifying patient" allowed at cultivation facilities. 
C.	Development Standards. 
1.	Location; 
a.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must be located in a permanent building and may not be located in a trailer, cargo container or motor vehicle. 
b.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be located a minimum of 2,500 feet from all other medical marijuana dispensaries and medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations measured from the parcel boundaries. 
c.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from schools, community service agency, activity facility and/or activity where children may be enrolled, measured from the parcel boundaries. 
d.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a childcare center, measured from the parcel boundaries. 
e.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a library, public community building, and a public park. 
f.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a church. 
g.	A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be located a minimum of 500 feet from a residential substance abuse diagnostic and treatment facility or other drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility. 
2.	The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be the square footage as required or allowed by the Arizona Department of Health [DHS]. 
3.	The secure storage area for the medical marijuana stored at the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall be the square footage as required or allowed by the department [DHS]. 
4.	Development services director or designee may require additional ventilation and air filtration to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses. 
5.	Medical Marijuana Dispensary Off-Site Cultivation Entrance. An off-site cultivation location may have more than one means of egress from the interior so as to meet building codes and public safety concerns; however it shall have a single secure entrance and shall implement appropriate security measures to deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and unauthorized entrance into areas containing marijuana. The medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation entrance shall be located and maintained clear of any barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions that may block the view so that the entrance is clearly visible from the public street, sidewalk and parking area. Medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations are to be designed and constructed so that no area or portion where marijuana cannot be visible from the exterior while requiring the entrance to be visible from a public street. 
6.	Security Plans. Pursuant to the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act (A.R.S. 36-2801), the DHS is responsible for promulgating regulations pertaining to dispensary security. A medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location shall comply with DHS security requirements provide for adequate lighting, alarms, security cameras and locks in order to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft. A floorplan showing the location, dimensions and type of security measure demonstrating that the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location will meet the definition of enclosed, locked facility and will be conducted completely within an enclosed, locked building. Security plans of medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must be approved by the City of Willcox Police Department before special permit issued. Before the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location is issued certificate of occupation, medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location security must be inspected and approved by the City of Willcox Police Department. 
7.	A requirement that the owner secure a certification from the state fire marshall or from another acceptable entity responsible for fire safety in the area in which the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location is to be located stating that the structure complies with, all fire code requirements and supply a copy of that certification to the development services department. 
8.	Security Lighting. During all nighttime hours, dispensaries shall illuminate exterior areas of the premises, including related parking areas, sidewalks and building entrances so that all areas are readily visible. All outdoor lighting shall be in compliance with City of Willcox Municipal Code, title 14, light pollution and regulation. 
9.	Medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must conform to regulations for other businesses with similar zoning and all applicable building, fire and safety codes. 
10.	Medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location must be issued a certificate of occupancy (C of O) from the City of Willcox Development Services Department before it opens for business. 
D.	Community Impact Assessment. The planning and zoning commission may or may not approve a medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location at a site if substantial evidence is presented that locating the dispensary at the proposed site will negatively impact neighboring property values or if substantial evidence is presented that shows that locating the medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation location at the proposed site will create an unreasonable risk to the health, safety or general welfare in the area. 
E.	Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection may be enforced through the use of the City Code general penalty clause provided for by title 17, chapter 17.96 as amended pursuant to Ordinance No. NS283 under title 1, chapter 4, section, 1.04.020 or by injunction or other civil proceeding as provided by the Arizona Revised Statutes. 
F.	Permit Fees. The current adopted development services department special use permit fee. 
(Ord. NS306, § 2, 2011) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ordinance No. NS283 under Title 1, Chapter 4, Section, 1.04.020. 
State Law reference- Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, Chapter 28.1, A.R.S. 36-2801 et seq.; police regulation, A.R.S. 9-240(12); ordinances, A.R.S. 9-240(28), (29); regulate construction and buildings, A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; 9-276 et seq. 
BUS Rule Reference: Title 9, Health Services, Chapter 17, DHS medical marijuana program. 
A.A.A.C. Reference: 9 A.A.A.C. 8, Article 1. 
17.18.050 - Special conditions for nondispensary cultivation. 
    As long as the Arizona Revised Statutes remain in full force and effect to allow medical marijuana dispensaries, nondispensary cultivation is permitted. The planning and zoning commission may include any conditions it finds necessary to conserve and promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. 
A.	l.	Medical marijuana cultivation location, for a registered qualifying patient: 
1.	Allowed as an accessory to a primary residence. 
2.	Must be conducted in a completely enclosed, locked building. 
3.	Must have a legible copy of a valid medical marijuana registry qualifying patient identification card, the original of which is issued by the State of Arizona, plainly displayed inside of the doorway. 
4.	The qualified patient cultivation must be at least 25 miles from a medical marijuana dispensary. 
5.	Consent to Future Inspections. City of Willcox constitutes consent by the registered qualifying patient to permit the city to conduct routine inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
A.	2.	Development Standards. 
1.	All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana dispensary offsite cultivation locations except that the designated caregiver cultivation location cultivation area is limited to 25 square feet. 
2.	Medical marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient's primary residence must not be detectable from exterior of the building in which the cultivation takes place. 
3.	Development services director or designee may require additional ventilation and air filtration to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses. 
4.	Security Plans. Pursuant to the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act and A.R.S. 36-2801, the DHS is responsible for promulgating regulations pertaining to dispensary security. A medical marijuana cultivation location for a registered qualifying patient shall comply with DHS security requirements provide for adequate lighting, alarms, security cameras and locks in order to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft, and must be inspected and approved by the Willcox Police Department. 
5.	Shall have an approved disposal plan from the Willcox Police Department for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products ["unusable marijuana"] as required under R9-17-310, and not to be placed within the facility's exterior refuse containers. 
6.	In the event that a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary begins operating within 25 miles of the qualifying patient's home subsequent to the establishment of the cultivation facility, all such cultivation operations shall cease within 15 days and equipment and materials shall be removed from the premises. 
B.	l.	Medical Marijuana Cultivation Location for a Registered Designated Caregiver. 
1.	Allowed as an accessory to a primary residence. 
2.	Must be conducted in a completely enclosed, locked building. 
3.	Must have a legible copy of a valid medical marijuana registry qualifying patient identification card, the original of which is issued by the State of Arizona, plainly displayed inside of the doorway. 
4.	The qualified patient cultivation must be at least 25 miles from a medical marijuana dispensary. 
5.	Consent to Future Inspections. City of Willcox constitutes consent by the registered qualifying patient to permit the city to conduct routine inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter or any other applicable law, rule or regulation. 
B.	2.	Development Standards. 
1.	All conditions and restrictions for medical marijuana dispensary off-site cultivation locations except that the designated caregiver cultivation area is limited to 25 square feet. 
2.	Medical marijuana cultivation as an accessory use to the qualifying patient's primary residence must not be detectable from exterior of the building in which the cultivation takes place. 
3.	Development services director or designee may require additional ventilation and air filtration to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses. 
4.	Security Plans. Pursuant to the Arizona Medical Marijuana Act and A.R.S. 36-2801, the DHS is responsible for promulgating regulations pertaining to dispensary security. A medical marijuana designated caregiver cultivation location shall comply with DHS security requirements, provide for adequate lighting, alarms, security cameras and locks in order to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft, and must be inspected and approved by the Willcox Police Department. 
5.	Shall have an approved disposal plan from the Willcox Police Department for proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products ["unusable marijuana"] as required under R9-17-310, and not to be placed within the facility's exterior refuse containers. 
6.	In the event that a registered nonprofit medical marijuana dispensary begins operating within 25 miles of the qualifying patient's home subsequent to the establishment of the cultivation facility, all such cultivation operations shall cease within 15 days and equipment and materials shall be removed from the premises. 
(Ord. NS306, § 2, 2011) 
Cross reference- 2008 Code, Ordinance NS283 under Title 1, Chapter 4, Section 1.04.020. 
State Law reference- Arizona Medical Marijuana Act, Chapter 28.1, A.R.S. 36-2801 et seq.; police regulation, A.R.S. 9-240(12); ordinances, A.R.S. 9-240(28), (29); regulate construction and buildings, A.R.S. 9-240 et seq.; 9-276 et seq. 
BUS Rule Reference: Title 9, Health Services, Chapter 17, DHS medical marijuana program. 
A.A.A.C Reference: 9 A.A.A.C. 8, Article 1. 
Chapter 17.20 - ZONE ESTABLISHMENT 
Sections: 

17.20.010 - Zones established. 
    In order to carry out the purposes of this title, the city is divided into zones as follows: 
R-1 Residential Zone R-2 Residential Zone R-3 Residential Zone R-3-A Residential Zone R-3-M Residential Zone R-4 Residential Zone R-5 Large Scale Development HP-1 Historical Preservation Zone H-1 Highway Service Zone CC-1 Central Commercial Zone CC-2 Central Commercial Zone GC-1 General Commercial Zone I-1 Industrial Zone I-2 Industrial Zone RR-1 Recreational Residential Zone  
(Prior code § 17.20.030) 
17.20.020 - Official zone map. 
A.	The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on the official zone map of the city and the map is declared to be an official record and a part of this title and the official zone map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be identified by the signature of the mayor and attested to by the city clerk and shall be as much a part of this title as if the matters and other information set forth by said map were fully described therein. 
B.	Whenever amendments or changes are made in zone boundaries such amendments or changes shall be made on the official zone map promptly. No amendment or change shall become effective until after it has been properly noted and attested to on the official zone map. 
C.	No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zone map except in conformity with the procedure set forth in this title. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this title and punishable as provided in this title. 
D.	Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zone map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zone map which shall be located in the office of the city manager shall be the final authority in determining current zoning status. 
(Prior code § 17.20.020) 
17.20.030 - Boundaries of zones. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the following rules shall apply: 
A.	Where the intended boundaries on the official zone map are approximately street or alley lines, said street or alleys shall be construed to be the zone boundaries; 
B.	Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries unless otherwise indicated; 
C.	Where land has not been subdivided into lots, the zone boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale of measurement shown on the official zone map; 
D.	Where other uncertainty exists, the board of adjustment shall interpret the official zone map. 
(Prior code § 17.20.030) 
17.20.040 - Regulations within zones. 
    Within each of the zones, the use, location, height, and size of buildings and structures, the use of land and size of lots, yards, courts, and other open spaces and the density of population are regulated as set forth in the following chapters of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.20.040) 
Chapter 17.24 - R-1 RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.24.010 - Minimum lot size. 
    The R-1 residential zone minimum lot size area is 7,500 square feet. 
(Prior code § 17.24.010) 
17.24.020 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The R-1 residential zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for one-family dwellings plus certain complimentary uses such as parks, churches, and schools. The primary objective in establishing this zone is to create and maintain a living environment within the city which is characterized by spacious landscaped lots, uncrowded buildings, and quiet residential conditions. Accordingly, apartment houses, boardinghouses and other multiple dwellings, as well as commercial and industrial uses, are not permitted in this zone. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the R-1 residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.24.020) 
17.24.030 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the R-1 residential zone upon compliance with requirements as set forth in this title: 
A.	One-family dwellings and accessory buildings, including a private garage for the storage of vehicles owned by persons residing on the premises, greenhouses for private use only, private swimming pools, pergolas, and arbors; 
B.	Home occupations when approved by the board of adjustment; 
C.	Public parks, public recreation grounds, but not including privately owned amusement parks or recreation grounds; 
D.	Agriculture; 
E.	A signboard not exceeding eight square feet in area, appertaining to the lease or sale of the property, also nameplates in connection with dwellings or offices of professional persons not exceeding 226 square inches in area, provided such signs are constructed and maintained in harmony with the residential character of the zone; 
F.	Fences, walls, and hedges which do not exceed six feet in height; 
G.	Schools and churches and public cemeteries; 
H.	Customary household pets. 
(Prior code § 17.24.030) 
17.24.040 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.80.010 of this title relating to the R-1 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.24.040) 
Chapter 17.28 - R-2 RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.28.010 - Minimum lot size.[4] 
    The R-2 residential zone minimum lot size area is 7,000 square feet. 
(Prior code § 17.28.010) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note- For minimum lot size for two-family dwelling, see Section 17.84.010. 

17.28.020 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The R-2 residential zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for residential development, represented by a commingling of one-family, and two-family dwellings plus parks, playgrounds, schools, churches, and other community facilities designed to serve the residents of the zone. This zone is characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development than is the R-1 residential zone. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the R-2 residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.28.020) 
17.28.030 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the R-1 residential zone; 
B.	Day care nurseries and rest homes when approved by the board of adjustment; 
C.	Two-family dwellings. 
(Prior code § 17.28.030) 
17.28.040 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.80.010 of this title relating to the R-2 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.28.040) 
Chapter 17.32 - R-3 RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.32.010 - Minimum lot size.[5] 
    The R-3 residential zone minimum lot size area is 5,600 square feet. 
(Prior code § 17.32.010) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Note- See also Section 17.84.010. 

17.32.020 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The R-3 residential zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for residential development represented by a commingling of one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings, plus parks, playgrounds, schools, churches, and other community facilities designed to serve the residents of the zone. This zone is characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development than is the R-2 residential zone. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the R-3 residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.32.020) 
17.32.030 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the R-2 residential zone; 
B.	Apartment houses, lodging houses, and other multiple dwellings; 
C.	Group dwellings subject to requirements set forth in sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.210 of this title, which pertain to group dwellings. 
(Prior code § 17.32.030) 
17.32.040 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title relating to the R-3 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.32.040) 
Chapter 17.36 - R-3-A RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.36.010 - Minimum lot size.[6] 
    The R-3-A residential zone minimum lot size area is 5,600 square feet. 
(Prior code § 17.36.010) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note- See also Section 17.84.010. 

17.36.020 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The R-3-A residential zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for residential development represented by one-family, two-family, and multiple-family dwellings and trailer houses, plus parks, playgrounds, schools, churches, and other community facilities. This zone is characterized by a mixture of conventional forms of residential development and trailer houses. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the R-3-A residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.36.020) 
17.36.030 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the R-3 residential zone; 
B.	Mobile homes subject to regulations and conditions set forth in section 17.12.290(D) of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.36.030) 
17.36.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. NS224, adopted April 25, 2000, repealed § 17.36.040 which pertained to special provisions, and derived from prior code § 17.36.040. 
17.36.050 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.80.010 of this title relating to the R-3-A zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.36.050) 
Chapter 17.40 - R-3-M RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.40.010 - Minimum lot size. 
    The R-3-M residential zone minimum lot size area is 5,100 square feet. 
(Prior code § 17.40.010) 
17.40.020 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
    The R-3-M residential zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for residential development represented by mobile homes, parks, playgrounds, and other community facilities. This zone is characterized by mobile homes placed on individual lots which have been included within an approved subdivision. 
(Prior code § 17.40.020) 
17.40.030 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the R-3-M residential zone upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Mobile homes subject to regulations and conditions set forth in section 17.12.290(D) of this title; 
B.	Public parks, public recreation grounds but not including privately owned amusement parks or recreation grounds; 
C.	Agriculture; 
D.	A signboard not exceeding eight square feet in area appertaining to the lease or sale of the property. Also, nameplates in connection with mobile homes not exceeding 226 square inches; 
E.	Fences, walls, and hedges which do not exceed six feet in height; 
F.	Customary household pets. 
(Prior code § 17.40.030) 
17.40.040 - Special provisions. 
    All mobile homes, except recreational vehicles as defined in the Arizona Rules and Regulations for the Division of Mobile and Manufactured Housing Standards, shall be skirted with materials that will harmonize with the design and materials used in the mobile home, as approved by the zoning administrator. Skirting of the mobile home shall be completed within 90 days from the date the mobile home is parked on the premises. Failure to comply with this provision within 90 days shall result in the city inspector personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, presenting written notice to the occupants and/or owner of the premises that the provisions of this Code have not been complied with. Failure to comply within 30 days of the building inspector's written notice shall be a violation of the Code in accordance with section 1.04.010. Each day that this Code is not complied with will constitute a separate offense. The city magistrate shall punish violators of this Code section in accordance with section 1.04.010. 
(Ord. NS116, 1986) 
17.40.050 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title relating to the R-3-M zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.40.050) 
Chapter 17.44 - R-4 RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.44.010 - Minimum lot size.[7] 
    The R-4 residential zone minimum lot size area is 5,100 square feet. 
(Prior code § 17.44.010) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Note- See also Section 17.84.010. 

17.44.020 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The R-4 residential zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for residential development but in which office buildings and certain other uses of a semicommercial nature may be located. In general, this zone serves as a transitional zone between the central commercial zone and the residential zones surrounding the central commercial zone. Since this zone is essentially residential in character, office buildings, rest homes, mortuaries, parking lots, and other transitional uses permitted in the zone must be developed and maintained in harmony with residential uses. While a greater amount of automobile traffic and automobile parking is characteristic of this zone, attractive lawns, shrubs, trees, both on the street and around buildings, are also characteristic of this zone. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the R-4 residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.44.020) 
17.44.030 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the R-3 residential zone; 
B.	Office buildings or a group of office buildings on one lot but not including office buildings that involve the exchange of goods or money on the premises; 
C.	Hospitals, clinics, clubs; 
D.	Parking lots for public use; 
E.	Nonflashing signs advertising the services performed within the building and signs designating the name of the building, provided such signs shall be attached to and placed flat against the wall of the building and provided no part of such sign shall extend more than two feet above the building wall and provided that any lights used to illuminate such signs shall be shielded or diffused; 
F.	Mortuaries, wedding chapels; 
G.	Other uses ruled by the board of adjustment to be similar to the uses specifically permitted in the zone and which will harmonize with the objectives and characteristics of the R-4 residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.44.030) 
17.44.040 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.80.010 of this title relating to the R-4 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.44.040) 
Chapter 17.48 - R-5 LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 
Sections: 

17.48.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The R-5 large scale development zone covers the portion of the city which is represented by planned unit developments, mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions, travel trailer courts, group dwellings, and one and two-family dwellings. This zone is characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development than is the R-1 or R-2 residential zone. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the R-5 large scale development zone. 
(Prior code § 17.48.010; Ord. NS250, § 1, 2003) 
17.48.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the R-2 residential zone; 
B.	Planned unit developments, mobile home parks, mobile home subdivisions, group dwellings, subject to the regulations and conditions set forth in sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.210 of this title provided, however, that a mobile home may be located in the Nordus Subdivision on any lot which was of record at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title. 
(Prior code § 17.48.020; Ord. NS250, § 1, 2003) 
17.48.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open spaces, the height and size of building and the percentage of lot that may be occupied for buildings and structures which are not included in a large scale development shall be the same as in the R-2 residential zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.48.030) 
Chapter 17.52 - HP-1 HISTORICAL PRESERVATION ZONE 
Sections: 

17.52.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the zone is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the community, and to ensure the harmonious growth and development of the municipality, by encouraging the preservation and rehabilitation of historic districts as well as historic sites and structures therein and of historic districts as well as historic sites and structures therein and of historic landmarks. The existing zone is to be designated where there is a group or surviving related structures in their original setting or an individual historically important structure which give an historic dimension to the city. This zone is intended to encourage the retention of early structures, keep them in active use and in their original appearance, setting and placement rather than to modify uses in the underlying zones. It is also intended that new or remodeled structures, located within historic districts be designed and constructed to harmonize with structures located within the immediate vicinity, in future development and to promote an awareness of the heritage of Willcox among both residents and visitors to the community. 
17.52.020 - Definitions. 
    Within historic districts or landmarks, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.	"Alteration" means any esthetic, architectural, mechanical or structural change to the exterior surface of any part of an existing structure. Applicants are advised to refer to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation when tax certification for rehabilitation is being contemplated. 
B.	"Development zone" means a certain designated area in the vicinity of the lot to be developed in which certain historic and architectural features have been identified and shall be maintained for the enhancement of the historic district. The area encompassed by the HP1 zone shall constitute the development zone. 
C.	"Height" means the vertical distance measured between the highest part of a structure and the finished grade at the midpoint of the front facade of the principal structure, excluding chimneys, mechanical equipment and other miscellaneous additions. 
D.	"Historic site," "historic structure," or "historic landmark" means a site or structure, including signs affixed thereto, which: 
1.	Is documented as dating from a particular significant period in Willcox history, i.e., Territorial (1854-1912) or Post Territorial (After 1912); 
2.	Is associated with the lives of outstanding historical personages; or 
3.	Is associated with significant historic events or occurrences; or 
4.	Exemplifies the architectural period in which it was built and has distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style, method of construction; or 
5.	Contributes information of archaeological, historical, cultural or social importance relating to the heritage of the community. 
6.	Relates to events, personages or architectural styles which are at least 50 years old. However, outstanding examples less than 50 years old should be evaluated on their own merits. 
7.	Relates positively to buildings in its immediate vicinity in terms of scale, size, massing, etc., such that its removal would be an irreparable loss to the setting. 
E.	"Intrusion" means a structure which detracts from the district's sense of time and place. 
F.	"Prevailing setback" means the most frequently occurring distances from the front facades of all structures in the development zone or historic district to the front property lines. 
G.	"Proportion" means the relationship between the width and height of a building's front facade, windows, doors, etc. 
H.	"Rhythm" means the ordered recurrent alteration of solids to voids in the front facade, streetscape, etc. 
I.	"Site utilization" means the spacing between the sides of buildings. 
17.52.030 - Initiation or amendment of historic districts and landmarks. 
    An historic district or landmark may be initiated by the owners of the proposed site, or by the Willcox Historic Preservation Commission. 
17.52.040 - Establishment of historic districts or additions to existing historic districts and landscapes. 
    Prior to the establishment or amendment of an historic district or the designation of landmarks a public hearing shall be held before the historic preservation commission, notice of which shall be provided to owners of real property located within the proposed historic district of landmark. 
    At the hearing, the commission shall: 1) designate the boundaries of the historic district and identify intrusions: or 2) designate the historic landmarks. 
    Within 30 days after the close of the public hearing, the commission shall render its decision concerning the establishment of the historic district or landmarks by written recommendation to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall review the recommendation and forward the decision to mayor and council for final designation. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.050 - Criteria for establishing historic districts. 
    In determining if an area, neighborhood or district shall be established an historic district the following criteria shall be examined: 
A.	An historic district shall include historic sites or structures, as defined above. 
B.	An historic district should include a group of related sites buildings and structures in their original setting which contribute an understanding of their heritage of the community. 
C.	The group of structures, buildings or sites should provide the area with a sense of uniqueness, and it should be readily distinguishable from other areas of the community. 
D.	There should be a significant number of structures of related or similar characteristics to make a recognizable entity. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.060 - Permitted uses. 
A.	Use requirements in the HP-1 historical preservation zone shall be as follows: any use permitted in the H-1 highway service zone, CC-1 central commercial zone, and GC general commercial zone except for automobile filling stations, gasoline, oil, and L.P. gas storage and sales, automobile sales yards, nonaccessory advertising signs and similar uses which were not in popular usage prior to 1900. 
B.	Landmarks shall retain their previous zoning use. An H shall be added to the zoning designation. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985; prior code § 17.52.120) 
17.52.070 - Separate approval for signs within an historic district of landmark protection area. 
    The appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials and design of such signs shall be in keeping with the collective characteristics of the structure located within the appropriate development zone shall be further limited as follows: 
A.	The zoning administrator may recommend exceptions to these requirements where it can be shown that the proposed sign is consistent with the purpose and intent of the historic district and is historically authentic. The historical commission will decide. 
B.	Off-site signs shall not be permitted. Directional signs may be permitted upon approval of the historical commission. 
C.	Business signs shall be limited to one sign only for each street frontage per premises. Businesses having frontage on more than two streets will be allowed a total of three signs. 
D.	Maximum area of any sign shall be eight square feet unless approved by the historical commission. 
E.	No sign may extend above the top of the nearest facade, eaves or firewall of a building or structure. 
F.	Design and Materials of Signs. Visible bulbs, not exceeding ten watts per bulb are allowed. Neon tubing is not allowed without permission. Plastics are not allowed. Luminous paints are not allowed. Flashing lights are not allowed. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.080 - Historic district development review. 
    The zoning administrator shall not issue a building, grading or demolition permit for the erection or construction of a new building or structure; or any alteration involving the modification, addition, moving or demolition of any part of an existing structure which would affect the exterior appearance of any existing building or the installation of a sign or the construction or enlargement of a parking lot within an historic district or on a property parking lot within an historic district or on a property containing an historic landmark, or within an historic landmark protection area without written recommendation from the historic preservation commission. An historic preservation consultant shall be retained to review all development lands. No changes to facades of historic buildings may be made without review and approval. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.090 - Approval by zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall authorize the issuance of a building permit for improvements only upon approval of a development plan in accordance with the following procedures. (Prior to the submittal of a development plan the applicant should consult with the zoning administrator concerning submission requirements.) It is also recommended that the applicant review the proposed development with the historic preservation commission at the concept stage. 
A.	Application. Application for historic district development review shall be accompanied by three copies of the development plan. Applicants are advised to refer to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation when tax certification for rehabilitation is being contemplated before submitting an application for review. 
B.	Development Plan Requirements The development plan shall be drawn to scale and shall provide the following information where applicable: 
1.	Property lines, easements, driveways and parking areas, existing and proposed landscaping, fences and walls; 
2.	Location of all existing and proposed structures on the property; 
3.	Drawings ("elevations") showing reviews of the existing structure as well as all proposed structures on the property; 
4.	Specific graphic information regarding exterior materials, colors and architectural details (trim, hardware, etc.); 
5.	A sign plan, drawn to scale, showing the location, size, design, material, color, lettering and methods of attachment and illumination of all exterior signs; 
6.	Any additional information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to properly review the development plan. 
C.	Development Plan Filing. The zoning administrator shall review each development plan for compliance with established application requirements and shall formerly accept or reject the application within two working days. 
D.	Review by Historic Preservation Commission. The zoning administrator shall, within one working day after acceptance of the application, transmit one copy of the accepted development plan to the commission for their review and recommendation. 
E.	Review by Historic Preservation Consultant. The zoning administrator shall, within one working day after acceptance of the application, transmit one copy of the accepted development plan to the historic preservation consultant for review and recommendation. 
F.	Decision by Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the proposed development plan for its compliance with the purpose of this ordinance, applicable standards and criteria and shall approve, subject to conditions or disapprove the development plan within 20 working days of the filing of an acceptable application unless the applicant request and extension. In no event shall the zoning administrator act on the proposed development prior to the expiration of 15 working days without having considered the recommendations of the historic preservation commission and the historic preservation consultant. 
    The zoning administrator shall provide the applicant, the commission, the historic preservation consultant and any other interested person(s) with a written statement setting forth the reasons for his decision. 
    All work performed pursuant to the issuance of a building permit shall conform to the requirements of the permit and to the development plan. It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator and commission members to inspect from time to time any work performed pursuant to the permit to assure such compliance. In the event work is not performed in accordance with the permit the zoning administrator shall issue a stop work order and all work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project as long as such stop work order shall continue in effect. 
G.	Appeal. The zoning administrator's decision may be appealed to the board of adjustment by the property owner, the historic preservation commission or any citizen within 15 days after the decision is rendered by the planning director. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.100 - Criteria for the alteration of existing structures and landmarks or the construction of new structures within historic districts. 
    The alteration or moving of existing structures in historic districts or landmark protection areas; or the alteration or moving of designated historic sites or landmarks; or the construction of new structures within historic districts or landmark protection areas, shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.	Alterations to an existing designated historic structure or landmark shall properly preserve the historical and architectural characteristics which make it unique, and any changes or additions shall conform to the intrinsic and unique character of other building or the structure itself. The applicant should refer to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and be aware of the current tax incentives when rehabilitation work is contemplated. 
B.	New construction within an historic district shall require no specific architectural style; however, the following criteria shall be considered in determining whether the proposed design of a new structure incompatible with the collective characteristics of the structures located within the historic district or landmark protection area: 
    The following criteria shall be considered: 
1.	Height. Alterations to a designated historic structure may be no higher than the tallest comparable feature of the existing structure. 
2.	Setback. Alterations to a designated historic structure must remain the original front setback of the existing structure or the prevailing setback existing within its historic district or landmark protection area, providing that such a setback is compatible with the historic character of the existing structure. 
3.	Proportion. Alterations to the designated historic structure shall reflect the proportions of the existing structure. 
4.	Roof Types. Alterations to a designated historic structure shall have roofs compatible in configuration, mass and materials to that of the style of the existing structure. 
5.	Surface texture of alterations to a designated historic structure shall be appropriate to the historical style of the existing structure and the period in which it was constructed. 
6.	Site utilization shall be appropriate to the historical period in which the existing structure was built. 
7.	Projections and recessions such as porches, steps, awnings, overhangs, entrances, windows, etc., shall be appropriate to the style of the existing structure and the historical period in which it was built. 
8.	Architectural details such as cornices, lintels, arches, grill word, shutters, window and door trim, canales, etc., shall be appropriate to the historical style of the existing structure ad the historical period in which it was built. 
9.	Building Form. Size, mass and scale of alterations to a designated historic structure shall be compatible with that of the existing structure. 
10.	Color. Color of a building or structure, including trim, roof, etc., shall be appropriate to the architectural style of the subject structure and its historical period. 
11.	Landscaping. Planting and other ornamental features shall reflect the historical period of the subject structure. 
12.	Enclosures. Fences, walls or other physical features used to enclose open space or provide privacy shall be compatible with the architectural style of the subject structure and compatible with other historic structures within the historic district or landmark protection area and reflect the historical period of the historic district or landmark protection area. 
13.	Utilities. Now above-ground power, telephone line and cable television installation shall be reviewed for appropriateness and compatibility. No electric utility boxes shall be used on front facades. 
C.	Alterations to an intrusion within an historic district shall reflect the architectural style and characteristics of the existing structure. In addition, such alterations shall generally conform to the height, mass, scale, color, etc., of the structures within the historic district. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.110 - Demolition of structures within districts or landmarks. 
    No demolition permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator demolition permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator for demolition or all or any significant part of a structure, building or landmark which has been designated as historic before review by the historic preservation consultant. 
    The historic preservation commission may deny a demolition permit. 
    In making its decision, the commission shall hold a public hearing to determine if the applicant has shown that the preservation of the structure is physically and/or economically infeasible. 
    The commission shall also take into consideration post-demolition plans for the site. 
A.	If preservation is found to be physically and/or economically infeasible, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant that the issuance of the demolition permit is approved by the historic preservation commission. 
B.	If the preservation of the structure is found to be feasible, the commission shall attempt to convince the owner to preserve the building or structure, if he does not so agree within 30 days, the commission shall have six months to advertise to have the property purchased at fair market value by someone who will agree to preserve the building or structure for ten years. If no purchaser is found within the six-month period the demolition permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.120 - Post-demolition considerations. 
A.	If demolished and the area left vacant, the area shall be maintained in a clean and unoffensive manner. 
B.	If demolished and the area converted to another use not requiring buildings (such as a parking lot), the area shall be buffered by landscaping and walls or fences that generally conform to the character of the other buildings and structures located within its historic district or landmark protection area. 
C.	If demolished and a new structure erected, the structure shall generally conform to the character of the buildings located within its historic district or landmark protection area as determined by using the historic district criteria identified in section 17.52.110. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
17.52.130 - Maintenance. 
    Historic district structures, sites, and landmarks shall be kept in good repair by the property owner so as to not detract from their exterior appearance. Deterioration caused by deliberate neglect of maintenance or repairs shall not be considered valid grounds for the approval of a demolition permit application. 
    The zoning administrator shall advise the historic preservation commission of cases of deliberate neglect or failure to meet minimum building code standards. The historical commission and the historic preservation consultant shall review such cases and make recommendations to the zoning administrator. 
    The zoning administrator shall decide if maintenance is necessary. The owner shall be notified and a public hearing will be held by the historic preservation commission. 
    If the commission finds that deliberate neglect is occurring, the owner shall be cited and shall have 90 days to make the specific repairs necessary to correct the neglect. 
    If the repairs are not completed within 90 days the City of Willcox may make the repairs and place a lien for the expenses against the property owner. 
(Ord. NS121, 1985) 
Chapter 17.56 - H-1 HIGHWAY SERVICE ZONE 
Sections: 

17.56.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The H-1 highway service zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for commercial and service uses to serve the traveling public. The objectives in establishing this zone are to promote the economic well being of the people of Willcox through increased employment in retail services, to increase the tax base, and to provide service to travelers and truckers who use the freeway, as well as to residents of the area. 
B.	This zone is characterized by restful surroundings in which the buildings and structures are situated among lawns, trees, and other plantings, and where the traveling public can find rest, comfort, and necessary services. 
C.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the H-1 highway service zone. 
(Prior code § 17.56.010) 
17.56.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the H-1 highway service zone upon compliance with requirements as set forth in this title: 
A.	Automobile filling stations, cafes, motels, drive-ins (food service), garages, and any other uses permitted in the CC-1 central commercial zone; 
B.	Accessory signs and bulletin boards; 
C.	Billboards; 
D.	Art and curio shops, public and private museums; 
E.	Fences, walls, reservoirs, and dams; 
F.	Public parks and playgrounds; 
G.	Caretakers' dwellings; 
H.	Gas, oil, and water wells; 
I.	Dental and medical offices, hospitals; 
J.	Travel trailer courts subject to regulations and conditions set forth in sections 17.88.010 through 17.88.020 of this title; 
K.	Other uses rules by the board of adjustment to be similar to uses specifically permitted in the zone and which will harmonize with the objectives and characteristics of the H-1 highway service zone. 
(Prior code § 17.56.020) 
17.56.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, and the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title pertaining to the H-1 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.56.030) 
Chapter 17.60 - CC-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.60.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	This zone covers the central commercial and financial part of the city and is primarily suited for retail and service establishments. The regulations have been made with a view to preserving and encouraging the use of land for retail establishments, plus certain other uses of an allied nature. Fabrication and processing activities in connection with, and incidental to, the primary function of retailing are also permitted along with motels, and other tourist accommodations. Since the area within this zone comprises the principal retailing and financial center of all of Sulphur Springs Valley, certain restrictions have been placed upon the use of land. Storage of merchandise, products, or materials must be enclosed within buildings or a sight obscuring fence. No dust, smoke, odor, or vibration shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the zone boundary. Dwellings and other uses which tend to thwart the use of land for the primary function of retailing, personal service, tourist accommodations, and business establishments, have also been excluded. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the CC-1 central commercial zone. 
(Prior code § 17.60.010) 
17.60.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the CC-1 central commercial zone upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Retail, financial, and personal service establishments, provided there is no storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, or junk outside of enclosing buildings, or enclosing fences, except automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles in running order; 
B.	The fabrication or processing of goods done in connection with, and incidental to, the sale of goods on the premises, provided such activities do not give rise to dust, odor, noise, smoke, vibration, or intermittent light or glare discernible beyond the zone boundary lines and do not involve the storage of merchandise, materials, products, equipment, or junk outside of enclosed buildings except automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles in running order; 
C.	Parking lots; 
D.	Private and public office buildings, clinics, clubs, churches, and public and parochial schools; 
E.	Amusement enterprises, pool halls, bowling alleys, public dance halls, night clubs, and alcoholic and beer dispensing establishments; 
F.	Cleaning and pressing shops which use nonflammable cleaning agents only; 
G.	Fine arts studios, museums; 
H.	Egg, poultry, and meat stores (not including slaughtering, eviscerating, plucking, or dressing); 
I.	Interior decorating; 
J.	Launderette (self-service); 
K.	Locksmith, metal sharpening; 
L.	Motels, hotels, and day-care nurseries which comply with the State Board of Health requirements; 
M.	Newsstands; 
N.	Optical shops; 
O.	Photostating and blueprinting; 
P.	Printing and publishing; 
Q.	Radio and television stations; 
R.	Radio, television, and electrical appliance repair shops; 
S.	Shoe repair shops; 
T.	Telephone exchange; 
U.	Tailor, millinery, and dressmaking establishments; 
V.	Bus stations; 
W.	Theaters; 
X.	Accessory signs; 
Y.	Dwellings, when located above the ground floor, provided the ground floor is designed and used exclusively for a commercial purpose permitted in the zone; 
Z.	Other uses ruled by the board of adjustment to be similar to uses specifically permitted in the zone. 
(Prior code § 17.60.020) 
17.60.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as hereinafter set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title pertaining to the CC-1 zone. 
    See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.60.030) 
Chapter 17.64 - CC-2 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.64.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
    This zone covers a portion of the central commercial and financial part of the city and is primarily suited for retail and office buildings for professional, financial, administrative and personal services and certain other uses of a semicommercial nature may be permitted. The regulations have been made with a view to preserving and encouraging the use of land for office buildings and retail establishments, plus certain other uses of an allied nature. Since the area within this zone comprises a part of the principal retailing and financial center of all of Sulphur Springs Valley, certain restrictions have been placed upon the use of land. Storage of merchandise, products, or materials must be enclosed within the buildings. No dust, smoke, litter, odor or vibration shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the zone boundary. Dwellings and other uses which tend to thwart the use of land for the primary function of office buildings and other uses of a semicommercial nature of retailing and personal services and business establishments shall be excluded. 
    In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this zone and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations shall apply in the CC-2 central commercial zone: 
A.	Primary purpose for the zone is professional, financial, administrative and personal services, plus limited retailing as set forth in this chapter. 
B.	This zone is primarily a transitional zone between the existing zones of R-4, CC-1 and H-1. 
C.	This zone is characterized by small businesses and specialty shops on small parcels which transact most of their business during the daylight hours. 
D.	Single-family dwellings are expressly prohibited from this zone. 
E.	There shall not be any retail establishments of any nature where a display and sale of secondhand, surplus and salvage merchandise is made available to the public for sale, lease or rent or exchange. 
F.	This zone shall be characterized with landscaping and sufficient parking to ensure compatibility with neighboring residential zones. Sufficient off-street parking shall serve the needs of each individual business or office within the zone. 
G.	This zone shall prohibit manufacture, fabrication or processing of goods and merchandise, except those of a bakery, tailor and arts and crafts. 
H.	Any construction sites over 2,500 square feet in net area require site plan approval by the Willcox Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. NS-56 (part), 1978; prior code § 17.62.010) 
17.64.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following building structures and uses of land shall be permitted in the CC-2 central commercial zone upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Private and public office buildings; 
B.	Clinics; 
C.	Fine art studios; 
D.	Museums; 
E.	Interior decorating; 
F.	Locksmiths and metal sharpening; 
G.	Optical shops; 
H.	Photostat offices; 
I.	Blueprinting; 
J.	Printing; 
K.	TV and appliance repair and sales; 
L.	Dress shops; 
M.	Financial institutions; 
N.	Personal service establishments; 
O.	Professional services; 
P.	Bakery; 
Q.	Specialty shops, i.e., jewelry, arts and crafts, gifts, bookstore, photography; 
R.	Other uses rules by the board of adjustment to be similar to the foregoing uses, provided such other uses are not inconsistent with the objectives and characteristics of this zone. 
(Ord. NS-56 (part), 1978; prior code § 17.62.020) 
17.64.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots and location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as hereinafter set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title pertaining to the CC-2 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirement and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Ord. NS-56 (part), 1978; prior code § 17.62.030) 
17.64.040 - Prohibited uses. 
    The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be prohibited in the CC-2 central commercial zone: 
A.	Service stations; 
B.	Garages; 
C.	Motorcycle repair; 
D.	Motels; 
E.	Cafes (eating establishments); 
F.	New and used car sales; 
G.	Single-family dwellings; 
H.	Duplexes; 
I.	Amusement establishments, i.e., pool halls, bars, pubs, saloons, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs, liquor dispensing stores, adult bookstores; 
J.	Lumberyards; 
K.	Shopping center; 
L.	Bus depot; 
M.	Egg, poultry and meat stores; 
N.	Laundromats; 
O.	Vet services; 
P.	Pet shops; 
Q.	Kennels; 
R.	Travel trailer parks; 
S.	Warehouses or distribution centers; 
T.	Food stores; 
U.	Billboards and nonaccessory signs, except as provided in this chapter, are prohibited in this zone. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 24 square feet at a maximum and shall not exceed ten feet in height at their highest point; all wall signs or billboards shall not exceed 18 square feet. All lights in this zone shall be nonflashing and nonrotating. No signs or lights shall exist within 30 feet of any residential property. 
(Ord. NS-56 (part), 1978; prior code § 17.62.040) 
17.64.050 - Conditional uses. 
    The following building structures and uses of land may be permitted upon first obtaining approval by the planning and zoning board of adjustment: 
A.	Daycare nursery; 
B.	Radio station; 
C.	Cable TV station; 
D.	Theater; 
E.	Convenience market; 
F.	Mini-storage facilities; 
G.	Furniture store; 
H.	Upholstery shop; 
I.	Hardware store; 
J.	Paint store. 
(Ord. NS-56 (part), 1978; prior code § 17.62.050) 
Chapter 17.68 - GC-1 GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.68.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The GC-1 general commercial zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for heavy commercial establishments and for nonnuisance industries. The objectives in establishing this zone are: 
1.	To designate the most appropriate land within the city for light industrial and wholesale establishments and to prevent the scattering of such uses into surrounding zones; 
2.	To encourage the construction of and continued use of the land for commercial and industrial buildings; and 
3.	To discourage the use of the land for both dwellings and for nuisance industries or any other use which would thwart or substantially interfere with the use of the land for its primary purpose. 
B.	This zone is characterized by a mixture of businesses, warehouses, craft shops, and manufacturing and industrial enterprises which are incidental to retail and wholesale establishments. 
C.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the GC-1 general commercial zone. 
(Prior code § 17.64.010) 
17.68.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the GC-1 general commercial zone upon compliance with requirements as set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the CC-1 central commercial zone; 
B.	Wholesale distributing houses and warehouses; 
C.	Service establishments such as dyeing, cleaning, or laundry plants, printing plants, machine shops, blacksmith shops; 
D.	Food preparation plants, the operation of which is not obnoxious by reason of emission of odors, smoke, or noise; 
E.	Milk distribution stations, creameries, bottling works and similar businesses; 
F.	Assembling and the sale of farm equipment, mining machinery, vehicles and similar articles, but excluding junk yards and auto wrecking yards; 
G.	Public garages and public parking lots; 
H.	Veterinary hospitals; 
I.	Carting, express hauling and storage; 
J.	Building materials storage yards, plant nurseries; 
K.	Stone cutting and monument works; 
L.	Hay, grain, and feed establishments; 
M.	Wholesale and bulk gasoline; 
N.	Oil and L.P. gas storage and sales; 
O.	Nonaccessory signs and billboards; 
P.	Bona fide caretakers' dwellings; 
Q.	Other uses ruled by the board of adjustment to be similar to the foregoing uses provided that such other uses are not inconsistent with the objectives and characteristics of this zone. 
(Prior code § 17.64.020) 
17.68.030 - Other requirements. 
    Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as hereinafter set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title pertaining to the GC-1 zone. 
    See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.64.030) 
Chapter 17.72 - I-1 INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.72.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The I-1 industrial zone covers the portion of the city which is primarily suited for industrial development. The primary objectives in establishing this zone are to separate industrial uses from residential and related uses and to promote the economic well being of the people. In an effort to protect surrounding residential and commercial uses, certain types of industrial uses have been excluded, such as industries which are hazardous or which are offensive due to excessive odors, vibration, dust, or other emissions. Hotels, schools, churches, dance halls, liquor dispensing establishments and certain other uses have been excluded from the I-1 industrial zone because of the adverse effects upon such uses when they are allowed to commingle. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the I-1 industrial zone. 
(Prior code § 17.68.010) 
17.72.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the CC-1 central commercial zone and GC-1 general commercial zone except motels, hotels, churches, public hospitals, public and parochial schools, day care nurseries, public dance halls, night clubs, beer and alcohol dispensing establishments; 
B.	Kennels, excluding outside runs; 
C.	All industrial, manufacturing, and processing establishments, and buildings and structures to accommodate the same, except the following: animal by-products and manufacture of fertilizer from animal by-products; manufacture of explosives, acetylene, acid, alcohol, ammonia, celluloid, and other explosive products and hog farms; 
D.	Storage of merchandise, materials, equipment, and junk either inside or outside of buildings. Junkyards shall be surrounded by a sight obscuring fence or wall at least eight feet in height and no material or junk shall be stored to a height exceeding the height of the enclosing fence; 
E.	Waste disposal sites when operated by a public agency in accordance with state board of health standards. 
(Prior code § 17.68.020) 
17.72.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied shall be as hereinafter set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title pertaining to the I-1 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.68.030) 
Chapter 17.76 - I-2 INDUSTRIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.76.010 - Objectives and characteristics. 
    The objectives and characteristics of the I-2 zone shall be the same as in the I-1 industrial zone. 
(Prior code § 17.72.010) 
17.76.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use permitted in the CC-1, GC-1, and I-1 zone; 
B.	Livestock feed yards and livestock corrals. 
(Prior code § 17.72.020) 
17.76.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to area and width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open space, the height and size of buildings, and the percentage of the lot that may be occupied, shall be as hereinafter set forth in section 17.84.010 of this title pertaining to the I-1 zone. 
B.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.72.030) 
Chapter 17.80 - RR-1 RECREATIONAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE 
Sections: 

17.80.010 - Objectives and characteristics of zone. 
A.	The RR-1 recreational residential zone covers the portion of the city which is best suited for residential development associated with certain domestic animals for family food production and for the enjoyment of families residing on the premises. This zone is characterized by one-family dwellings located on the front part of the lots with pens and stables for the care and keeping of domestic animals located on the rear part of the lots. In an effort to protect the health of the inhabitants and to prevent the emission of excessive odor and dust, limitations as to number of domestic animals and proximity of such pens and stables to dwellings have been imposed. Even so, it can be expected that a certain amount of odor and dust will be present in the zone, and people who construct dwellings or live therein should bear this in mind. 
B.	In order to accomplish the objectives and purposes of this title and to stabilize and protect the essential characteristics of this zone, the following regulations in this chapter shall apply in the RR-1 recreational residential zone. 
(Prior code § 17.76.010) 
17.80.020 - Use requirements. 
    The following buildings, structures, and uses of land shall be permitted in the zone upon compliance with the requirements set forth in this title: 
A.	Any use of land or buildings permitted in the R-1 zone; 
B.	The raising, care, and keeping of domestic animals and chickens in numbers not to exceed four-animal units for each 35,000 square feet of lot area, not including easements. One animal unit shall be one horse, or one cow, or two sheep and/or dairy goats, or 25 chickens, or 25 rabbits. No animal or fowl (except household pets) may be kept on a lot containing less than 35,000 square feet. Other domestic animals not otherwise mentioned may be kept subject to limitations of numbers and conditions as may be determined by the board of adjustment to be in harmony with the objectives and characteristics of this zone; 
C.	Barns, pens, coops, and feed storage facilities for the care and keeping of permitted domestic animals. 
(Prior code § 17.76.020) 
17.80.030 - Other requirements. 
A.	Requirements and restrictions pertaining to width of lots, the location of buildings and structures, the size of yards and open spaces, the height and size of buildings and the percentage of lots that may be occupied shall be the same as in the R-1 zone, except that no lot for use as a dwelling, barn, or corral or combination thereof, shall contain less than 35,000 square feet or have a width of less than 100 feet. 
B.	All barns, coops, and feeding facilities for the care and keeping of animals and fowl shall be located on the back one-third of the lot. All corrals, pens or other fences shall be located on the back one-half of the lot. All animals and fowl and facilities for their care and keeping shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the city health officer. 
C.	See also supplementary requirements and procedures applicable within zones. 
(Prior code § 17.76.030) 
Chapter 17.81 - RU, RURAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

17.81.010 - Purpose. 
A.	RU (Rural) zoning districts are established to achieve the following purposes: 
1.	To preserve the character of areas designated as "rural;" 
2.	To encourage those types of nonresidential and non-agricultural activities which serve local needs or provide a service and are compatible with rural living; 
3.	To preserve the agricultural character of those portions of the incorporated city capable of resource production; 
4.	To provide space for people, minimize traffic congestion, and preserve the existing rural environment of unincorporated areas of the county situated outside of existing communities; 
5.	To provide recreational support services that are compatible with rural living; and 
6.	To protect the quality of the natural environment as it relates to safeguarding the health, safety and welfare of the people within the incorporated area. 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
17.81.020 - Division of RU zoning districts. 
A.	The RU (rural) zoning districts shall be further divided into the following density districts, which are so designated on the official zoning map, and subject to the regulations herein: 
1.	RU-36 
2.	RU-18 
3.	RU-10 
4.	RU-4 
5.	RU-2 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
17.81.030 - Permitted principal uses. 
A.	The following uses shall be permitted in all RU zoning districts, provided that they conform to the applicable site development standards for such uses set forth below, and meet any other requirements for such uses found in these regulations, such as off-site road and drainage improvements. 
1.	All single and multiple-household dwellings. 
2.	Mobile home or manufactured home parks subject to the maximum densities in section 17.88.090. 
3.	Utility installations, other than electrical generation plants, regional sewage treatment plants, solid waste landfills or incinerators. 
4.	Churches or places of religious worship. 
5.	Enclosed veterinary clinics or animal hospitals. 
6.	Riding stables, commercial, on a minimum site of ten acres. 
7.	Emergency vehicle stations. 
8.	Residential care homes. 
9.	Bed and breakfast inn. 
10.	Grocery stores and agriculture-related retail sales (sales area not to exceed 2,000 square feet of total area, including any outdoor storage). 
11.	Day care facilities. 
12.	Wireless communications facilities at a maximum height of 30 feet. 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
17.81.040 - Site development standards. 
A.	All uses permitted in RU zoning districts shall conform to the following minimum site development standards: 
1.	Minimum Site Area and Maximum Density. 
a.	The minimum site area and maximum density are as follows: 
District Minimum Site Area Maximum Density RU-36 36.0 acres One dwelling per 36.0 acres RU-18 18.0 acres One dwelling per 18.0 acres RU-10 10.0 acres One dwelling per 10.0 acres RU-4 4.0 acres One dwelling per 4.0 acres RU-2 2.0 acres One dwelling per 2.0 acres  
2.	Maximum Height. 
a.	Principal and accessory structure 30 feet above grade. 
b.	Wall or fence to meet requirements of chapter 17.14, fences, walls and screening devices. 
3.	Setbacks, Principal and Accessory Structures/Uses. 
District Front Setback Side Setback Rear Setback RU-36 100 feet 50 feet 75 feet RU-18 75 feet 50 feet 75 feet RU-10 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet RU-4 50 feet 25 feet 50 feet RU-2 25 feet 10 feet 25 feet  
4.	Maximum Site Coverage-25 percent. 
5.	Distance Between Buildings. 
a.	Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, the minimum distance between principal structures shall be 15 feet; ten feet for multiple-household structures. Nothing herein shall prevent permanent attachment of structures. 
6.	Screening. 
a.	Whenever a non-residential use abuts a residential zoning district, the developed area of the non-residential site shall be screened with a six-foot-high solid screen. The zoning inspector may defer the screening if the abutting residentially zoned property is not yet developed. Screening is not required in areas abutting typical agricultural uses in the RU (rural) areas. 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
17.81.050 - Permitted accessory uses. 
A.	Accessory uses are permitted in RU zoning districts provided they are customarily incidental to an established permitted principal use. Accessory structures may exceed the size of the principal structure, unless otherwise stated, provided that all other site development standards are met. For residential uses, the following additional accessory uses and buildings shall be permitted: 
1.	Recreational vehicles (RVs) are allowed as follows: 
a.	Storage of no more than two RVs on a parcel (no permit is required). 
b.	Temporary occupancy of one RV in conjunction with a permitted principal use up to six months in a calendar year (a temporary use permit is required; stays of 15 consecutive days or less do not require a permit). 
c.	Temporary occupancy of RVs in conjunction with the construction of a non-residential or residential permitted principal use (a temporary use permit is required). 
2.	Rooms in the principal dwelling for rent paying visitors, not exceeding two such persons per dwelling unit (no permit is required). 
3.	Home occupations. 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
17.81.060 - Other permitted uses. 
A.	The following rural uses will be allowed without the establishment of a permitted principal use: 
1.	Fences (setbacks do not apply; permit required). 
2.	Well houses, permanently affixed (setbacks apply; no permit required). 
3.	One out-building, permanently affixed, and corrals/pens (setbacks apply; permit may be required). 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
17.81.070 - Special uses. 
A.	Any of the following uses may be permitted as a special use in an RU zoning district, subject to the procedures and review criteria set forth in title 17 of the Willcox Municipal Code: 
1.	Guest Lodging. 
2.	Recreational vehicle parks. 
3.	Welfare and charitable services. 
4.	Zoos and other animal exhibits 
5.	Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, and animal husbandry services. 
6.	Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities 
7.	Firearms, skeet, archery or trap shooting ranges, indoor. 
8.	Fairgrounds and outdoor amusement parks. 
9.	Gasoline/service stations. 
10.	Convenience stores. 
11.	Restaurants, bars, taverns and nightclubs 
12.	Contract construction services. 
13.	Airports and flying fields, including private landing areas. 
14.	Manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, distribution, or storage of agriculture-related products. 
15.	Manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing, distribution and storage of products, activity area not to exceed 2,000 square feet. 
16.	Wholesaling, warehousing, distribution or storage of propane. 
17.	Motion picture production sites/studios. 
18.	Meat cutting or butchering operations. 
19.	Retail sales, rentals, or accessory storage of materials, merchandise, supplies and equipment. 
20.	Civic, social, fraternal or business associations. 
21.	Educational services. 
22.	Personal and professional services. 
23.	Hospitals. 
24.	Health clinics. 
25.	Repair services. 
26.	Recycling centers. 
27.	Cultural, historic and nature exhibits. 
28.	Residential care institutions. 
29.	Offender rehabilitation facilities. 
30.	Group quarters. 
31.	Funeral and crematory services. 
32.	Golf courses. 
33.	Agricultural processing services. 
34.	Wireless communications facilities exceeding 30 feet in height. 
35.	Cemeteries. 
36.	Slaughterhouses and meat packing plants. 
37.	Day care establishments. 
38.	Commercial plant nurseries. 
39.	Bed and breakfast establishment. 
(Ord. NS271, § 2(Exh. B), 2006) 
Chapter 17.82 - SR, SINGLE-HOUSEHOLD RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
Sections: 

17.82.010 - Purpose. 
A.	SR (single-household residential) zoning districts are established to achieve the following purposes: 
1.	To stabilize and protect single-household residential development; 
2.	To provide areas for family living at a broad range of densities; and 
3.	To protect residential properties from noise, direct illumination, unsightliness, odors, smoke and other incompatible influences. 
(Ord. NS272, § 2(Exh. C), 2006) 
17.82.020 - Division of SR zoning districts. 
A.	The SR (single-household residential) zoning district shall be further divided into the following density districts, which are so designated on the official zoning district map and are subject to regulations herein; 
1.	SR-36 acres 
2.	SR-18 acres 
3.	SR-10 acres 
4.	SR-174 
5.	SR-87 
6.	SR-43 
7.	SR-22 
8.	SR-8 
(Ord. NS272, § 2(Exh. C), 2006) 
17.82.030 - Permitted principal uses. 
A.	The following uses shall be permitted in all SR zoning districts, provided that they conform to the applicable site development standards set forth below and meet any other requirements for such uses found in these regulations. 
1.	All single-household dwellings, excluding mobile and manufactured homes. 
2.	Utility installations not otherwise exempted, other than electric generation plants, regional sewage treatment plants, solid waste landfills or incinerators. 
3.	Churches or other places of religious worship. 
4.	Residential cares homes. 
5.	Emergency vehicle stations not otherwise exempted. 
(Ord. NS272, § 2(Exh. C), 2006) 
17.82.040 - Site development standards. 
A.	All uses permitted in SR zoning districts shall conform to the following minimum site development standards: 
1.	Minimum Site Area and Maximum Density. 
District Minimum Site Area Maximum Density SR-36 acres 36 acres One dwelling per 36 acres SR-18 acres 18 acres One dwelling per 18 acres SR-10 acres 10 acres One dwelling per 10 acres SR-174 174,240 square feet One dwelling per 174,240 
square feet SR-87 87,120 square feet One dwelling per 87,120 
square feet SR-43 43,560 square feet One dwelling per 43,560 
square feet SR-22 22,000 square feet One dwelling per 22,000 
square feet SR-12 12,000 square feet One dwelling per 12,000 
square feet SR-8 8,000 square feet One dwelling per 8,000 
square feet  
2.	Maximum Height. 
a.	Principal structure-30 feet above grade. 
b.	Accessory structure-20 feet above grade. 
c.	Wall or fence-Eight feet above grade 
3.	Setbacks, Principal and Accessory Structure/Uses. 
District Front Setback
Feet Side Setback
Feet Side Setback on
Corner Lot
Feet Rear Setback
(Primary Use)
Feet SR-36 acres 100 50 50 75 SR-18 acres 75 50 50 75 SR-10 acres 50 25 25 50 SR-175 50 25 25 50 SR-87 25 15 15 25 SR-43 25 10 15 25 SR-22 25 10 15 25 SR-12 25 5 15 20 SR-8 25 5 15 20 *The minimum setback shall be measured from the closest point on the property line or the roadway to the structure/use. * The minimum required setbacks for special uses shall be double that of the zoning district in which it is located.  
4.	Maximum Site Coverage. 
a.	The maximum site coverage in SR-36 acres, SR-18 acres, SR-10 acres, SR-174 and SR-87 is 25 percent. 
b.	The maximum site coverage in SR-22, SR-12 and SR-8 is 65 percent. 
5.	Distance Between Structures. 
a.	Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, a minimum distance between principal structures shall be 15 feet; ten feet for multiple-household structures. Nothing herein shall prevent permanent attachment of principle structures. 
(Ord. NS272, § 2(Exh. C), 2006) 
17.82.050 - Permitted accessory uses. 
A.	Accessory uses are permitted in SR zoning districts provided they are customarily incidental to an established permitted principal use. For residential uses, the following additional accessory uses and buildings shall be permitted: 
1.	Recreational vehicles (RVs) are allowed as follows: 
a.	Storage of no more than two RVs on a parcel (no permit is required). 
b.	Temporary occupancy of one RV in conjunction with a permitted principal use up to six months in a calendar year (a temporary use permit is required; stays of 15 consecutive days or less do not require a permit). 
c.	Temporary occupancy of RVs in conjunction with the construction of a non-residential or residential permitted principal use (a temporary use permit is required). 
2.	Rooms in the principal dwelling for rent paying visitors, not exceeding two such persons per dwelling unit (no permit is required). 
3.	One accessory living quarter in SR-36 acres, SR-18 acres, SR-10 acres, SR174, SR-87 and SR-43 zoning districts providing all other applicable regulations are met. 
4.	Home occupations. 
(Ord. NS272, § 2(Exh. C), 2006) 
17.82.060 - Special uses. 
A.	The following use(s) may be permitted as a special use subject to other applicable regulations: 
1.	Welfare and charitable services. 
2.	Child care facilities and establishments. 
3.	Educational services. 
4.	Personal and professional services. 
5.	Health clinics. 
6.	Residential care institutions. 
7.	Golf courses. 
8.	Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities. 
9.	Cultural, historic and nature exhibits. 
10.	Bed and breakfast lodging. 
11.	Cemeteries. 
12.	Civic, social, fraternal or business associations. 
13.	Grocery stores. 
14.	Convenience stores. 
(Ord. NS272, § 2(Exh. C), 2006) 
Chapter 17.84 - SIZE REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

17.84.010 - Chart. 
    Requirements and regulations pertaining to area and width of lots, size of yards, and open spaces, percentage of lot that may be occupied and the height and size of buildings shall be as follows: 
Zone Symbol Minimum Lot Size Minimum Yards Rear Yard Maximum Permissible lot coverage by bldgs. Height of
Buildings Size of Buildings Area Width measured at front building line Front Yard Setback in Feet Side Yard Width in Feet
 
Interior Lot Side Yard Width in Feet
 
Corner Lot Width in feet R-1 7,500 sq. ft. 75 lin. ft. 25 ft. 5 ft. one side 
15 ft. both sides for both main and accessory bldgs. 5 ft. for both main and accessory bldgs. for interior side of lot. 15 ft. for side yard adjacent to street. 20 ft. 25% for accessory bldgs. 25 ft. 900 sq. ft. minimum. R-2 7,000 sq. ft. for 1-family dwelling; 8,000 sq. ft. for 2-family dwelling. 70 lin. ft. for 1-family dwelling 80 lin. ft. for 2-family dwelling. 25 ft. Same as R-1. Same as R-1. 20 ft. Same as R-1. 25 ft. 750 sq. ft. minimum. R-3 5,600 sq. ft. plus 2 sq. ft. of lot area for each sq. ft. of bldg. floor space above 500 ft. 50 ft. for 1-family dwelling plus 5 ft. for each additional dwelling unit. 25 ft. Same as R-1. Same as R-1. 20 ft. Same as R-1. Maximum of 25 ft. plus 1 ft. of additional height for each ft. that bldg. is set back from street, over 25 ft. 500 sq. ft. minimum for each dwelling unit. R-3-A Same as R-3. Same as R-3. 25 ft. Same as R-1. Same as R-1. 20 ft. Same as R-1. Same as R-3. Same as R-3 except that the minimum size of a mobile home may be reduced to 400 sq. ft. R-3-M 5,000 Same as R-3. 25 ft. Same as R-1 Same as R-1 20 ft. Same as R-1 Floor level to be 18" above ground level 
R-3-M Same as R-3 R-4 Same as R-3. 50 ft. 25 ft. Same as R-1. Same as R-1. 20 ft. Same as R-1 30 ft. Same as R-3. R-5 Same as R-2 for dwellings which are not contained within a large scale development. For buildings which are contained within a large scale development the area, width of lots, size of yards, and open spaces, percentage of lot that may be occupied and the height and size of buildings shall be that which is shown on the approved plan. H-1 No requirements. No requirements. 15 ft. No requirements. No requirements for interior side. 15 ft. for street side. No requirements. No requirements. No requirements. No requirements. CC-1 " " No requirements. " No requirements. " " " " GC-1 No requirements, except that the regulations pertaining to caretaker dwellings shall be the same as those set forth in the R-2 zone for one-and two-family dwellings. I-1 No requirements except that the regulations pertaining to caretaker dwellings shall be the same as those set forth in the R-2 zone for one-and two-family dwellings. HP-1 The area, width of lots, size of yards and open spaces, percentage of lot that may be occupied and the height and size of buildings shall be that which is specified by the board of adjustment.  
(Prior code § 17.80.010; Ord. NS186, § 1, 1996) 
Chapter 17.88 - LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 

17.88.010 - Intent. 
    The intent of this chapter is to provide for a type of urban development in which more efficient use of land, more flexibility in land development and a better quality of living environment can be obtained than is obtainable under restrictions which must be imposed on lot by lot development. 
(Prior code § 17.84.010) 
17.88.020 - Application. 
    The following large scale developments shall be permitted upon compliance with the regulations and restrictions hereinafter set forth. Upon review of any large scale development by the planning and zoning commission and upon approval of the development by the city council, the approved plan shall constitute the zoning requirements as applied to the land covered by the development: 
A.	Planned unit developments; 
B.	Mobile home parks; 
C.	Mobile home subdivisions; 
D.	Travel trailer courts; 
E.	Group dwellings; 
(Prior code § 17.84.020; Ord. NS250, § 1, 2003) 
17.88.030 - Approval of plans and documents necessary. 
    Any person wishing to construct a large scale development shall obtain, from the planning and zoning administrator, information pertaining to the city's plan of land use, streets, public facilities, and other requirements affecting the land within the development. Before a permit can be issued for any construction connected with a large scale development, preliminary plans covering the entire development must be submitted, together with documents pertaining to the development, and a final site plan covering any part of the plan to be constructed. 
(Prior code § 17.84.030) 
17.88.040 - Preliminary plan. 
A.	The preliminary plan must be prepared and submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its approval. Five copies of the preliminary plan must be submitted to the planning and zoning administrator at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the plan will be considered. 
B.	The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, or as recommended by the planning and zoning administrator, and shall show the following information: 
1.	Type and name of development; 
2.	Name and address of the owner and the designer; 
3.	Date submitted; 
4.	Scale of plan and north point; 
5.	Legal description of tract; 
6.	Zoning boundary lines or zone designation in the area surrounding the development; 
7.	The proposed street, driveway and building site layout; 
8.	Typical street cross-sections; 
9.	Profiles of all streets and roads showing direction of surface drainage. Profiles must be shown on separate sheets but at the same scale as the preliminary plan; 
10.	Existing and proposed public utility lines, easements, etc.; 
11.	Location and size of water mains and fire hydrants; 
12.	Location and size of existing and proposed sewers; 
13.	Bridges, drain pipes, and culverts; 
14.	Existing and proposed storm drains; 
15.	Proposed reservations for parks, playgrounds, and open spaces; 
16.	Types of dwellings and other buildings and structures and the location of said buildings and structures on the building site; 
17.	Preliminary drawings of floor plans of typical dwellings, along with elevations of such dwellings and other buildings; 
18.	General planting plans showing the areas to be landscaped and the types of plans and architectural features to be used; 
19.	Size and character of recreation buildings, pergolas, arbors, and other structures associated with land and facilities to be used by the occupants and guests of the development; 
20.	Tabulations showing: 
a.	Area of land within the development; 
b.	Number of dwelling units permitted; 
c.	Number of dwelling units provided for in the development; 
d.	Percent of area to be devoted to parks and playgrounds. 
21.	Location of each parking space; 
22.	Any other data that the planning and zoning commission may require in order to enable it to understand the proposal. 
(Prior code § 17.84.040) 
17.88.050 - Documents. 
    Documents shall also be submitted with the preliminary plan consisting of: 
A.	A declaration of management policies, covenants, and restrictions setting forth the responsibilities and duties of the renters or occupants within the large scale development; 
B.	An agreement between the developers and the city stating among other things: 
1.	That in the event of failure or neglect on the part of the owners, successors, or assigns to maintain the common areas, landscaping and other improvements in good conditions, the city may perform the necessary maintenance work and for the purpose may enter in upon the land and do said work and charge the cost thereof, including reasonable attorney's fees, against the owners or their successors or assigns; 
2.	That the developer will construct the project in accordance with approved plans; 
3.	That the contract shall be binding upon the heirs, assigns, receivers, successors of the project for the life of the buildings and project; 
4.	That no building shall be allowed to be constructed in the open space shown on the plan, except for recreation buildings, as approved by the city council, after recommendations from the planning and zoning commission; 
5.	Any other conditions that the planning and zoning commission deems to be reasonably necessary to carry out the intent of the large scale development. 
C.	If any of the land or buildings contained within a large scale development are to be divided into two or more separately owned units, a property owners' association or a trust must first be established which will insure proper maintenance of the common facilities. Such property owners' association or trust must be approved by the city council and by the city attorney as to form. It is unlawful to divide any large scale development into two or more separately owned units until such property owners' association or trust has been established which will provide, among other things, that each owner shall be subject to a pro rata charge for the maintenance of the common property, that said charge shall constitute a lien upon said property in the event of the owner's failure or neglect to pay his pro rata share, and that the association or trust will assume the responsibility for maintaining the development premises in the event of the failure of any member of said association to pay his pro rata share. It is unlawful for a property owners' association or trust to discontinue the maintenance of the development premises. In case of failure or neglect to comply with the conditions and regulations as herein established and as specifically made applicable to a large scale development, such failure or neglect shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this title. The city may also recover costs resulting from such failure or neglect by civil action. 
(Prior code § 17.84.050) 
17.88.060 - Design criteria. 
A.	There shall be architectural unity and harmony within the development and with the surrounding area. 
B.	Grouping and spacing of buildings and structures shall provide for a restful and uncrowded environment. Landscaped areas, rather than off-street parking areas, shall be the dominant feature of the development. 
(Prior code § 17.84.060) 
17.88.070 - Specific standards and requirements applying to all large scale developments. 
    The following conditions and requirements shall apply to all large scale developments: 
A.	In the event that the land contained within a development is traversed by a proposed collector or arterial street shown on the comprehensive plan, said development shall be designed in accordance therewith, and the right-of-way across the development for said collector and arterial streets shall be dedicated to the public; 
B.	All areas not covered by buildings, or by off-street parking space or driveways, shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with good landscape practice. Permanent sprinkler systems shall be installed, when required by the planning and zoning commission, to provide for irrigation of planted areas; 
C.	The plan must be prepared by a licensed architect, landscape architect, civil engineer, or surveyor as required by the laws of the state; 
D.	Ownership or tax liability of private open space reservations shall be established in a manner acceptable to the city council and made a part of the conditions of the plan approval; 
E.	Size of community facilities and the quality of materials shall comply with city standards. 
(Prior code § 17.84.070) 
17.88.080 - Planned unit developments. 
    The following supplementary and additional standards shall apply to planned unit developments: 
A.	Not less than ten percent of the gross area of the development shall be designated as common open space for parks and playgrounds for the use of occupants. The land covered by vehicular roads and off-street parking and the yards surrounding buildings which constitute open space pertinent to individual dwelling units shall not be included in computing the required area for open space; 
B.	At least 70 percent of the required yards which abut upon public streets shall be landscaped; 
C.	In addition to dwellings, the development may include schools, churches, club houses, or other nonprofit or public recreation buildings, and other uses which may be permitted in the surrounding zone. In a planned unit development containing 50 or more dwelling units, the development may also include a convenience center containing not more than ten square feet per dwelling unit in the development; 
D.	The dwelling units may be situated in one or more buildings provided the total number of dwelling units does not exceed the number of dwelling units permitted on one acre multiplied by the number of acres within the development. The building may also be clustered and individual lot sizes may be reduced below the requirements of the surrounding zone in which the development is located; 
E.	The development shall contain not less than three acres; 
F.	The number of dwelling units shall be limited to 15 units per acre; 
G.	No building shall be constructed closer than 20 feet to another building; 
H.	Whenever a planned unit development is on the opposite side of a street from one or more existing dwellings, then all yard and location requirements pertaining to the land across the street shall also apply to the frontage within the development; 
I.	Streets that serve 20 or more dwelling units shall be at least 30 feet in width; 
J.	All of the parking spaces shall be hard surfaced; 
K.	Property development standards in excess of the minimum standards herein specified may be imposed where it is determined by the city council that such increased standards are necessary in order to insure that the development will mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses of property and are necessary to accomplish the intent of planned unit developments. In the event that a developer does not desire to comply with the requirements of this chapter in obtaining approval of his development, he may develop his land in accordance with the requirements of the surrounding zone in which the development is located. 
(Prior code § 17.84.080; Ord. NS155, § 2, 1992) 
17.88.090 - Mobile home parks. 
    The following supplementary and additional standards shall apply to mobile home parks: 
A.	The mobile home park shall be in one ownership and shall remain in one ownership. The park shall contain not less than four acres of land; 
B.	The mobile homes may be clustered and the individual lot sizes may be reduced below the requirements for single family dwellings in the zone in which the development is located, provided that the total number of mobile home units does not exceed eight units multiplied by the number of acres in the development. The remaining land not contained in individual lots, roads, or parking shall be set aside and developed as parks, playgrounds, and service areas for the common use and enjoyment of the occupants; 
C.	No less than ten percent of the gross area of the mobile home park shall be set aside as open space for use by the occupants. The open space shall be situated as near to the central part of the park as good design indicates. The land covered by vehicular roadways, sidewalk, and off-street parking and landscaped areas surrounding trailer spaces, which are pertinent to each trailer space, and areas devoted to service facilities shall not be construed as being part of the area required for open space; 
D.	No mobile home shall be located closer than 15 feet to the nearest portion of any other mobile home, except that metal carports having three or more open sides may be located within ten feet to another mobile home or add-on; 
E.	All mobile homes and add-ons shall be set back at least eight feet from all roadways within the mobile home park and at least 25 feet from public streets; 
F.	All off-street parking space and driveways shall be hard surfaced; 
G.	A strip of land at least eight feet wide surrounding the mobile home park shall be left unoccupied by mobile homes and shall be landscaped and otherwise designed to afford privacy to the development; 
H.	All mobile homes shall be skirted in compliance with section 17.40.040. All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of the confines of a mobile home must be housed in a closed structure. All skirting service buildings, patios, garages, carports, and other add-ons must also be compatible in design and construction with the mobile home and with the service buildings as approved by the planning and zoning administrator; 
I.	All mobile home spaces shall be occupied only after a written lease has been negotiated with the lessee which shall be made available to the officials of the city upon demand; 
J.	Roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate anticipated traffic as follows: 
1.	For two-way traffic with no parking-24 feet in width; 
2.	For entrance streets and collector streets within the development-minimum of 36 feet in width. All streets shall be bordered by curbs, and the streets shall be hard-surfaced. 
K.	There shall be no more than two entrances from the mobile home park into any one street, which entrances shall be no closer than 75 feet from each other, nor closer than 70 feet from the corner of an intersection; 
L.	Access shall be provided to each mobile home stand by means of an access way reserved for maneuvering mobile homes into position and shall be kept free from trees and other immovable obstructions. Paving the access way shall not be permitted. Use of planks, steel mats, or other means during placement of a mobile home shall be allowed so long as the same are removed immediately after placement of the mobile home; 
M.	Off-street parking shall be provided at the rate of two parking spaces per mobile home space contained within the mobile home park. In no case shall the parking space be located greater than 100 feet away from the mobile home space it is designed to serve, except that one-fourth of the required parking spaces may be located not more than 300 feet away from the mobile home spaces it is designed to serve; 
N.	Mobile home parks containing not less than 50 mobile homes may include a launderette for convenience of the occupants of the park but not for the general public; 
O.	The yard which must be provided between a public street and the nearest mobile home shall be landscaped, except for permitted driveways, in a manner which is similar to conventional dwellings; 
P.	Yard Lighting. A minimum of two-tenths footcandles of light shall be required for protective yard lighting the full length of all driveways and walkways; 
Q.	An area of at least 100 square feet for each mobile home space contained within the park shall be provided for the storage of boats, trailers, campers, etc. Said storage space shall be enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence of not less than six nor more than eight feet in height; 
R.	In addition to meeting the above requirements, all mobile home parks shall also conform to requirements of the plumbing code of the city, and to the regulations of the state health department; 
S.	Property development standards in excess of the minimum standards herein specified may be imposed where it is determined by the city council that such increased standards are necessary in order to insure that the development will mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses of property and are necessary to accomplish the intent of mobile home parks. In the event that a developer does not desire to comply with the requirements of this chapter in obtaining approval of his development, he may develop his land in accordance with the requirements of the surrounding zone in which the development is located. 
(Prior code § 17.84.090; Ord. NS116, 1985) 
17.88.100 - Mobile home subdivisions. 
    The following supplementary and additional standards shall apply to mobile home subdivisions: 
A.	The regulations pertaining to the subdivision of land within the city shall be adhered to; 
B.	Density shall not exceed six lots per acre of land contained within the subdivision and the subdivision shall contain at least four acres of land; 
C.	No less than ten percent of the gross area of the subdivision shall be set aside as open space for use by the occupants. The open space shall be situated as near to the central part of the park as good design indicates. The land covered by vehicular roadways, driveways, sidewalks, and off-street parking area and land contained within a lot shall not be construed as being part of the area required for open space; 
D.	No mobile home or add-on shall be located closer than 15 feet to another mobile home or add-on; 
E.	All mobile homes shall be set back at least 25 feet from all roadways; 
F.	A sight-obscuring wall or fence or a strip of land at least eight feet wide shall be constructed or provided around the mobile home park subdivision, except across roadways and along the front lot line of the subdivision, in order to afford privacy to the subdivision; 
G.	All mobile homes placed in the subdivision shall be skirted in accordance with section 17.40.040 and all skirting, buildings, add-ons and structures placed in the subdivision shall be compatible in design and construction with the mobile homes as approved by the planning and zoning administrator. 
H.	Roadway widths shall conform to the subdivision regulations; 
I.	An area of at least 100 square feet for each lot contained within the subdivision shall be provided for the storage of trailers, campers, and other material. Such storage space shall be enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence of not less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height; 
J.	Property development standards in excess of the minimum standards herein specified may be imposed where it is determined by the city council that such increased standards are necessary in order to insure that the development will mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses of property and are necessary to accomplish the intent of mobile home subdivisions. In the event that a developer does not desire to comply with the requirements of this chapter in obtaining approval of his subdivision, he may develop his land in accordance with the requirements of the surrounding zone in which the subdivision is located. 
(Prior code § 17.84.100; Ord. NS116, 1985) 
17.88.110 - Travel trailer courts. 
    The following supplementary and additional standards shall apply to travel trailer courts: 
A.	The development shall abut upon an arterial or collector street as shown in the comprehensive plan of the city; 
B.	All entrances and exits from the travel trailer court shall be by forward motion only; 
C.	No exit or entrance from a travel trailer court shall be through a residential zone and no entrance or exit shall be located closer than fifty feet to the intersection of two streets; 
D.	All travel trailers shall be set back at least 20 feet from any public street; 
E.	All one-way roadways shall be at least 12 feet in width and all two-way roadways at least 20 feet in width and all roadways shall be hard-surfaced; 
F.	Each travel trailer space shall be at least 20 feet in width and at least 40 feet in length and shall be clearly marked on the ground; 
G.	Each travel trailer court shall be held in one ownership and shall contain at least one acre of land; 
H.	In addition to the above requirements all travel trailer courts shall also conform to requirements of the plumbing code of the city, and to the regulations of the state health department. 
(Prior code § 17.84.110) 
17.88.120 - Group dwellings. 
    The following supplementary and additional standards shall apply to group dwellings: 
A.	Same as for planned unit developments except: 
1.	No common open space shall be required, 
2.	The development shall contain not less than 20,000 square feet nor more than four acres. 
(Prior code § 17.84.120) 
17.88.130 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. NS250, adopted Nov. 17, 2003, repealed § 17.88.130 which pertained to farm labor camps, and derived from prior code § 17.84.130. 
17.88.140 - Planning and zoning commission review. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plan of any large scale development. In considering the plan, the planning and zoning commission shall make sure: 
A.	That the development is consistent with the comprehensive plan for the city; 
B.	That the development will constitute a living environment of sustained desirability and stability; 
C.	That the development will not produce a volume of traffic beyond the capacity of the surrounding street system; 
D.	That requirements for utilities, off-street parking, traffic circulation and other public requirements will be adequately met; and 
E.	That the design criteria and intent of this chapter shall be adequately complied with. 
(Prior code § 17.84.140) 
17.88.150 - Approval or return of preliminary plans. 
    Within 60 days from the date of submission, the planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plan and documents and shall either approve as submitted or shall refer them back to the developer for one or more of the following reasons: 
A.	The development has been found to be inconsistent with either this title or the comprehensive plan; 
B.	The planning and zoning commission requires that certain specific changes be made in the plans; 
C.	The plans or documents have not been completed. 
(Prior code § 17.84.150) 
17.88.160 - Recommend change of zone. 
    Upon approval of the preliminary plan of a large scale development, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend to the city council that the zone map be amended. The city council shall then hold a public hearing thereon in accordance with section 17.16.040 of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.84.160) 
17.88.170 - Duration of preliminary plan approval. 
    In the event that the city council approves a change in the zone map covering the territory described in the large scale development, approval of the preliminary plan shall be valid for one year unless changing conditions require said approval to be rescinded by the city council in which case notice of such actions shall be given to the owners of the property. If a final plan covering all or part of the territory covered in the preliminary plan has not been submitted within one year from the date of preliminary approval, the development will be deemed to be abandoned. Thereupon, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend that the territory included in the original plan be rezoned. 
(Prior code § 17.84.170) 
17.88.180 - Stage construction permitted. 
    Development may be carried out in progressive stages in large scale developments in which event each stage shall be so planned that the requirements and intent of this title shall be fully complied with at the completion of each stage. No final plan for the initial stage shall cover less than minimum area required. 
(Prior code § 17.84.180) 
17.88.190 - Final site plan and documents. 
A.	Within one year after approval of the preliminary plan, the developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission a final site plan of either the entire large scale development or the first stage of such development. Such plan shall: 
1.	Conform to the approved preliminary plan; 
2.	Include all appropriate dimensions; 
3.	Include a landscape plan; 
4.	Contain all of the information required by this title, as well as all applicable information and plans required by the subdivision and building code ordinances of the city. 
B.	Properly signed documents shall also be presented with the final site plan. 
(Prior code § 17.84.190) 
17.88.200 - Building permit. 
    No building permit shall be issued within said large scale development until final plans have been approved by the planning and zoning commission and the final documents filed in the office of the county recorder and until the bonds required under section 17.88.210 shall have been posted. One copy of the final plan shall be retained in the office of the planning and zoning administrator. 
(Prior code § 17.84.200) 
17.88.210 - Guarantees and safeguards. 
A.	In order to insure that large scale developments will be constructed and maintained in an acceptable manner, developers shall post a bond, or mortgage or other valuable assets with the city, acceptable to the city manager, in an amount equal to the estimated cost of constructing and installing: 
1.	All required landscaping; 
2.	Street improvements, and hardsurfacing including automobile parking areas; 
3.	Curbs; 
4.	Parks and playgrounds; 
5.	Water, sewer and gas lines as shown on the approved final site plan. Estimates of cost shall be determined by a registered engineer and construction of all required improvements shall be completed within two years from date of final site plan. 
B.	In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within two years from the date of approval of the plat by the city council or to pay all liens in connection therewith, the city council may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the city may install or cause the required improvements to be installed using the proceeds from the collection of bond or other assurance to defray the expense thereof. 
C.	The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the work, or not less than ten days prior to the release date of the bond or other assurance, the city engineer shall make a preliminary inspection of the improvements and shall submit a report to the city manager setting forth the conditions of such facilities. If conditions thereof are found to be satisfactory, the city manager shall release the bond or other assurance. If the conditions of material or workmanship show unusual depreciation or do not comply with the acceptable standards of durability, the city council may declare the developer in default. 
D.	In order to insure continued maintenance of a large scale development, the developer shall record both the declaration of management policies and the agreement between the city and the developer in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 17.84.210) 
Chapter 17.92 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

17.92.010 - Applications for building permits required. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to construct, remodel, or move a building or structure within the city, shall make application therefor to the zoning administrator before commencing construction thereon. 
(Prior code § 17.88.010) 
17.92.020 - Plans required. 
    All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans which have been drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing buildings, buildings to be erected, and the location and layout of proposed off-street parking areas. Plans for multiple dwellings shall also include a planting plan showing how the premises will be landscaped. A careful record of such application and plans shall be kept in the office of the zoning administrator for a period of two years from the date of receipt thereof. Plans of large scale developments shall be kept for the life of the project. 
(Prior code § 17.88.020) 
17.92.030 - Permits to comply with title. 
    From the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, permits shall not be granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure or for the moving of a building or structure onto a lot or for the change in use of any land, building, or structure, if such construction, alteration, moving, or change in use would be a violation of any of the provisions of this title, nor shall any sewer or water service line or gas utility be installed to serve the premises if such use would be in violation of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.88.030) 
17.92.040 - License to comply with title. 
    No license shall be issued by any official or employee vested with the duty and authority to issue licenses which would not be in conformance with the provisions of this title. Any license so issued shall be null and void. 
(Prior code § 17.88.040) 
17.92.050 - Permits required. 
    No building or structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved, nor shall the use of any land be changed, except, after the issuance of a permit for the same by the zoning administrator or other authorized officer. 
(Prior code § 17.88.050) 
17.92.060 - Construction and use to comply with application. 
    Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and specifications approved by the zoning administrator authorizes only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed to be a violation of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.88.060) 
17.92.070 - Certificate of zoning compliance required. 
A.	It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or to change the occupancy of any building or premises until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued therefor by the zoning administrator, stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this title. No nonconforming structure or use shall be changed or extended until a certificate of zoning compliance shall have been issued by the zoning administrator. The certificate of zoning compliance shall state specifically wherein the nonconforming use differs with the provisions of this title. 
B.	The zoning administrator may permit the occupancy of a building prior to the completion of all required work provided a bond or other assurance has been posted with the city clerk in an amount equal to the cost of completing said required work as determined by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all certificates of zoning compliance for a period of two years, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any applicant. 
C.	Failure to obtain a certificate of zoning compliance shall be a violation of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.88.070) 
17.92.080 - Zoning administrator appointed. 
    The building inspector appointed under the building code of the city, is designated as the zoning administrator who shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of this title. The city manager may also appoint other officers to assist in the administration and enforcement of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.88.080) 
17.92.090 - Powers and duties of zoning administrator. 
A.	It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings in the course of construction or repair. He shall enforce all of the provisions of this title, entering actions in the courts when necessary; and his failure to do so shall not legalize any act in violation of such provisions. 
B.	Upon appeal to the board of adjustment of any matters on which said board is required to pass, the zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit all papers, records, and other pertinent data pertaining to the appeal to said board of adjustment as required by the terms of this title. The zoning administrator shall also refer matters to the city manager, planning commission, and city council, or other agency as required by the terms of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.88.090) 
17.92.100 - Board of adjustment-Created-Members-Terms. 
    There is created a board of adjustment which shall consist of five members, each to be appointed by the city council for a term of three years, provided that the terms of the members of the first board so appointed shall be such that the term of one member shall expire each year. At least one member of the planning and zoning commission shall be a member of the board of adjustment. Any member may be removed for cause by the city council upon written charges and after a public hearing, if such public hearing is requested. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term has not been completed. 
(Prior code § 17.88.100) 
17.92.110 - Organization-Meetings-Records. 
    The board of adjustment shall organize and elect a chairman and adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this title. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman or, in his absence, the acting chairman shall conduct all meetings and may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official acts, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be a public record. Robert's Rules of Order shall be followed in the conducting of meetings wherever applicable. 
(Prior code § 17.88.110) 
17.92.120 - Powers and duties of the board of adjustment. 
A.	The powers and duties of the board of adjustment shall be limited to three general types, as follows: 
1.	It shall have judicial power to interpret the provisions of this title; 
2.	It shall have administrative power to grant variances; 
3.	It shall have the administrative power to grant special exceptions or conditional uses. 
B.	Interpret Ordinance and Map. It is the intent of this provision to provide a way whereby applicants who think that the zoning administrator is in error, or does not interpret the provisions of the zoning title correctly, may obtain relief from such error in an expeditious and inexpensive manner without having to resort to the courts. It is also the intent of this title to empower the board of adjustment to decide, upon appeal in certain zones, whether uses which are not listed therein are, in fact, similar to those which are listed. Accordingly, the board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by an appellant that there is error in any order, requirements, decisions, or refusal made in the enforcement of this title. The board of adjustment shall also interpret the zone map and the boundaries thereof in cases of dispute or disagreement and shall determine the similarity or dissimilarity of uses which are not listed as permitted uses in the various zones. Before the board of adjustment shall declare a use to be similar to other uses permitted in the zone, it must find that the requested use will be: 
1.	Consistent with the objectives and characteristics of the zone in which the use is to be located; 
2.	Similar to permitted uses as to function, service, and traffic demands and the emission of smoke, dust, vibration, light, etc. 
C.	Grant Variances. It is the intent of this provision to provide a way whereby an applicant can use his property to the same extent as other properties in the same zone. Accordingly, the board of adjustment may authorize, upon appeal, variances from the terms of this title whereby reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of the regulation, or where by reason of exceptional topographic condition, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this title would result in unnecessary hardship upon the owner. Before any variance may be granted, however, the board of adjustment must find that all of the following conditions are present: 
1.	Having to adhere strictly to the letter of the title will cause difficulties and hardships upon the petitioner which are unnecessary in order to carry out the purposes of this title; 
2.	Special circumstances attach to the property covered by the application that do not apply to other property in the same zone; 
3.	That because of said special circumstances, property covered by the application is deprived of privileges possessed by the other properties in the same zone; and that the granting of the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by the other properties in the same zone; 
4.	That the difficulties and hardships were not created by any act of the appellant subsequent to the effective date of the regulation appealed from. 
D.	Grant Certain Special Exceptions or Conditional Uses. There are certain uses which are not permitted within particular zones unless they are made to comply with conditions which make them compatible with other uses in the same zone. Accordingly, the board of adjustment shall hear and decide requests for special exceptions or conditional uses, but only when authorized to do so under the terms of this title. In deciding whether or not to grant a special exception or conditional use, the board shall be guided by the following conditions set forth, which shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements that must be complied with. 
1.	Small Lots. Where a parcel of land at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified herein is at least one and eight-tenths times as wide and one and eight-tenths times as large in area as required for a lot in the zone, the board of adjustment may permit the division of a parcel into two lots, provided: 
a.	Such division will not cause undue concentration of population; 
b.	The characteristics of the zone in which the lot is located will be maintained; 
c.	In the opinion of the board of adjustment, values in the area will be safeguarded adequately. 
2.	Transitional Uses. Uses which are permitted on either portion of a lot, which lot is divided by a zone boundary line, may be permitted to extend to the entire lot, but not more than 100 feet beyond the boundary line of such zone in which such use is permitted. Before a permit for such a use may be granted, however, the board of adjustment must find that a more harmonious mixing of uses will be achieved thereby. 
3.	Adjust or Reduce Off-street Parking Requirements. The board of adjustment may approve substitute parking locations and may reduce the amount of off-street parking required provided: 
a.	It can be shown that the time of use of the buildings or uses will be at different hours or days so that each use will have the amount of off-street parking available when the building or use is occupied; or 
b.	Sufficient off-street parking is readily available within the vicinity; or 
c.	Acquisition of land for such use is unnecessary in order to carry out the purposes of this title. 
4.	Other Special Exceptions or Conditional Uses. The board of adjustment may grant other special exceptions which it has been specifically authorized to grant under the terms of this title, subject to the conditions expressed therein. 
(Prior code § 17.88.120) 
17.92.130 - May attach reasonable conditions. 
    The board of adjustment, subject to the provisions and restraints of this title, may attach other reasonable conditions or requirements to the grant of a variance, exception, or conditional use which the petitioner must comply with as a condition of the grant or approval. The granting of a variance or the approval of a special exception or conditional use shall run with the land. However, a time limit of one year shall be attached to the exercise or nonexercise of any grant unless specifically extended by action of the board. 
(Prior code § 17.88.130) 
17.92.140 - May reverse or affirm zoning administrator. 
    In performing the duties and powers as set forth herein, the board of adjustment is empowered to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination of the enforcing officer and may make such order or requirement as ought to be made; provided, however, that in interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the requirements contained herein shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the purpose set forth. 
(Prior code § 17.88.140) 
17.92.150 - Authority limited. 
    The powers and duties of the board of adjustment are limited to judicial and administrative matters as set forth in this title. The board of adjustment shall not have the authority to amend this title nor to correct what it may consider to be an unwise requirement. Nevertheless, the board of adjustment shall have powers and duties as set forth in this title and within the limitations and intent of the provisions of this title shall perform its duties and shall have the power to perform those acts as herein set forth. 
(Prior code § 17.88.150) 
17.92.160 - Vote. 
    The concurring vote of three members of the board shall be necessary to decide on any matter on which it is required to pass. 
(Prior code § 17.88.160) 
17.92.170 - Application to appear before the board of adjustment. 
    Any citizen or person, or any officer or department of the city may appeal to the board of adjustment by filing a request in writing with the zoning administrator, and with the application the applicant must have the signatures of all property owners in a distance of 150 feet from his property line. These signatures are not meant to endorse or show disapproval of the matter in question but to show that the owners have been notified of the request before the board of adjustment and the date of the public hearing; and by paying a fee of $25.00, provided such appeal is made within 30 days from the grant or refusal of a building permit by the zoning administrator. The request to appear before the board of adjustment shall be made on forms furnished by the zoning administrator at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing on the appeal. 
(Prior code § 17.88.170) 
17.92.180 - Procedure. 
    Upon receipt of the application, the zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by a restraining order granted by the board, or by a court of record on application and notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Prior code § 17.88.180) 
17.92.190 - Hearing. 
A.	The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof by publication, as required by law, and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. 
B.	The intent in requiring a hearing is to enable the board of adjustment to obtain facts surrounding the case which may not be evident, or which may not be shown in the record as submitted to the board. The decision of the board shall be based upon the facts and not upon expressions of support or protest, or lack of support or protest, which may be made at the hearing. Any party may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Prior code § 17.88.190) 
17.92.200 - Action of the board of adjustment. 
    The board of adjustment shall make determinations in harmony with the provisions of this title; shall notify the city manager and the petitioner of the action taken; and shall file its decision in the office of the board. 
(Prior code § 17.88.200) 
17.92.210 - Recourse from decision of board. 
    Any person, taxpayer, or municipal officer aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may at any time within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board, petition a writ of certiorari for review of the board's decision. Allowance of the writ shall not stay proceedings upon the decision appealed from, but the court may, on application, on notice to the board, and for good cause shown, grant a restraining order, and on final hearing may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision reviewed. 
(Prior code § 17.92.210) 
17.92.220 - Powers and duties of the planning and zoning commission. 
    The planning and zoning commission shall have the following powers and duties with respect to zoning in the city: 
A.	The planning and zoning commission shall hear and decide requests for amendments to this title. The planning and zoning commission may also act on its own initiative in considering and recommending amendments to this title. Before a favorable recommendation is given, however, it must be shown that: 
1.	The amendment will not be contrary to the land use plan; 
2.	The amendment will not militate against the fulfillment of any other provisions of the comprehensive plan; 
3.	The amendment will not decrease nor adversely affect the health, safety, convenience, morals or general welfare of the public; 
4.	The amendment will more fully carry out the intent and purpose of this title; 
5.	Balancing the interest of the petitioner with the interest of the public, both interests will be served better by adopting such an amendment. In considering a request for an amendment to the zoning title or map, the planning and zoning commission may submit a recommendation for or against the request or it may recommend an alternate amendment. 
B.	To hear request for permits to construct mobile home parks, travel trailer courts, farm labor camps, group dwellings and planned unit development subject to the standards set forth in this title pertaining thereto; 
C.	Any other duty imposed on the planning and zoning commission under the terms of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.88.220) 
17.92.230 - Powers and duties of the city council. 
A.	The city council may amend, change, or modify any provision of the zoning title or map provided: 
1.	The proposed amendment shall be first submitted to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations; 
2.	A public hearing is held thereon as required by law; 
3.	The amendment will not be contrary to the comprehensive plan. 
B.	No substantial change in or departure from the recommendations of the planning and zoning commission can be made after such public hearing, unless the change or departure be first resubmitted with comments to the planning and zoning commission for its reconsideration and recommendations. Upon receiving the reconsidered recommendations from the planning and zoning commission, the city council may overrule the planning and zoning commission. 
(Prior code § 17.88.230) 
Chapter 17.96 - VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 

17.96.010 - Responsibility for violations. 
    It shall be the duty of all contractors, subcontractors, builders, and other persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the erection, altering, changing, or remodeling of any building or structure to make sure that a proper permit has been obtained before work is begun on any project for which a permit is required. Any such architect, builder, contractor, or other person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued shall be deemed guilty of violating this title in the same manner and to the same extent as the owner of the premises or the person for whom the use is established, or for whom such buildings are erected or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for a violation. 
(Prior code § 17.92.010) 
17.96.020 - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this title will be subject to the provisions of section 1.04.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. NS116, 1985) 
17.96.030 - Each day of violation a separate violation. 
    Each person found guilty of violation is guilty of a separate offense for every day during which any violation of any provisions of this title, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished as provided in this title. The imposition of any sentence or fine shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this title. 
(Prior code § 17.92.030) 
TITLE 18 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Chapters: 18.01 Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods 18.02 Definitions 18.03 General Provisions 18.04 Administration 18.05 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 18.06 Variance Procedure  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. NS275, § 1, adopted July 17, 2006, repealed the former tit. 18, ch. 18.04, §§ 18.04.010-18.04.260, and enacted a new tit. 18 as set out herein. The former tit. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. NS133, adopted May 15, 1987. 

Chapter 18.01 - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 
Sections: 

18.01.010 - Statutory authorization. 
    In A.R.S. 48-3610, the Arizona State Legislature enabled the City of Willcox to adopt regulations in conformance with A.R.S. 48-3603 designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Willcox, Arizona, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.01.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.	The flood hazard areas of the City of Willcox are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.	These flood losses may be caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage, also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.01.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
A.	To protect human life and health; 
B.	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.	To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize blight areas caused by flooding; 
G.	To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; 
H.	To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and 
I.	To maintain eligibility for disaster relief. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.01.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for: 
A.	Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
B.	Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
C.	Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
D.	Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
E.	Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 18.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

[18.02.005 - Introduction.] 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.010 - Appeal. 
    A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.020 - Area of shallow flooding. 
    A designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.030 - Area of special flood hazard. 
    The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. These areas are designated as zones A, AE, AO, AH and A1-30 on the flood insurance rate map and other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the director of ADWR (see "special flood hazard area"). 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.040 - Base flood. 
    The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.050 - Basement. 
    Any area of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.060 - Building. 
    See "Structure." 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.070 - Community. 
    Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.080 - Development. 
    Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.090 - Encroachment. 
    The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.100 - Erosion. 
    The process of the gradual wearing away of landmasses. This peril is not, per se, covered under the program. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.110 - Flood or flooding. 
    A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of flood waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.120 - Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM). 
    The official map on which FEMA or the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.130 - Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    The official map on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.140 - Flood insurance study. 
    The official report provided by FEMA that includes flood profiles, FIRM, FBFM and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.150 - Floodplain or floodprone area. 
    Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see flood or flooding). 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.160 - Floodplain administrator. 
    The individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.170 - Floodplain board. 
    The Board of Directors of the Flood Control District of Cochise County, or the City Council of the City of Willcox, at such times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this ordinance. (Floodplain board as defined in A.R.S. 48-3601 for counties). 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.180 - Floodplain management. 
    The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.190 - Floodproofing. 
    Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.200 - Flood-related erosion. 
    The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.210 - Floodway. 
    The area of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.210.1 - Floodway fringe. 
    That area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.220 - Functionally dependent use. 
    A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking or port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.230 - Governing body. 
    The local governing unit (i.e., county or municipality), which is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.240 - Hardship. 
    Related to [chapter] 18.06 "Variances," of this ordinance means the exceptional hardship which would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The governing body requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.250 - Highest adjacent grade. 
    The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.260 - Historic structure. 
    Any structure that is: 
A.	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior (secretary) as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
B.	Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
C.	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary; or 
D.	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the secretary; or 
b.	Directly by the secretary in states without approved programs. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.270 - Levee. 
    A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.280 - Lowest floor. 
    The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.290 - Manufactured home. 
    A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.300 - Manufactured home park or subdivision. 
    A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.310 - Mean sea level. 
    For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, to which base flood elevations are shown on a community's FIRM are referenced. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.320 - New construction. 
    For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.330 - New manufactured home park or subdivision. 
    A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.340 - Obstruction. 
    Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.350 - One-hundred-year flood. 
    The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (see "base flood" definition). 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.360 - Person. 
    An individual or the individual's agent, a firm, partnership, association or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its agencies or political subdivisions. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.370 - Recreational vehicle. 
    A vehicle that is: 
A.	Built on a singe chassis; 
B.	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
C.	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
D.	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.380 - Regulatory flood elevation. 
    An elevation one foot above the base flood elevation for a watercourse for which the base flood elevation has been determined and shall be determined by the criteria developed by the director of water resources for all other watercourses. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.390 - Regulatory floodway. 
    The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.400 - Sheet flow area. 
    See "Area of shallow flooding." 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.410 - Special flood hazard area. 
    An area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards and shown on a FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.420 - Start of construction. 
    Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.430 - Structure. 
    A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.440 - Substantial damage. 
    Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.450 - Substantial improvement. 
    Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
A.	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or, 
B.	Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.460 - Variance. 
    A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.470 - Violation. 
    The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.480 - Water surface elevation. 
    The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.02.490 - Watercourse. 
    A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 18.03 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

18.03.010 - Lands to which this ordinance applies. 
    This ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the corporate limits of the City of Willcox. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.020 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Cochise County and incorporated areas, dated February 15, 2000" with accompanying FIRMs dated February 15, 2000, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this ordinance and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the floodplain board by the floodplain administrator. The floodplain board, within its area of jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by rule, require developers of land to delineate) for areas where development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter as development becomes imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria developed by FEMA and the director of water resources. The FIS and FIRM panels are on file at Public Services and Works, 250 N. Railroad Avenue, Willcox Arizona. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006; Ord. NS279, § 2, 2006) 
18.03.030 - Compliance. 
    All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain areas is subject to the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.040 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.050 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 
A.	Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
C.	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.060 - Disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Willcox, any officer or employee thereof, the State of Arizona or FEMA, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.070 - Statutory exemptions. 
    In accordance with A.R.S. 48-3609(H), unless expressly provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter do not affect: 
A.	Existing legal uses of property or the right to continuation of such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a building or structure is discontinued for 12 months, or destroyed to the extent of 50 percent of its value as determined by a competent appraiser, any further use shall comply with this chapter and regulations of the City of Willcox. 
B.	Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any regulations affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration, addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would result in increasing its flood damage potential by 50 percent or more shall be either floodproofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation; 
C.	Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the written authorization required by A.R.S. 48-3613; and 
D.	Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a certificate of environmental compatibility issued pursuant to A.R.S. Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2. 
Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions listed below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction to the floodplain board for review and comment. In accordance with A.R.S. 48-3613, written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the floodplain board prohibit: 
E.	The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and streets intersecting or crossing a watercourse; 
F.	The construction of storage dams for watering livestock or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of floodwaters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 6; 
G.	Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations. This paragraph does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with and acquiring authorization from the floodplain board pursuant to regulations adopted by the floodplain board under this chapter; 
H.	Other construction upon determination by the floodplain board that written authorization is unnecessary; 
I.	Any flood control district, county, city, town or other political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1; 
J.	The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and 
K.	The construction and erection of poles, towers, foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service corporation or a political subdivision. 
    In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided by law, this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or has been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this section or regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. If a person is found to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the violator to either comply with this section if authorized by the floodplain board or remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs and attorney fees. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.080 - Unlawful acts. 
A.	It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization required by A.R.S. 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. 48-3613. 
B.	Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.090 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    All development located or maintained within any area of special flood hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this ordinance is a public nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this political subdivision. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.110 - Abatement of violations. 
    Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this ordinance, the floodplain administrator shall submit a report to the floodplain board which shall include all information available to the floodplain administrator which is pertinent to said violation. Within 30 days of receipt of this report, the floodplain board shall either: 
A.	Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such violation; or 
B.	Issue a variance to this ordinance in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18.06 herein; or 
C.	Order the owner of the property upon which the violation exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their determination. Such information must be provided to the floodplain administrator within 30 days of such order and the floodplain administrator shall submit an amended report to the floodplain board within 20 days. At the next regularly scheduled public meeting, the floodplain board shall either order the abatement of said violation or they shall grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of chapter 18.06 herein; or 
D.	Submit to FEMA a declaration for denial of insurance, stating that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law, regulation or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 as amended. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.03.120 - Severability. 
    This ordinance and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 18.04 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 

18.04.010 - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in section 18.03.020. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.	Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In zone AO, elevation of existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all structures; 
B.	Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
C.	Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in section 18.05.010.C.2 ; 
D.	Require base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals or other development greater than 50 lots or five acres; and 
E.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.04.020 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The administrator of development services or his/her appointee is hereby appointed to administer, implement and enforce this ordinance by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.04.030 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.	Review all development permits to determine that: 
1.	The permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied; 
2.	All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.	The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.	The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this ordinance, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.	Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 18.03.020, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer chapter 18.05. Any such information shall be consistent with the requirements of FEMA and the director of water resources and shall be submitted to the floodplain board for adoption. 
C.	Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available the following: 
1.	The certified regulatory flood elevation required in section 18.05.010.C.1; 
2.	The zone AO certification required in section 18.05.010.C.1; 
3.	The floodproofing certification required in section 18.05.010.C.2; 
4.	The flood vent certification required in section 18.05.010.C.3a. 
D.	Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated: 
1.	Notify adjacent communities and ADWR prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to FEMA through appropriate notification means; and 
2.	Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained. 
E.	Advise the district of Cochise County and any adjunct jurisdiction having responsibility for floodplain management in writing and provide a copy of a development plan of all applications for floodplain use permits or variances to develop land in a floodplain or floodway within one mile of the corporate limits of the City of Willcox. Also, advise the district of Cochise County in writing and provide a copy of any development plan of any major development proposed within a floodplain or floodway, which could affect floodplains, floodways or watercourses within the district's area of jurisdiction. Written notice and a copy of the plan of development shall be sent to the district no later than three working days after having been received by the City of Willcox. 
F.	Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in chapter 18.06. 
G.	Take actions on violations of this ordinance as required in section 18.03.110 herein. 
H.	Notify FEMA and ADWR of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of additional areas of jurisdiction. 
I.	Within 120 days after completion of construction of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted by the director of water resources. 
J.	Base flood elevations may increase or decrease resulting from physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the date such information becomes available, the floodplain administrator shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code of Federal Regulations section 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 18.05 - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Sections: 

18.05.010 - Standards of construction. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are required: 
A.	Anchoring. 
1.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and 
2.	All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of section 18.05.050.B. 
B.	Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
2.	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.	All new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.	Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.	Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.	Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.	In an AO zone, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
b.	In an A zone where a BFE has not been determined, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation or be elevated in accordance with the criteria developed by the director of water resources. 
c.	In zones AE, AH and A1-30, elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation. 
Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community's building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.	Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with section 18.05.010.C.1 or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.	Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under section 18.05.010.C.1 so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.	Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.	Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.	All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet or exceed the following criteria: 
a.	Have a minimum of two openings, on different sides of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; or 
b.	If it is not feasible or desirable to meet the openings criteria stated above, a registered engineer or architect may design and certify the openings. 
4.	Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in section 18.05.050. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.020 - Standards for storage of materials and equipment. 
A.	The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious to human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is prohibited in special flood hazard areas. 
B.	Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.030 - Standards for utilities. 
A.	All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters. 
B.	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
C.	Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or partially in a regulatory floodway. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.040 - Additional standards for development, including subdivisions. 
A.	All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.	Identify the area of the special flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood 
2.	Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator. 
B.	All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.	All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.	All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.050 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved shall: 
A.	Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above the regulatory flood elevation; and 
B.	Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.060 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
    All recreational vehicles placed on site will either: 
A.	Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or 
B.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
C.	Meet the permit requirements of chapter 18.04 of this ordinance and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in section 18.05.050. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.070 - Floodways. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 18.03.020 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
B.	If section 18.05.070 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of chapter 18.05. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.05.080 - Flood-related erosion-prone area. 
A.	The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community. 
B.	Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard. 
C.	If a proposed development is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvements shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard. 
D.	Within zone E on the FIRM, a setback is required for all new development from the lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated "useful life" of structures and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes such as agricultural, forestry, outdoors recreation and wildlife habitat areas and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
Chapter 18.06 - VARIANCE PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

18.06.010 - Nature of variances. 
    The variance criteria set forth in this section of the ordinance are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this ordinance would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners. 
    It is the duty of the City of Willcox to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below the regulatory flood elevation is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.06.020 - Appeal board. 
A.	The Floodplain Board of the City of Willcox shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.	The floodplain board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
C.	In passing upon such applications, the floodplain board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and: 
1.	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
2.	The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
4.	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
5.	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
6.	The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use, which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
7.	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
8.	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
9.	The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
10.	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
11.	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system and streets and bridges. 
D.	Upon consideration of the factors of section 18.06.020.C and the purposes of this ordinance, the floodplain board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
E.	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.	The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; 
2.	Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and 
3.	The land upon which the variance is granted shall be ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and land exchange program provided by A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2. A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Cochise County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.	The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to FEMA. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
18.06.030 - Conditions for variances. 
A.	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, provided the procedures of chapters 18.04 and 18.05 of this ordinance have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.	Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
E.	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
2.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; 
3.	A showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This includes only facilities defined in chapter 18.02 of this ordinance in the definition of "Functionally dependent use;" and 
4.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. NS275, § 1, 2006) 
CROSS REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the legislative history and the current disposition of the sections of the prior municipal code. ;p0;The legislative history information was derived from the Willcox Municipal Code, published in 1971 by Book Publishing Company. 
Prior 
Code § Ordinance History Herein 1.01.010 Ord. 183 § 1, 1970 Not codified 1.01.020 Ord. 183 § 2, 1970 Not codified 1.01.030 Ord. 183 § 3, 1970 Not codified 1.01.040 Ord. 183 § 4, 1970 Not codified 1.01.050 Ord. 183 § 5, 1970 Not codified 1.01.060 Ord. 183 § 6, 1970 Not codified 1.01.070 Not codified 1.04.010 Ord. 177 § 1, 1970 1.04.010 1.08.010 Ord. 89 § 1, 1956 1.08.010 1.08.020 Ord. 89 § 2, 1956 1.08.020 1.12.010 Ord. 162 § 1, 1967 1.12.010 1.12.020 Ord. 162 § 2, 1967 1.12.020 1.12.030 Ord. 162 § 3, 1967 1.12.030 2.04.010 Ord. 171 § 3, 1969: Ord. 108 § 1, 1958 2.40.010 2.04.020 Ord. 171 § 4, 1969: Ord. 108 § 2, 1958 2.40.020 2.04.030 Ord. 171 § 5, 1969: Ord. 108 § 3, 1958 2.40.030 2.04.040 Ord. 171 § 6, 1969: Ord. 108 § 4, 1958 2.40.040 2.04.050 Ord. 171 § 7, 1969: Ord. 108 § 5, 1958 2.40.050 2.04.060 Ord. 171 § 8, 1969: Ord. 108 § 6, 1958 2.40.060 2.08.010 Ord. 2 § 3, 1915 2.08.010 2.08.020 Ord. 33 § 1, 1919; Ord. 2 § 4, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.08.030 Ord. 2 § 5, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.08.040 Ord. 2 § 6, 1915 2.08.020 2.08.050 2.08.030 2.08.060 Ord. 2 § 8, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.08.070 Ord. 2 § 9, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.08.080 Ord. 2 § 10, 1915 2.08.040 2.12.010 Ord. 118 § 1, 1959 2.12.010 2.12.020 Ord. 151 § 1, 1966: Ord. 118 § 2, 1959 2.12.020 2.12.030 Ord. 151 § 2, 1966: Ord. 118 § 3, 1959 2.12.030 2.12.040 Ord. 118 § 4, 1959 2.12.040 2.12.050 Ord. 141 § 2, 1964 2.12.050 2.12.060 Ord. 118 § 5, 1959 2.12.060 2.12.070 Ord. 118 § 6, 1959 2.12.070 2.12.080 Ord. 118 § 7, 1959 2.12.080 2.12.090 Ord. 118 § 8, 1959 2.12.090 2.16.010 Ord. 167 § 1, 1969 2.16.010 2.16.020 Ord. 167 § 2, 1969 2.16.020 2.16.030 Ord. 167 § 3, 1969 2.16.030 2.16.040 Ord. 167 § 4, 1969 2.16.040 2.16.050 Ord. 167 § 5, 1969 2.16.050 2.16.060 Ord. 167 § 6, 1969 2.16.060 2.16.070 Ord. 167 § 7, 1969 2.16.070 2.20.010 Ord. 170 § 1, 1969 2.20.010 2.20.020 Ord. 170 § 2, 1969 2.20.020 2.20.030 Ord. 170 § 3, 1969 2.20.030 2.20.040 Ord. 170 § 4, 1969 2.20.040 2.20.050 Ord. 170 § 5, 1969 2.20.050 2.20.060 Ord. 170 § 6, 1969 2.20.060 2.20.070 Ord. 170 § 7, 1969 2.20.070 2.20.080 Ord. 170 § 8, 1969 2.20.080 2.20.090 Ord. 170 § 9, 1969 2.20.090 2.20.100 Ord. 170 § 10, 1969 2.20.100 2.20.110 Ord. 170 § 11, 1969 2.20.110 2.20.120 Ord. 170 § 12, 1969 2.20.120 2.24.010 Ord. 103 § 1, 1958 2.24.010 2.24.020 Ord. 103 § 2, 1958 2.24.020 2.24.030 Ord. 103 § 3, 1958 2.24.030 2.24.040 Ord. 103 § 4, 1958 2.24.040 2.28.010 Ord. 126 Art. I § 1, 1963 2.28.010 2.28.020 Ord. 126 Art. I § 2, 1963 2.28.020 2.28.030 Ord. 126 Art. I § 3, 1963 2.28.030 2.28.040 Ord. 126 Art. I § 4, 1963 2.28.040 2.28.050 Ord. 126 Art. II § 1, 1963 2.28.050 2.28.060 Ord. 126 Art. II § 2, 1963 2.28.060 2.28.070 Ord. 126 Art. II § 3, 1963 2.28.070 2.28.080 Ord. 126 Art. II § 4, 1963 2.28.080 2.28.090 Ord. 126 Art. II § 5, 1963 as hereby amended 2.28.090 2.28.100 Ord. 126 Art. II § 6, 1963 2.28.100 2.28.110 Ord. 126 Art. II § 7, 1963 2.28.110 2.28.120 Ord. 126 Art. II § 8, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.130 Ord. 126 Art. III § 1, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.140 Ord. 126 Art. III § 2, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.150 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 1, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.160 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 2, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.170 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 3, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.180 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 4, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.190 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 5, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.200 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 6, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.210 Ord. 126 Art. IV § 7, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.220 Ord. 126 Art. V § 1, 1963 2.28.120 2.28.230 Ord. 126 Art. V § 2, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.240 Ord. 126 Art. V § 3, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.250 Ord. 126 Art. V § 4, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.260 Ord. 126 Art. V § 5, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.270 Ord. 126 Art. V § 6, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.280 Ord. 126 Art. V § 7, 1963 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.28.290 Ord. 126 Art. VI § 2, 1963 2.28.130 2.28.300 Ord. 126 Art. VI § 3, 1963 2.28.140 2.32.010 A.R.S. § § 13-1441-13-1454 2.36.010 2.32.020 Ord. 8 § 1, 1915 2.36.020 2.32.030 Ord. 48 § 1, 1927: Ord. 8 § 2, 1915 2.36.030 2.32.040 Ord. 8 § 3, 1915 2.36.040 2.32.050 Ord. 8 § 4, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.32.060 Ord. 8 § 5, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.32.070 Ord. 8 § 6, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.32.080 Ord. 8 § 7, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.32.090 Ord. 8 § 8, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.32.100 Ord. 8 § 9, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.32.110 Ord. 8 § 10, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 2.36.010 Ord. 2 § 2, 1915 2.04.010 2.36.020 Ord. 150, 1966: Ord. 132 (part), 1964 2.04.020 2.36.030 Ord. 64 § 1, 1936: Ord. 24 § 1, 1917: Ord. 20 § 1, 1917: Ord. 1 § 3, 1915 2.04.030 2.36.040 Ord. 173 § 1, 1969 2.04.040 2.36.050 Ord. 2 § 1, 1915 2.04.050 2.36.060 Ord. 1 § 2, 1915 2.04.060 3.04.010 Ord. 29 § 1, 1918 3.04.010 3.08.010 Ord. 145 § 1, 1965 3.08.010 3.08.020 Ord. 145 § 2, 1965 3.08.020 3.08.030 Ord. 145 § 3, 1965 3.08.030 3.08.040 Ord. 145 § 4, 1965 3.08.040 3.08.050 Ord. 145 § 5, 1965 3.08.050 3.08.060 Ord. 145 § 6, 1965 3.08.060 3.08.070 Ord. 145 § 7, 1965 3.08.070 3.08.080 Ord. 145 § 8, 1965 3.08.080 3.08.090 Ord. 145 § 9, 1965 3.08.090 3.08.100 Ord. 145 § 10, 1965 3.08.100 3.08.110 Ord. 145 § 11, 1965 3.08.110 3.08.120 Ord. 145 § 12, 1965 3.08.120 3.08.130 Ord. 145 § 13, 1965 3.08.130 3.08.140 Ord. 145 § 14, 1965 3.08.140 3.08.150 Ord. 145 § 15, 1965 3.08.150 3.08.160 Ord. 145 § 16, 1965 3.08.160 3.08.170 Ord. 145 § 17, 1965 3.08.170 3.08.180 Ord. 145 § 18, 1965 3.08.180 3.08.190 Ord. 145 § 19, 1965 3.08.190 3.08.200 Ord. 145 § 20, 1965 3.08.200 3.08.210 Ord. 145 § 21, 1965 3.08.210 3.08.220 Ord. 145 § 22, 1965 3.08.220 3.08.230 Ord. 145 § 23, 1965 3.08.230 3.08.240 Ord. 145 § 24, 1965 3.08.240 3.08.250 Ord. 145 § 25, 1965 3.08.250 3.08.260 Ord. 145 § 26, 1965 3.08.260 3.08.270 Ord. 145 § 27, 1965 3.08.270 3.08.280 Ord. 145 § 28, 1965 3.08.280 3.08.290 Ord. 145 § 29, 1965 3.08.290 3.08.300 Ord. 145 § 30, 1965 3.08.300 3.08.310 Ord. 145 § 31, 1965 3.08.310 3.08.320 Ord. 145 § 32, 1965 3.08.320 3.12.010 Ord. 10 § 1, 1915 3.12.010 3.12.020 Ord. 10 § 2, 1915 3.12.020 3.12.030 Ord. 10 § 3, 1915 3.12.030 3.12.040 Ord. 57 § 1, 1933: Ord. 10 § 4, 1915 3.12.040 3.12.050 Ord. 57 § 2, 1933: Ord. 10 § 5, 1915 3.12.050 3.12.060 Ord. 10 § 6, 1915 3.12.060 3.12.070 Ord. 57 § 3, 1933: Ord. 10 § 7, 1915 3.12.070 3.12.080 Ord. 10 § 8, 1915 3.12.080 3.16.010 Ord. 153 § 1, 1966 3.16.010 3.16.020 Ord. 153 § 2, 1966 3.16.020 3.16.030 Ord. 153 § 3, 1966 3.16.030 5.04.010 Ord. 142, 1964: Ord. 54 § 1 (part), 1931 5.04.010 5.08.010 Ord. 181 § 1, 1970 5.08.010 5.08.020 Ord. 181 § 2, 1970 5.08.020 7.04.010 Ord. 13 § 1, 1915 2.44.010 7.04.020 Ord. 13 § 2, 1915 2.44.020 7.04.030 Ord. 13 § 3, 1915 2.44.030 7.04.040 Ord. 13 § 4, 1915 2.44.040 7.08.010 Ord. 13 § § 4-6, 1915 8.04.010 7.08.020 Ord. 13 § 7, 1915 8.04.020 7.08.030 Ord. 13 § 8, 1915 8.04.030 7.08.040 Ord. 13 § 9, 1915 8.04.040 7.08.050 Ord. 13 § 10, 1915 8.04.050 7.08.060 Ord. 13 § 11, 1915 8.04.060 7.08.070 Ord. 13 § 12, 1915 8.04.070 7.08.080 Ord. 13 § 13, 1915 8.04.080 7.08.090 Ord. 13 § 14, 1915 8.04.090 7.08.100 Ord. 13 § 16, 1915 8.04.100 7.08.110 Ord. 13 § 17, 1915 8.04.110 7.08.120 Ord. 13 § 18, 1915 8.04.120 7.08.130 Ord. 13 § 19, 1915 8.04.130 7.08.140 Ord. 13 § 20, 1915 8.04.140 7.08.150 Ord. 13 § 21, 1915 8.04.150 7.08.160 Ord. 13 § 22, 1915 8.04.160 7.08.170 Ord. 13 § 23, 1915 8.04.170 7.08.180 Ord. 13 § 24, 1915 8.04.180 7.08.190 Ord. 13 § 26, 1915 8.04.190 7.08.200 Ord. 13 § 31, 1915 8.04.200 7.08.210 Ord. 13 § 33, 1915 8.04.210 7.08.220 Ord. 13 § 34, 1915 8.04.220 7.08.230 Ord. 13 § 35, 1915 8.04.230 7.08.240 Ord. 13 § 36, 1915 8.04.240 7.08.250 Ord. 13 § 38, 1915 8.04.250 7.08.260 Ord. 13 § 39, 1915 8.04.260 7.08.270 Ord. 13 § 40, 1915 8.04.270 7.08.280 Ord. 13 § 42, 1915 8.04.280 7.08.290 Ord. 13 § 43, 1915 8.04.290 7.12.010 Ord. 30 § 1, 1918 8.08.010 7.12.020 Ord. 30 § 2, 1918 8.08.020 7.16.010 Ord. 37 § 1, 1921 8.08.030 7.16.020 Ord. 37 § 2, 1921 8.08.040 7.20.010 Ord. 88 § 1, 1955 8.12.010 7.20.020 Ord. 88 § 2, 1955 8.12.020 7.20.030 Ord. 88 § 3, 1955 8.12.030 7.20.040 Ord. 88 § 4, 1955 8.12.040 7.20.050 Ord. 88 § 5, 1955 8.12.050 7.20.060 Ord. 88 § 6, 1955 8.12.060 7.20.070 Ord. 88 § 7, 1955 8.12.070 7.20.080 Ord. 88 § 8, 1955 8.12.080 7.20.090 Ord. 114 § 1, 1959 8.12.090 7.20.100 Ord. 114 § 4, 1959 8.12.100 7.20.110 Ord. 114 § 5, 1959 8.12.110 7.20.120 Ord. 144 § 6, 1959 8.12.120 7.20.130 Ord. 114 § 7, 1959 8.12.130 7.20.140 Ord. 116 § 1, 1959: Ord. 114 § 12, 1959 8.12.140 7.24.010 Ord. 127 Art. I § 1, 1963 8.20.010 7.24.020 Ord. 127 Art. II § 1, 1963 8.20.020 7.24.030 Ord. 127 Art. II § 2, 1963 8.20.030 7.24.040 Ord. 127 Art. II § 3, 1963 8.20.040 7.24.050 Ord. 127 Art. II § 4, 1963 8.20.050 7.24.060 Ord. 127 Art. II § 5, 1963 8.20.060 7.24.070 Ord. 127 Art. II § 6, 1963 8.20.070 7.24.080 Ord. 127 Art. II § 7, 1963 8.20.080 7.24.090 Ord. 127 Art. II § 8, 1963 8.20.090 7.24.100 Ord. 127 Art. II § 9, 1963 8.20.100 7.24.110 Ord. 127 Art. II § 10, 1963 8.20.110 7.24.120 Ord. 127 Art. II § 11, 1963 8.20.120 7.24.130 Ord. 127 Art. II § 12, 1963 8.20.130 7.24.140 Ord. 127 Art. IV, 1963 8.20.140 7.28.010 Ord. 166 § 1, 1968 8.16.010 7.28.020 Ord. 166 § 2, 1968 8.16.020 7.28.030 Ord. 166 § 3, 1968 8.16.030 7.28.040 Ord. 166 § 4, 1968 8.16.040 7.28.050 Ord. 166 § 5, 1968 8.16.050 7.28.060 Ord. 166 § 6, 1968 8.16.060 7.28.070 Ord. 166 § 7, 1968 8.16.070 7.28.080 Ord. 166 § 8, 1968 8.16.080 8.04.010 Ord. 124 § 1, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.020 Ord. 124 § 2, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.030 Ord. 124 § 3, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.040 Ord. 124 § 4, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.050 Ord. 128 § 1, 1964: Ord. 124 § 5, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.060 Ord. 124 § 6, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.070 Ord. 124 § 7, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.080 Ord. 124 § 8, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.090 Ord. 124 § 9, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.100 Ord. 124 § 10, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.110 Ord. 124 § 11, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.120 Ord. 124 § 12, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.130 Ord. 124 § 13, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.140 Ord. 124 § 14, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.04.150 Ord. 124 § 15, 1962 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.08.010 Ord. 3 § 5, 1915 Repealed during 1981 codification 8.12.010 Ord. 9 § 5, 1915 6.20.010 8.12.020 Ord. 9 § 6, 1915 6.20.020 9.04.010 Model Code § 6-601, 1960 9.04.010 9.04.020 Model Code § 6-602, 1960 9.04.020 9.08.010 Model Code § 6-304, 1960 9.08.010 9.08.020 Model Code § 6-404, 1960 9.08.020 9.08.030 Model Code § 6-405, 1960 9.08.030 9.08.040 Model Code § 6-406, 1960 9.08.040 9.08.050 Model Code § 6-102, 1960 9.08.050 9.08.060 Model Code § 6-306, 1960 9.08.060 9.08.070 Model Code § 6-402, 1960 9.08.070 9.12.010 Model Code § 6-410, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.16.010 Model Code § 6-401, 1960 Repealed by NS-92 9.16.020 Model Code § 6-411, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.20.010 Model Code § 6-106, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.20.020 Model Code § 6-110, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.24.010 Model Code § 6-103, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.28.010 Model Code § 6-307, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.32.010 Model Code § 6-403, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.36.010 Model Code § 6-305, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.36.020 Model Code § 6-407, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.40.010 Model Code § 6-301, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.40.020 Model Code § 6-302, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.40.030 Model Code § 6-308, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.40.040 Model Code § 6-309, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.40.050 Model Code § 6-310, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.40.060 Model Code § 6-311, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.44.010 Model Code § 6-501, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.44.020 Model Code § 6-504, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.44.030 Model Code § 6-408, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.48.010 Model Code § 6-109, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.48.020 Model Code § 6-111, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.48.030 Model Code § 6-113, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.48.040 Model Code § 6-503, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.52.010 Model Code § 6-112, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.010 Model Code § 6-202, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.020 Model Code § 6-104, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.030 Model Code § 6-204, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.040 Model Code § 6-105, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.050 Model Code § 6-102, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.060 Model Code § 6-101, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.56.070 Model Code § 6-108, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.60.010 Model Code § 6-201, 1960 8.24.010 9.60.020 Model Code § 6-211, 1960 8.24.020 9.60.030 Model Code § 6-203, 1960 8.24.030 9.60.040 Model Code § 6-207, 1960 8.24.040 9.60.050 Model Code § 6-208, 1960 8.24.050 9.60.060 Model Code § 6-210, 1960 8.24.060 9.60.070 Model Code § 6-212, 1960 8.24.070 9.60.080 Model Code § 6-213, 1960 8.24.080 9.60.090 Model Code § 6-214, 1960 8.24.090 9.60.100 Model Code § 6-205, 1960 8.24.100 9.60.110 Model Code § 6-209, 1960 8.24.110 9.60.120 Model Code § 6-215, 1960 8.24.120 9.64.010 Model Code § 6-107, 1960 9.12.010 9.64.020 Model Code § 6-206, 1960 Repealed during 1981 codification 9.64.030 Model Code § 6-303, 1960 9.12.020 9.64.040 Model Code § 6-312, 1960 9.12.030 9.64.050 Model Code § 6-409, 1960 9.12.040 9.68.010 8.28.010 9.68.020 8.28.020 9.68.030 8.28.030 9.68.040 8.28.040 9.68.050 8.28.050 9.68.060 8.28.060 9.68.070 8.28.070 9.68.080 8.28.080 9.68.090 8.28.090 9.68.100 8.28.100 10.04.010 Ord. 131 § 1, 1964 10.04.010 10.04.020 Ord. 131 § 2, 1964 10.04.020 10.04.030 Ord. 131 § 3, 1964 10.04.030 10.04.040 Ord. 131 § 4, 1964 10.04.040 10.04.050 Ord. 131 § 5, 1964 10.04.050 10.04.060 Ord. 131 § 6, 1964 10.04.060 10.04.070 Ord. 131 § 7, 1964 10.04.070 10.04.080 Ord. 131 § 8, 1964 10.04.080 10.04.090 Ord. 131 § 9, 1964 10.04.090 10.04.100 Ord. 131 § 10A, 1964 10.04.100 10.04.110 Ord. 131 § 10B, 1964 10.04.110 10.04.120 Ord. 131 § 11, 1964 10.04.120 10.08.010 Ord. 131 § 12, 1964 10.08.010 10.08.020 Ord. 131 § 13, 1964 10.08.020 10.08.030 Ord. 131 § 14, 1964 10.08.030 10.12.010 Ord. 131 § 15A, 1964 10.12.010 10.12.020 Ord. 131 § 15B, 1964 10.12.020 10.16.010 Ord. 131 § 16A, 1964 10.16.010 10.16.020 Ord. 131 § 16B, 1964 10.16.020 10.16.030 Ord. 131 § 16C, 1964 10.16.030 10.16.040 Ord. 131 § 16D, 1964 10.16.040 10.16.050 Ord. 131 § 16E, 1964 10.16.050 10.20.010 Ord. 131 § 17A, 1964 10.20.010 10.20.020 Ord. 131 § 17B, 1964 10.20.020 10.20.030 Ord. 131 § 17C, 1964 10.20.030 10.20.040 Ord. 131 § 17D, 1964 10.20.040 10.24.010 Ord. 131 § 18, 1964 10.24.010 10.24.020 Ord. 131 § 19, 1964 10.24.020 10.28.010 Ord. 131 § 20A, 1964 10.28.010 10.28.020 Ord. 131 § 20B, 1964 10.28.020 10.28.030 Ord. 131 § 20C, 1964 10.28.030 10.28.040 Ord. 147 § 1, 1965: Ord. 131 § 21, 1964: Ord. 42 § 1, 1923 10.28.040 12.04.010 Ord. 39 § 1, 1921 12.04.010 12.04.020 Ord. 39 § 2, 1921 12.04.020 12.04.030 Ord. 39 § 3, 1921 12.04.030 12.04.040 Ord. 39 § 4, 1921 12.04.040 12.04.050 Ord. 39 § 5, 1921 12.04.050 12.04.060 Ord. 39 § 6, 1921 12.04.060 12.04.070 Ord. 39 § 7, 1921 12.04.070 12.04.080 Ord. 44 § 1, 1924; Ord. 28 § 1, 1924 12.04.080 13.04.010 Ord. 70 § 21, 1939 13.04.010 13.08.010 Ord. 115 § 1, 1959 13.08.010 13.08.020 Ord. 115 § 2, 1959 13.08.020 13.08.030 Ord. 115 § 3, 1959 13.08.030 13.08.040 Ord. 115 § 5, 1959 13.08.040 13.08.050 Ord. 115 § 6, 1959 13.08.050 13.08.060 Ord. 115 § 7, 1959 13.08.060 13.12.010 Ord. 172 § 1, 1969 13.12.010 13.12.020 Ord. 172 § 2, 1969 13.12.020 13.12.030 Ord. 172 § 3, 1969 13.12.030 13.12.040 Res. 240 § 1, 1969 13.12.040 13.12.050 Res. 240 § 2, 1969 13.12.050 13.12.060 Res. 240 § 3, 1969 13.12.060 13.12.070 Res. 240 § 4, 1969 13.12.070 13.12.080 Ord. 172 § 4, 1969 13.12.080 13.12.090 Ord. 174 § 1, 1970; Ord. 172 § 5, 1969 13.12.090 13.12.100 Ord. 172 § 6, 1969 13.12.100 13.12.110 Ord. 172 § 7, 1969 13.12.110 13.12.120 Ord. 172 § 8, 1969 13.12.120 13.12.130 Ord. 172 § 9, 1969 13.12.130 13.12.140 Ord. 172 § 10, 1969 13.12.140 13.12.150 Ord. 172 § 11, 1969 13.12.150 13.12.160 Ord. 172 § 12, 1969 13.12.160 13.12.170 Ord. 172 § 13, 1969 13.12.170 13.12.180 Ord. 172 § 14, 1969 13.12.180 14.04.010 Ord. 169 § 1, 1969 15.04.010 14.04.020 Ord. 169 § 1, 1969 15.24.010 14.04.025 Ord. NS-5 § 1, 1971 Not codified 14.04.030 Ord. 169 § 6, 1969 15.04.020 14.04.040 Ord. 169 § 7, 1969 Repealed during 1981 codification 14.04.050 Ord. 92 § 2, 1957 15.04.030 14.04.060 Ord. 92 § 3, 1957 15.04.040 14.04.070 Ord. 92 § 4, 1957 15.04.050 14.04.080 Ord. 92 § 6, 1959 15.04.060 14.08.010 Ord. 169 § 4, 1969 15.08.010 14.08.020 Ord. 93 § 2, 1957 15.08.020 14.08.030 Ord. 93 § 3, 1957 15.08.030 14.08.040 Ord. 93 § 4, 1957 15.08.040 14.08.050 Ord. 93 § 6, 1957 15.08.050 14.08.060 Ord. 93 § 7, 1957 15.08.060 14.08.070 Ord. 93 § 8, 1957 15.08.070 14.12.010 Ord. 169 § 3, 1969 15.12.010 14.12.020 Ord. 94 § 2, 1957 15.12.020 14.12.030 Ord. 94 § 3, 1957 15.12.030 14.12.040 Ord. 94 § 4, 1957 15.12.040 14.12.050 Ord. 94 § 6, 1957 15.12.050 14.12.060 Ord. 94 § 7, 1957 15.12.060 14.12.070 Ord. 94 § 6, 1957 15.12.070 14.16.010 Ord. 77 § 1, 1949 15.16.010 14.20.010 Ord. 175 § 1 Art. A, 1970 15.16.020 14.20.020 Ord. 175 § 1 Art. B, 1970 15.16.030 14.20.030 Ord. 175 § 1 Art. C, 1970 15.16.040 14.20.040 Ord. 175 § 1 Art. D, 1970 15.16.050 14.20.050 Ord. 175 § 1 Art. E, 1970 15.16.060 14.20.060 Ord. 175 § 1 Art. F, 1970 15.16.070 14.24.010 Ord. 169 § 5, 1969 15.20.010 14.28.010 Ord. 182 § 1, 1970 15.32.010 14.28.020 Ord. 182 § 2, 1970 15.32.020 14.28.030 Ord. 182 § 3, 1970 15.32.030 14.28.040 Ord. 182 § 4, 1970 15.32.040 16.04.010 Ord. 179 § 1, 1970 16.04.010 16.08.010 Ord. 179 § 2, 1970 16.08.010 16.12.010 Ord. 179 § 3, 1970 16.12.010 16.16.010 Ord. 179 § 4A, 1970 16.16.010 16.16.020 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.020 16.16.030 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.030 16.16.040 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.040 16.16.050 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.050 16.16.060 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.060 16.16.070 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.070 16.16.080 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.080 16.16.090 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.090 16.16.100 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.100 16.16.110 Ord. 179 § 4B(part), 1970 16.16.110 16.20.010 Ord. 179 § 5A(part), 1970 16.20.010 16.20.020 Ord. 179 § 5A(part), 1970 16.20.020 16.24.010 Ord. 179 § 5B(1), 1970 16.24.010 16.24.020 Ord. 179 § 5B(2), 1970 16.24.020 16.24.030 Ord. 179 § 5B(3), 1970 16.24.030 16.24.040 Ord. 179 § 5B(4), 1970 16.24.040 16.24.050 Ord. 179 § 5B(5), 1970 16.24.050 16.24.060 Ord. 179 § 5B(6), 1970 16.24.060 16.24.070 Ord. 179 § 5B(7), 1970 16.24.070 16.24.080 Ord. 179 § 5B(8), 1970 16.24.080 16.24.090 Ord. 179 § 5B(9), 1970 16.24.090 16.24.100 Ord. 179 § 5B(10), 1970 16.24.100 16.24.110 Ord. 179 § 5B(11), 1970 16.24.110 16.24.120 Ord. 179 § 5B(12), 1970 16.24.120 16.28.010 Ord. 179 § 5C(1), 1970 16.28.010 16.28.020 Ord. 179 § 5C(2), 1970 16.28.020 16.28.030 Ord. 179 § 5C(3), 1970 16.28.030 16.32.010 Ord. 179 § 5D(1), 1970 16.32.010 16.32.020 Ord. 179 § 5D(2), 1970 16.32.020 16.32.030 Ord. 179 § 5D(3), 1970 16.32.030 16.32.040 Ord. 179 § 5D(4), 1970 16.32.040 16.32.050 Ord. 179 § 5D(5), 1970 16.32.050 16.32.060 Ord. 179 § 5D(6), 1970 16.32.060 16.32.070 Ord. 179 § 5D(7), 1970 16.32.070 16.36.010 Ord. 179 § 5E, 1970 16.36.010 16.40.010 Ord. 179 § 5F, 1970 16.40.010 16.44.010 Ord. 179 § 5G, 1970 16.44.010 16.48.010 Ord. 179 § 5H, 1970 16.48.010 16.52.010 Ord. 179 § 6, 1970 16.52.010 16.56.010 Ord. 179 § 7A, 1970 16.56.010 16.56.020 Ord. 179 § 7B, 1970 16.56.020 16.56.030 Ord. 179 § 7C, 1970 16.56.030 16.56.040 Ord. 179 § 7D, 1970 16.56.040 16.60.010 Ord. 179 § 8A, 1970 16.60.010 16.64.010 Ord. 179 § 9A, 1970 16.64.010 16.64.020 Ord. 179 § 9B, 1970 16.64.020 16.64.030 Ord. 179 § 9C, 1970 16.64.030 16.64.040 Ord. 179 § 9D, 1970 16.64.040 16.64.050 Ord. 179 § 9E, 1970 16.64.050 16.64.060 Ord. 179 § 9F, 1970 16.64.060 16.64.070 Ord. 179 § 9G, 1970 16.64.070 16.64.080 Ord. 179 § 9H, 1970 16.64.080 16.64.090 Ord. 179 § 9I, 1970 16.64.090 16.64.100 Ord. 179 § 9J, 1970 16.64.100 16.64.110 Ord. 179 § 9K, 1970 16.64.110 16.64.120 Ord. 179 § 9L, 1970 16.64.120 16.64.130 Ord. 179 § 9M, 1970 16.64.130 16.64.140 Ord. 179 § 9N, 1970 16.64.140 16.64.150 Ord. 179 § 90, 1970 16.64.150 16.64.160 Ord. 179 § 9P, 1970 16.64.160 16.64.170 Ord. 179 § 9Q, 1970 16.64.170 16.64.180 Ord. 179 § 9R, 1970 16.64.180 16.64.190 Ord. 179 § 9S, 1970 16.64.190 16.68.010 Ord. 179 § 10, 1970 16.68.010 17.04.010 Ord. NS-6 § 01.00, 1971 17.04.010 17.04.020 Ord. NS-6 § 01.01, 1971 17.04.020 17.04.030 Ord. NS-6 § 02.00, 1971 17.04.030 17.04.040 Ord. NS-6 § 03.00, 1971 17.04.040 17.04.050 Ord. NS-6 § 04.00, 1971 17.04.050 17.08.010 Ord. NS-6 § 05.01, 1971 17.08.010 17.08.020 Ord. NS-6 § 05.02, 1971 17.08.020 17.08.030 Ord. NS-6 § 05.03, 1971 17.08.030 17.08.040 Ord. NS-6 § 05.04, 1971 17.08.040 17.08.050 Ord. NS-6 § 05.05, 1971 17.08.050 17.08.060 Ord. NS-6 § 05.06, 1971 17.08.060 17.08.070 Ord. NS-6 § 05.07, 1971 17.08.070 17.08.080 Ord. NS-6 § 05.08, 1971 17.08.080 17.08.090 Ord. NS-6 § 05.09, 1971 17.08.090 17.08.100 Ord. NS-6 § 05.10, 1971 17.08.100 17.08.110 Ord. NS-6 § 05.11, 1971 17.08.110 17.08.120 Ord. NS-6 § 05.12, 1971 17.08.120 17.08.130 Ord. NS-6 § 05.13, 1971 17.08.130 17.08.140 Ord. NS-6 § 05.14, 1971 17.08.140 17.08.150 Ord. NS-6 § 05.15, 1971 17.08.150 17.08.160 Ord. NS-6 § 05.16, 1971 17.08.160 17.08.170 Ord. NS-6 § 05.17, 1971 17.08.170 17.08.180 Ord. NS-6 § 05.18, 1971 17.08.180 17.08.190 Ord. NS-6 § 05.19, 1971 17.08.190 17.08.200 Ord. NS-6 § 05.20, 1971 17.08.200 17.08.210 Ord. NS-6 § 05.21, 1971 17.08.210 17.08.220 Ord. NS-6 § 05.22, 1971 17.08.220 17.08.230 Ord. NS-6 § 05.23, 1971 17.08.230 17.08.240 Ord. NS-6 § 05.24, 1971 17.08.240 17.08.250 Ord. NS-6 § 05.25, 1971 17.08.250 17.08.260 Ord. NS-6 § 05.26, 1971 17.08.260 17.08.270 Ord. NS-6 § 05.27, 1971 17.08.270 17.08.280 Ord. NS-6 § 05.28, 1971 17.08.280 17.08.290 Ord. NS-6 § 05.29, 1971 17.08.290 17.08.300 Ord. NS-6 § 05.30, 1971 17.08.300 17.08.310 Ord. NS-6 § 05.31, 1971 17.08.310 17.08.320 Ord. NS-6 § 05.32, 1971 17.08.320 17.08.330 Ord. NS-6 § 05.33, 1971 17.08.330 17.08.340 Ord. NS-6 § 05.34, 1971 17.08.340 17.08.350 Ord. NS-6 § 05.35, 1971 17.08.350 17.08.360 Ord. NS-6 § 05.36, 1971 17.08.360 17.08.370 Ord. NS-6 § 05.37, 1971 17.08.370 17.08.380 Ord. NS-6 § 05.38, 1971 17.08.380 17.08.390 Ord. NS-6 § 05.39, 1971 17.08.390 17.08.400 Ord. NS-6 § 05.40, 1971 17.08.400 17.08.410 Ord. NS-6 § 05.41, 1971 17.08.410 17.08.420 Ord. NS-6 § 05.42, 1971 17.08.420 17.08.430 Ord. NS-6 § 05.43, 1971 17.08.430 17.08.440 Ord. NS-6 § 05.44, 1971 17.08.440 17.08.450 Ord. NS-6 § 05.45, 1971 17.08.450 17.08.460 Ord. NS-6 § 05.46, 1971 17.08.460 17.08.470 Ord. NS-6 § 05.47, 1971 17.08.470 17.08.480 Ord. NS-6 § 05.48, 1971 17.08.480 17.08.490 Ord. NS-6 § 05.49, 1971 17.08.490 17.08.500 Ord. NS-6 § 05.50, 1971 17.08.500 17.08.510 Ord. NS-6 § 05.51, 1971 17.08.510 17.08.520 Ord. NS-6 § 05.52, 1971 17.08.520 17.08.530 Ord. NS-6 § 05.53, 1971 17.08.530 17.08.540 Ord. NS-6 § 05.54, 1971 17.08.540 17.08.550 Ord. NS-6 § 05.55, 1971 17.08.550 17.08.560 Ord. NS-6 § 05.56, 1971 17.08.560 17.08.570 Ord. NS-6 § 05.57, 1971 17.08.570 17.08.580 Ord. NS-6 § 05.58, 1971 17.08.580 17.08.590 Ord. NS-6 § 05.59, 1971 17.08.590 17.08.600 Ord. NS-6 § 05.60, 1971 17.08.600 17.08.610 Ord. NS-6 § 05.61, 1971 17.08.610 17.08.620 Ord. NS-6 § 05.62, 1971 17.08.620 17.08.630 Ord. NS-6 § 05.63, 1971 17.08.630 17.08.640 Ord. NS-6 § 05.64, 1971 17.08.640 17.08.650 Ord. NS-6 § 05.65, 1971 17.08.650 17.12.010 Ord. NS-6 § 06.01, 1971 17.12.010 17.12.020 Ord. NS-6 § 06.02, 1971 17.12.020 17.12.030 Ord. NS-6 § 06.03, 1971 17.12.030 17.12.040 Ord. NS-6 § 06.04, 1971 17.12.040 17.12.050 Ord. NS-6 § 06.05, 1971 17.12.050 17.12.060 Ord. NS-6 § 06.06, 1971 17.12.060 17.12.070 Ord. NS-6 § 06.07, 1971 17.12.070 17.12.080 Ord. NS-6 § 06.08, 1971 17.12.080 17.12.090 Ord. NS-6 § 06.09, 1971 17.12.090 17.12.100 Ord. NS-6 § 06.10, 1971 17.12.100 17.12.110 Ord. NS-6 § 06.11, 1971 17.12.110 17.12.120 Ord. NS-6 § 06.12, 1971 17.12.120 17.12.130 Ord. NS-6 § 06.13, 1971 17.12.130 17.12.140 Ord. NS-6 § 06.14, 1971 17.12.140 17.12.150 Ord. NS-6 § 06.15, 1971 17.12.150 17.12.160 Ord. NS-6 § 06.16, 1971 17.12.160 17.12.170 Ord. NS-6 § 06.17, 1971 17.12.170 17.12.180 Ord. NS-6 § 06.18, 1971 17.12.180 17.12.190 Ord. NS-6 § 06.19, 1971 17.12.190 17.12.200 Ord. NS-6 § 06.20, 1971 17.12.200 17.12.210 Ord. NS-6 § 06.21, 1971 17.12.210 17.12.220 Ord. NS-6 § 06.22, 1971 17.12.220 17.12.230 Ord. NS-6 § 06.23, 1971 17.12.230 17.12.240 Ord. NS-6 § 06.24, 1971 17.12.240 17.12.250 Ord. NS-6 § 06.25, 1971 17.12.250 17.12.260 Ord. NS-6 § 06.26, 1971 17.12.260 17.12.270 Ord. NS-6 § 06.27, 1971 17.12.270 17.12.280 Ord. NS-6 § 06.28, 1971 17.12.280 17.12.290 Ord. NS-6 § 06.29, 1971 17.12.290 17.12.300 Ord. NS-6 § 06.30, 1971 17.12.300 17.12.310 Ord. NS-6 § 06.31, 1971 17.12.310 17.12.320 Ord. NS-6 § 06.32, 1971 17.12.320 17.12.330 Ord. NS-6 § 06.33, 1971 17.12.330 17.12.340 Ord. NS-6 § 06.34, 1971 17.12.340 17.12.350 Ord. NS-6 § 06.35, 1971 17.12.350 17.12.360 17.12.360 17.16.010 Ord. NS-6 § 07.01, 1971 17.16.010 17.16.020 Ord. NS-6 § 07.02, 1971 17.16.020 17.16.030 Ord. NS-6 § 07.03, 1971 17.16.030 17.16.040 Ord. NS-6 § 07.04, 1971 17.16.040 17.20.010 Ord. NS-6 § 08.01, 1971 17.20.010 17.20.020 Ord. NS-6 § 08.02, 1971 17.20.020 17.20.030 Ord. NS-6 § 08.03, 1971 17.20.030 17.20.040 Ord. NS-6 § 08.04, 1971 17.20.040 17.24.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.01.00, 1971 17.24.010 17.24.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.01.01, 1971 17.24.020 17.24.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.01.02, 1971 17.24.030 17.24.040 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.01.03, 09.01.04, 1971 17.24.040 17.28.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.02.00, 1971 17.28.010 17.28.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.02.01, 1971 17.28.020 17.28.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.02.02, 1971 17.28.030 17.28.040 Ord. NS-6 § 09.02.03, 09.02.04, 1971 17.28.040 17.32.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.03.00, 1971 17.32.010 17.32.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.03.01, 1971 17.32.020 17.32.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.03.02, 1971 17.32.030 17.32.040 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.03.03, 09.03.04, 1971 17.32.040 17.36.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.00, 1971 17.36.010 17.36.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.01, 1971 17.36.020 17.36.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.02, 1971 17.36.030 17.36.040 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.03, 1971 17.36.040 17.36.050 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.04.04, 09.04.05, 1971 17.36.050 17.40.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.06, 1971 17.40.010 17.40.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.07, 1971 17.40.020 17.40.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.08, 1971 17.40.030 17.40.040 Ord. NS-6 § 09.04.09, 1971 17.40.040 17.40.050 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.04.10, 09.04.11, 1971 17.40.050 17.44.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.05.00, 1971 17.44.010 17.44.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.05.01, 1971 17.44.020 17.44.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.05.02, 1971 17.44.030 17.44.040 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.05.03, 09.05.04, 1971 17.44.040 17.48.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.06.01, 1971 17.48.010 17.48.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.06.02, 1971 17.48.020 17.48.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.06.03, 09.06.04, 1971 17.48.030 17.52.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.07.01, 1971 17.52.010 17.52.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.07.02, 1971 17.52.020 17.52.030 Ord. NS-6 § 09.07.03, 1971 17.52.030 17.52.040 Ord. NS-6 § 09.07.04, 1971 17.52.040 17.56.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.08.01, 1971 17.56.010 17.56.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.08.02, 1971 17.56.020 17.56.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.08.03, 09.08.04, 1971 17.56.030 17.60.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.09.01, 1971 17.60.010 17.60.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.09.02, 1971 17.60.020 17.60.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.09.03, 09.09.04, 1971 17.60.030 17.62.010 17.64.010 17.62.020 17.64.020 17.62.030 17.64.030 17.62.040 17.64.040 17.62.050 17.64.050 17.64.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.10.01, 1971 17.68.010 17.64.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.10.02, 1971 17.68.020 17.64.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.10.03, 09.10.04, 1971 17.68.030 17.68.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.11.01, 1971 17.72.010 17.68.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.11.02, 1971 17.72.020 17.68.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.11.03, 09.11.04, 1971 17.72.030 17.72.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.12.01, 1971 17.76.010 17.72.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.12.02, 1971 17.76.020 17.72.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.12.03, 09.12.04, 1971 17.76.030 17.76.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.13.01, 1971 17.80.010 17.76.020 Ord. NS-6 § 09.13.02, 1971 17.80.020 17.76.030 Ord. NS-6 § § 09.13.03, 09.13.04, 1971 17.80.030 17.80.010 Ord. NS-6 § 09.20.00, 1971 17.84.010 17.84.010 Ord. NS-6 § 10.01, 1971 17.88.010 17.84.020 Ord. NS-6 § 10.02, 1971 17.88.020 17.84.030 Ord. NS-6 § 10.03, 1971 17.88.030 17.84.040 Ord. NS-6 § 10.03.01, 1971 17.88.040 17.84.050 Ord. NS-6 § 10.03.02, 1971 17.88.050 17.84.060 Ord. NS-6 § 10.04, 1971 17.88.060 17.84.070 Ord. NS-6 § 10.05, 1971 17.88.070 17.84.080 Ord. NS-6 § 10.06, 1971 17.88.080 17.84.090 Ord. NS-6 § 10.07, 1971 17.88.090 17.84.100 Ord. NS-6 § 10.08, 1971 17.88.100 17.84.110 Ord. NS-6 § 10.09, 1971 17.88.110 17.84.120 Ord. NS-6 § 10.10, 1971 17.88.120 17.84.130 Ord. NS-6 § 10.11, 1971 17.88.130 17.84.140 Ord. NS-6 610.12, 1971 17.88.140 17.84.150 Ord. NS-6 § 10.13, 1971 17.88.150 17.84.160 Ord. NS-6 § 10.14, 1971 17.88.160 17.84.170 Ord. NS-6 § 10.15, 1971 17.88.170 17.84.180 Ord. NS-6 § 10.16, 1971 17.88.180 17.84.190 Ord. NS-6 § 10.17, 1971 17.88.190 17.84.200 Ord. NS-6 § 10.18, 1971 17.88.200 17.84.210 Ord. NS-6 § 10.19, 1971 17.88.210 17.88.010 Ord. NS-6 § 11.01, 1971 17.92.010 17.88.020 Ord. NS-6 § 11.02, 1971 17.92.020 17.88.030 Ord. NS-6 § 11.03, 1971 17.92.030 17.88.040 Ord. NS-6 § 11.04, 1971 17.92.040 17.88.050 Ord. NS-6 § 11.05, 1971 17.92.050 17.88.060 Ord. NS-6 § 11.06, 1971 17.92.060 17.88.070 Ord. NS-6 § 11.07, 1971 17.92.070 17.88.080 Ord. NS-6 § 11.08, 1971 17.92.080 17.88.090 Ord. NS-6 § 11.09, 1971 17.92.090 17.88.100 Ord. NS-6 § 11.10, 1971 17.92.100 17.88.110 Ord. NS-6 § 11.11, 1971 17.92.110 17.88.120 Ord. NS-6 § 11.12, 1971 17.92.120 17.88.130 Ord. NS-6 § 11.13, 1971 17.92.130 17.88.140 Ord. NS-6 § 11.14, 1971 17.92.140 17.88.150 Ord. NS-6 § 11.15, 1971 17.92.150 17.88.160 Ord. NS-6 § 11.16, 1971 17.92.160 17.88.170 Ord. NS-6 § 11.17, 1971 17.92.170 17.88.180 Ord. NS-6 § 11.18, 1971 17.92.180 17.88.190 Ord. NS-6 § 11.19, 1971 17.92.190 17.88.200 Ord. NS-6 § 11.20, 1971 17.92.200 17.88.210 Ord. NS-6 § 11.21, 1971 17.92.210 17.88.220 Ord. NS-6 § 11.22, 1971 17.92.220 17.88.230 Ord. NS-6 § 11.23, 1971 17.92.230 17.92.010 Ord. NS-6 § 13.00, 1971 17.96.010 17.92.020 Ord. NS-6 § 15.00(part), 1971 17.96.020 17.92.030 Ord. NS-6 § 15.00(part), 1971 17.96.030  
    As of the 2014 republication, this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST 
    Beginning with the 2014 republication, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance
Number Disposition NS-7 Property tax assessment (Special) NS-8 Alley vacation (Special) NS-9 Rezone (Special) NS-10 Flood control (Not codified) NS-11 Rezone (Special) NS-12 Cochise visitor center board (Repealed by NS-14 and NS-21) NS-13 Rezone (Special) NS-14 Cochise visitor center board (Repealed by NS-21) NS-15 Tax levy (Special) NS-16 Rezone (Special) NS-17 Sale of real property (Special) NS-18 Sale of real property (Special) NS-19 Delinquent utility services payment penalty (13.12) NS-20 Tax levy (Special) NS-21 Cochise visitor center board (2.48) NS-22 Rezone (Special) NS-23 Rezone (Special) NS-24 Willcox community appearance committee (2.52) NS-25 Amends §3(2) of Ord. 88, garbage collection NS-26 Tax levy (Special) NS-27 Amends §3(B)(3) of Ord. 145, privilege tax (Repealed by NS-55) NS-28 Sale of real property (Special) NS-29 Rezone (Special) NS-30 Tax levy (Special) NS-31 Amends prior code §17.08.550, zoning (17.08) NS-32 Amends §5 of Ord. 119, alcoholic beverages (Not codified) NS-33 Spanish language municipal election material (1.12) NS-34 Rezone (Special) NS-35 City landfill (8.12) NS-36 Amends prior code §9.16.010, curfew (Repealed byNS-92) NS-37 Abandoned vehicles (Repealed by NS-41) NS-38 Tax levy (Special) NS-39 Amends §10 of Ord. 181, CATV licenses (Not codified) NS-40 Amends §5 of Ord. NS-21, Cochise visitor center board (2.48) NS-41 Adds prior code Ch. 9.68; repeals Ord. NS-37, abandoned vehicles (8.28) NS-42 Street name change (Special) NS-43 Alley vacation (Special) NS-44 Annexation (Special) NS-45 Rezone (Special) NS-46 Street load limits (10.32) NS-47 Gas rates; repeals Ord. NS-4 (Not codified) NS-48 Annexation (Special) NS-49 Amends prior code §2.36.040, council meetings (2.04) NS-50 Flood control (18.04) NS-51 CATV system license (Special) NS-52 Tax levy (Special) NS-53 Adds §3(D) to Ord. NS-47, gas rates (Not codified) NS-54 Amends §2(B) of Ord. NS-47, gas rates (Repealed by NS-82) NS-55 Amends §3(B)(3) of Ord. 145, privilege tax; repeals Ord. NS-27 (3.08) NS-56 Adds prior code Ch. 17.62, zoning (17.64) NS-57 Rezone (Special) NS-58 Adds §39 to Ord. 181; amends §§4, 5 and 31 of Ord. 181, community antenna television franchise (Special) NS-59 Rezone (Special) NS-60 Adds prior code §10.28.050, speed limits (10.28) NS-61 Annexation (Special) NS-62 Zoning of annexed land (Special) NS-63 Street vacation (Special) NS-64 Volunteer police reserve (2.32) NS-65 Tax levy (Special) NS-66 Amends prior code §17.12.360, zoning (17.12) NS-67 Rezone (Special) NS-68 Adopts Twin Lakes zone map by reference (Special) NS-69 Adopts 1979 Uniform Building Code (15.04) NS-70 Adopts 1979 Uniform Fire Code (15.20) NS-71 Adopts 1979 Uniform Plumbing Code (15.12) NS-72 Adopts 1979 Uniform Sign Code (15.24) NS-73 Adopts 1978 National Electrical Code (15.08) NS-74 Adopts Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (15.28) NS-75 Annexation (Special) NS-76 (Number not used) NS-77 Annexation (Special) NS-78 Amends prior code §§3.08.030 and 3.08.080, privilege tax (3.08) NS-79 Amends §§1 and 3 of Ord. 145, privilege tax (3.08) NS-80 Zoning of annexed land (Special) NS-81 Transient occupancy tax (3.20) NS-82 Gas rates; repeals Ord. NS-54 (13.16) NS-83 (Number not used) NS-84 Zoning of annexed property (Special) NS-85 Zoning of annexed property (Special) NS-86 Amends prior code §§ 3.08.120, 3.08.150 and 3.08.220, privilege tax (3.08) NS-87 Amends prior code §§ 2.08.010 and 2.12.040(12), city clerk (2.08, 2.12) NS-88 Rezone (Special) NS-89 Amends § 4 of Ord. NS-21, Cochise Visitor Center Board (2.48) NS-90 Tax levy (Special) NS-91 Annexation (Special) NS-92 Repeals prior code § 9.16.010 (Repealer) NS-93 Amends § 4 of Ord. NS-81, transient occupancy tax (3.20) NS-94 Amends prior code § 1.08.020, voter registration (1.08) NS-95 Rezone (Special) NS-96 Street and alley vacation (Special) NS-97 Rezone (Special) NS-98 Tax levy (Special) NS-99 Authorize utility cycle billing (13.12.200) NS-100 Rezone (Special) NS-101 Rezone (Special) NS-102 Light pollution regulation (14.30), redesignated as (10.03) NS-103 Garbage and waste disposal (8.12) NS-104 Expenditure limitation (Special) NS-105 Amends and general update of Municipal Code (1.01) NS-106 Tax levy (Special) NS-107 Amends §§ 3.08.080.7, exemptions on advertising transactions NS-108 Amends Chapter 10.24, Parking (10.24.030) NS-109 Amends §§ 1.04.010 NS-110 Amends Chap. 3.08 time that taxes are due. NS-111 Amends Chap. 17.12, regulation of dust emissions NS-112 Tax levy (Special) NS-113 Tax levy (Special) NS-114 Expenditure limitation (Special) NS-115 Amends §§ 6.16.010 Dogs at large NS-116 Amends §§ 17.12.290, 17.40.040, 17.88.090, 17.88.100, 17.96.020 and deleting 17.96.030, skirting of mobile homes NS-117 Amends §§ 2.36.020, Magistrate appointment NS-118 Amends Chap. 2.40, Personnel policy NS-119 Expenditure limitation (Special) NS-120 Adding Sec. 10.36.010, 10.36.020, 10.36.030, and 10.36.040, Recreational vehicles NS-121 Amending §§ 2.18.010, 2.18.020, 2.18.030, 2.18.050, 2.18.070, 17.52.010, 17.52.020, 17.52.030, 17.52.040, and adding §§ 17.52.050 through 17.52.130, Historical preservation zone and creation of Historial Preservation Commission NS-122 Tax levy (Special) NS-123 Amending 2.12.040 F, 3.12.010, 3.12.020, and 3.12.090 Implementation of purchasing policy NS-124 Amending §§ 10.24.040 Handicapped parking NS-125 Amending §§ 10.24.050 Private parking areas reserved for handicapped NS-126 Amending §§ 13.08.020 and adding §§ 13.08.100 Sewer impact fees NS-127 Levy property tax (Special) NS-128 Amends 3.08.080(H), Removes sales tax exemption for sale of food. NS-129 Amends Chap. 3.20 Transient occupancy tax NS-130 Granting selling and renewing to SSVEC right and privilege to construct and sell electricity NS-131 Annexation (Special) NS-132 Adopting the City Tax Code of Willcox, repealing Chap. 3.08 NS-133 Adopting City of Willcox Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance Repeals Chap. 18.04 NS-134 Amends Chap. 3.08, Sec. 3.08.110, Willcox City Tax Code NS-135 Levy tax (Special) NS-136 Adopting the 1988 Amendment to City Tax Code NS-137 Levy tax (Special) NS-138 Adopting City Tax Code, repealing Sec. 3.08.445(F) NS-139 Annexation (Special) NS-140 VOID NS-141 Annexation (Special) NS-142 Levy tax (Special) NS-143 Amends Chap. 9, Sec. 08 by adding §§ 150, Prohibiting glass beverage containers in municipal parks NS-144 Implementing provision of A.R.S. Sec. 26-301 by creating Title 11 "Emergency Services"  
    Beginning with the 2014 republication, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city of Willcox, Arizona, beginning with the 2014 republication, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 

this Code NS148  4- 9-1991 Amended definitions 1 13.08.020.16., 17       Added 13.08.020.49 Added ch. 13.09, use of municipal sewer system 2       Added 13.09.010-13.09.270 NS149 12-28-1993 Added ch. 13.13, backflow prevention and cross-connection control 1       Added 13.13.010-13.13.180 NS150  7-23-1991 Amended retail sales; measure of tax; burden of proof; exclusions 1 3.08.460 NS152 10- 8-1991 Added unauthorized use of approved containers 1       Added 8.12.055 Added unauthorized disposal of hazardous waste 2       Added 8.12.125 NS155  6-23-1992 Amended planned unit developments 2 17.88.080.E NS161  4-15-1993 Amended definitions 1 8.12.010.F 2 8.12.010.H Amended permits and hauling 3 8.12.050.A Amended unauthorized use of approved containers 4 8.12.055.A Amended burning garbage 5 8.12.060 Amended prohibited disposal of certain materials in containers 6 8.12.110 NS164 10-12-1993 Amended trailer houses or mobile homes prohibited-exceptions 1       Added 17.12.290.E NS165 12-28-1993 Amended ch. 15.14, building code 1-3 15.04.010-15.04.030 NS166 12-28-1993 Amended ch. 15.08, electrical code 1-3 15.08.010-15.08.030 4 15.08.050 5 15.08.070 NS167 12-28-1993 Amended ch. 15.12, plumbing code 1-3 15.12.010-15.12.030 4 15.12.070 NS168 12-28-1993 Amended ch. 15.20, fire code 1 15.20.010 NS169 12-28-1993 Amended ch. 15.24, sign code 1 15.24.010 NS170 12-28-1993 Amended ch. 15.28, dangerous building abatement code 1 15.28.010 NS171 12-28-1993 Added ch. 15.14, mechanical code 1       Added 15.14.010-15.14.040 NS175  6-28-1994 Amended volunteer fire department 2.28.010-2.28.140 NS177  8-23-1994 Amended regular meetings 2.04.040 NS180 12-13-1994 Amended due date-return preparation-late payment 3.20.040.C NS186  3-12-1996 Amended chart 1 17.84.010 NS191 10-22-1996 Amended notice of removal by city-contents 8.28.040 NS195  5-13-1997 Amended meeting place 2.04.030 NS199  9-30-1997 Added ch. 2.22, public library commission       Added 2.22.010-2.22.090 NS200  9-30-1997 Repealed and replaced ch. 2.18, historical preservation commission I       Rpld 2.18.010-2.18.070 II       Added 2.18.010-2.18.090 NS201  9-30-1997 Repealed and replaced ch. 2.20, planning and zoning commission I       Rpld 2.20.010-2.20.120 II       Added 2.20.010-2.20.150 NS202  9-30-1997 Repealed and replaced ch. 2.16, recreation and parks commission I       Rpld 2.16.010-2.16.070 II       Added 2.16.010-2.16.090 NS203 11-25-1997 Added juvenile curfew I-V 
      Added 6.06.190 NS204  1-13-1998 Repealed ch. 2.04, mayor and city council       Rpld 2.04.010-2.04.060 NS205  1-13-1998 Added ch. 2.01, council       Added 2.01.010-2.01.080 NS206  1-13-1998 Added ch. 2.02, mayor       Added 2.02.010-2.02.070 NS207  1-13-1998 Added ch. 2.03, council procedure       Added 2.03.010-2.03.100 NS208  1-13-1998 Added ch. 2.04, ordinances, resolutions and contracts       Added 2.04.010-2.04.080 NS210  2-10-1998 Amended keeping swine prohibited 6.04.050 NS211  2-10-1998 Added ch. 9.09, consumption of malt beverages in public parks       Added 9.09.010 NS216  4-13-1999 Amended noise       Added 9.08.070.D NS218  4-27-1999 Repealing and replacing tit. 6, animal control 1, 2 
      Added 6.04.010-6.04.190 3       Rpld 6.04.010-6.04.050, 6.08.010-6.08.100, 6.12.010-6.12.060, 6.16.010-6.16.070, 6.20.010, 6.20.020 NS219  6-22-1999 Added alarm system regulation       Added 9.08.160 NS224  4-25-2000 Repealed special provisions 1       Rpld 17.36.040 NS233  6-12-2001 Amended regular council meetings 2.03.010 NS236  8-20-2001 Added duty to procure and display address numbers       Added 16.32.080 NS243  2- 3-2003 Amended fence, sight obscuring fence 17.08.190 Added ch. 17.14, fences, walls and screening devices       Added 17.14.010-17.14.060 2008-01 
(Res.)  1-22-2008 Added procurement policy       Added 3.01.010 NS246  3-17-2003 Repealed ch. 5.01, business permit; ch. 5.02, temporary business permit; ch. 5.04, peddlers 3       Rpld 5.01.010-5.01.130, 5.02.010-5.02.130 4       Rpld 5.04.010-5.04.080 NS250 11-17-2003 Amended ch. 17.48, R-5 large scale development zone 1 17.48.010.A 17.48.020.B Repealed farm labor camps       Rpld 17.88.020.F, 17.88.130 NS252  6- 7-2004 Added ch. 11.17, slumlord enforcement guidelines       Added 11.17.010-11.17.080 NS255  8- 2-2004 Added ch. 5.09, telecommunications service       Added 5.09.010-5.09.040 NS260  8- 1-2005 Amended trailer houses or mobile homes prohibited-exceptions 1 17.12.290.E NS261  8- 1-2005 Amended hotels 1 3.08.444 Repealed ch. 3.20, transient occupancy tax 2       Rpld 3.20.010-3.20.070 NS264 12-19-2005 Added care, control and sale of products containing ephedrine, pseudo-ephedrine, norpseudoephedrine and phenylpropanolamine 1       Added 6.06.200 NS265  2- 6-2006 Amended ch. 15.04, building code 1 15.04.010 2 15.04.070 NS266  2- 6-2006 Amended ch. 15.14, mechanical code 1 15.14.010 2 15.14.070 NS268  2- 6-2006 Amended ch. 15.16, gas code 1 15.16.010 2 15.16.015 NS269  2- 6-2006 Amended ch. 15.20, fire code 1 15.20.010 NS270  2- 6-2006 Amended ch. 15.08, electrical code 1 15.08.010 2 15.08.070 NS271  6- 5-2006 Added recreational vehicle (RV) 1(Exh. A)       Added 17.08.505 Added ch. 17.81, RU rural zoning districts 2(Exh. B)       Added 17.81.010-17.81.070 NS272  6- 5-2006 Amended recreational vehicle (RV) 1(Exh. A) 17.08.505 Added ch. 17.82, SR single-household residential zoning districts 2(Exh. C)       Added 17.82.010-17.82.060 NS274  6- 5-2006 Amended recreational vehicle (RV) 1 17.08.505 NS275  7-17-2006 Repealed and added tit. 18, flood damage prevention ordinance 1       Rpld 18.04.010-18.04.260 1       Added 18.01.010-18.01.040, 18.02.010-18.02.490, 18.03.010-18.03.120, 18.04.010-18.04.030, 18.05.010-18.05.080, 18.06.010-18.06.030 NS279 11- 6-2006 Amended basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard 2 18.03.020 NS283  3- 3-2008 Repealed tit. 1, general provisions; tit. 2, administration and personnel; tit. 3, revenue and finance; and enacted a new tit. 1, administration; tit. 2, boards, commissions and committees; and tit. 3, finance and taxation 1       Added 1.01.010-1.01.050, 1.02.010-1.02.040, 1.03.010-1.03.030, 1.04.010-1.04.060, 1.05.010-1.05.100, 1.06.010-1.06.050, 1.06.110-1.06.180, 1.07.010, 1.07.020, 1.07.110-1.07.170, 1.07.210-1.07.230, 1.07.310, 1.08.010-1.08.050, 1.09.010-1.09.050, 1.10.010-1.10.080, 2       Added 2.01.010-2.01.100, 2.02.010-2.02.070, 2.03.010-2.03.070, 2.04.010-2.04.070, 3       Added 3.01.010-3.01.030, 3.02.010, 3.02.020, 3.03.010-3.03.070 4       Rpld 1.04.010, 1.08.010, 1.08.020, 1.12.010-1.12.040, 2.04.010-2.04.060, 2.08.010-2.08.040, 2.12.010-2.12.090, 2.16.010-2.16.070, 2.18.010-2.18.070, 2.20.010-2.20.120, 2.24.010-2.24.040, 2.28.010-2.28.140, 2.32.010-2.32.090, 2.36.010-2.36.040, 2.40.010-2.40.060, 2.44.010-2.44.040, 2.48.010-2.48.060, 2.52.010-2.52.060, 3.04.010, 3.08.010-3.08.320, 3.12.010-3.12.090, 3.16.010-3.16.030, 3.20.010-3.20.070 NS289 11-17-2008 Added tit. 10, buildings and construction 2       Added 10.01.010-10.01.170, 10.02.010-10.02.170 Repealed tit. 15, buildings and construction; repealed ch. 11.17, slumlord enforcement guidelines       Rpld 11.17.010-11.17.080 15.04.010-15.04.060, 15.08.010-15.08.070, 15.12.010-15.12.070, 15.16.010-15.16.070, 15.20.010 15.24.010, 15.28.010, 15.32.010-15.32.040 NS290 12-15-2008 Added business permit regulations 1-3 
      Added 4.01.010-4.01.110 NS292  4- 6-2009 Added tit. 5, health and sanitation; repealed tit. 8, health and safety; repealed ch. 9.04, nuisances 2       Added 5.01.010-5.01.080, 5.02.010-5.02.110, 5.03.010-5.03.120       Rpld 8.04.010-8.04.290, 8.08.010-8.08.040, 8.12.010-8.12.150, 8.16.010-8.16.100, 8.20.010-8.20.140, 8.24.010-8.24.120, 8.28.010-8.28.100, 9.04.010, 9.04.020 NS294  4-20-2009 Amended appointment; qualifications 1 1.07.120 NS298 11-16-2009 Amended offensive businesses prohibited 2 5.01.050 NS300  9-20-2010 Amended unlawful acts 2 5.02.040.A NS301 11-15-2010 Added tit. 6, police and public safety       Added 6.01.010-6.01.070, 6.02.010-6.02.100, 6.03.010-6.03.140, 6.04.010-6.04.090, 6.05.010-6.05.170, 6.06.010-6.06.180 Repealed tit. 9, public peace, morals and welfare; ch. 6.04, animal general regulations       Rpld 6.04.010-6.04.190 9.08.010-9.08.160, 9.12.010-9.12.040 NS302 11-15-2010 Amended sunset clause 2 4.01.120 NS303 12-20-2010 Added ch. 5.06, solid waste 2       Added 5.06.010-5.06.280 NS306  6- 6-2011 Added ch. 17.18, medical marijuana 2       Added 17.18.010-17.18.050 NS309  9- 6-2011 Amended ch. 13.08, municipal sewer system; ch. 13.09, use of municipal sewer system; ch. 13.12, water regulations and fees; ch. 13.16, gas rates 2       Added 13.08.019-13.08.023, 13.12.010, 13.12.020-13.12.022, 13.12.100, 13.16.010-13.16.100       Rpld 13.12.010-13.12.100, 13.16.010-13.16.100 NS310  9- 6-2011 Amended responsibility for payment of charges 2 5.06.080 NS313  5- 6-2013 Added ch. 13.14, sewer pretreatment II       Added 13.14.101-13.14.503 Added significant noncompliance a civil violation; severe noncompliance a criminal violation; interference with enforcement procedure III       Added 13.14.501-13.14.503 NS314  6- 3-2013 Amended city attorney; appointment; duties 1 1.07.310 NS316 12-16-2013 Amended elected officers; terms and vacancies 1 1.06.010 NS317  2-20-2014 Amended code adopted; repealed tit. 3, ch. 3.03, transient occupancy tax 1 3.02.010 3       Rpld 3.03.010-3.03.070 NS319  9-18-2014 Added ch. 17.10, citizen review process 1       Added ch. 17.10 NS320  2-5-2015 Amended and retitled effective date; amended contents of ordinances 1 1.10.050 2 1.10.040.C NS321  2-5-2015 Amended presiding officer, magistrate duties 1 1.08.020.A NS322  8- 6-2015 Levies a primary and secondary property tax 1-7 Not codified NS323  4- 7-2016 Adopts state mandated amendments to the tax code 1-5 Not codified NS324  6- 2-2016 Removes the public library advisory committee 1       Rpld 2.04.010-2.04.070 NS325  6- 2-2016 Removes the parks and recreation advisory committee 1       Rpld 2.02.010-2.02.070 NS327  2-16-2017 Amended general penalty; continuing violations 1       Rpld 1.04.010.C       Added 1.04.010.C-E  
