
Yuma Code of Ordinances


YUMA CITY CODE
YUMA, ARIZONA




Contains 2019 S-60, current through April 30, 2019















Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



PUBLISHER'S ACKNOWLEDGEMENT




In the publication of this Code of Ordinances, every effort was made
to provide easy access to local law by municipal officials, the citizens
of this municipality, and members of the business community.





We want to express our grateful appreciation to all municipal officials
for their untiring efforts in the preparation of this Code of Ordinances.





AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING CORPORATION





Stephen G. Wolf, Esq.
President




CITY OFFICIALS



 




City Council




Douglas J. Nicholls, Mayor




Gary Knight




Leslie McClendon




Jacob Miller




Mike Shelton




Edward C. Thomas




Karen Watts








City Administrator




Gregory K. Wilkinson










Charter of the City of Yuma



Article



   I.   Name and Continuity



   II.   Boundaries



   III.   Powers of the City



   IV.   Elections



   V.   Initiative, Referendum and Recall of Elected Officials



   VI.   City Officials



   VII.   The City Council



   VIII.   City Administrator



   IX.   Boards and Commissions



   X.   Personnel System



   XI.   Municipal Court



   XII.   Contracts and Competitive Bidding



   XIII.   Revenue, Taxation and Finance



   XIV.   Franchise and Public Utilities



   XV.   Transitional Powers



   XVI.   Amendments



   XVII.   Gender



      Historical Information



Article I
Name and Continuity



Sec. 1.  Name.



   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Yuma
shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate in name and in fact by
the name of the “City of Yuma,” and by that name shall have perpetual
succession.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Rights and liabilities.



   The City of Yuma shall remain vested with, and continue to have, hold
and enjoy all property, rights of property, and rights of action of every
nature and description not pertaining to this municipality and is hereby
declared to be a successor of the same.  It shall be subject to all the
liabilities that now exist against this municipality.  All ordinances of
said City of Yuma, not conflicting with this Charter, shall be continued in
force until amended or repealed and all proceedings providing for any public
improvement pending and uncompleted shall be continued in accordance with the
law in which said proceedings were commenced.  (OC)



Article II
Boundaries



Sec. 1.  Boundaries.



   The boundaries of the City shall be the boundaries as established at
the time this Charter takes effect, or as such boundaries may be changed
thereafter in the manner authorized by law.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Article III
Powers of the City



Sec. 1.  General powers.



   The City of Yuma shall have all the powers granted to municipal
corporations and cities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Arizona
and by this Charter, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry
into execution all the powers granted, and to exercise such other powers as
are now or may be hereafter granted by legislature to the municipalities
within the State, unless the exercise of such powers is contrary to the
provisions of this Charter; to exercise all other needful powers for the
efficient administration of the municipal government, or for the welfare of
the City or its habitants, whether such powers are herein expressly
enumerated or not; and to enact appropriate legislation, and do or perform
any and all other acts and things which may be necessary and proper to carry
out the general powers of the City or of any of the provisions of this
Charter.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Property.



   That in addition to all the powers granted in Section 1 above, the City
of Yuma shall possess the power to purchase, receive, have, take, hold,
lease, use and enjoy, condemn and take by operation of law real and personal
property of every kind, nature and description, both within and without the
corporate limits of the City; and to control and to dispose of the same in
fee simple or any lesser interest or estate as the public interest of the
City may require and as would be of public benefit.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 3.  Money and bonds.



   The City of Yuma shall possess the power to borrow money for any of the
purposes which the City is authorized to provide, and for carrying out any of
the powers which the City is authorized to enjoy and exercise, and to issue
bonds therefor; provided, that in the procedure for the creation and the
issuance of such bonded indebtedness, the general laws of the Constitution
and statutes of the State of Arizona in force at the time of such proceedings
are taken shall be observed and followed. (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Gen. Elec.
11/6/01)



Sec. 4.  Tax.



   The City of Yuma may raise money by a special tax in addition to the
annual tax levy provided for in this Charter.  To authorize such special
tax, the provision of this Charter relative to initiative and referendum
shall be followed and the levy of such tax must be approved by at least a
majority of the qualified electors of the State and the City, therein voting
at an election provided by law to be held for that purpose.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



Sec. 5.  Nuisance.



   The City of Yuma shall provide for the summary abatement of any
nuisance at the expense of the person creating, causing, committing or
maintaining such nuisance.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 6.  Health.



   The City of Yuma shall compel the owner or occupant of buildings or
grounds to remove dirt, rubbish, weeds and other debris therefrom and from
the sidewalk adjacent thereto and on default to authorize the removal or
destruction thereof by an officer or employee of the City, at the expense of
such owner or occupant, and to make such expense a lien upon such buildings
and grounds to be collected in a manner prescribed by ordinance.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 7.  Disease.



   The City of Yuma shall have the power by ordinance to provide
regulations which may be necessary and expedient for the preservation of
health and the suppression of disease within the City.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 8.  Public utilities and services.



   The City may create, own, maintain, construct or acquire by gift,
purchase or eminent domain, and regulate to the extent permissible under the
Constitution and statutes of the State of Arizona, any and all public
utilities and public works both within and without the corporate limits of
the City of Yuma for the benefit, safety, welfare, health or convenience of
the residents of the City.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



Sec. 9.  License.



   The City of Yuma shall license, for the purpose of regulation and
revenue, all and every kind of business not prohibited by law; and to fix the
rates of licenses upon the same, and to provide for the collection thereof by
suit or otherwise, and to provide penalties for transacting such business or
occupation without license when the same has been fixed and prescribed. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 10.  Fees.



   The City of Yuma shall fix the fees and charges for all official
services rendered by the City.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 11.  City as a person.



   The City of Yuma shall possess all powers and rights that are capable
of being possessed by any person under the Constitution and laws of the State
of Arizona and shall exercise said powers and rights only for a public
purpose and for public benefit.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 12.  Land use.



   The City of Yuma shall regulate the use of and have exclusive control
over and enjoyment of all streets, alleys and public grounds and ways, and
the City shall regulate as is necessary for the public benefit the use of all
land within the corporate limits.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 13.  Intergovernmental agreements.



   The City of Yuma shall exercise any of its powers or perform any of its
functions and participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation
by contract, or otherwise, with any one or more states, political
subdivisions, school districts, Indian tribe or council, the County of Yuma,
or any board, commission or agency or combination of them or with the United
States or any department or agency thereof.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 14.  Elections.



   The City of Yuma shall make all rules and regulations governing
elections not inconsistent with the Constitution and statutes of the State of
Arizona and to provide the necessary polling places, ballots, paraphernalia
required for the conducting of such elections and for the announcing,
declaring and recording the results thereof; to provide for the registration
of the duly qualified electors of the City from time to time in accordance
with the laws of the State of Arizona, prescribe suitable rules and
regulations and appoint officers to carry such rules and regulations into
effect. (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



Cross-reference:



   Elections, see Charter Art. IV



   Initiative, referendum and recall elections, see Charter Art. V



Sec. 15.  Commercial and industrial pursuits.



   The City of Yuma shall have the power to engage in any and all
commercial and industrial pursuits for a public purpose and for the benefit
of the public.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 16.  Special sales tax.



   The City of Yuma shall have the further right and power by ordinance,
without an election, to assess, levy and collect excise taxes on the
privilege or right to engage in business, as the word “business” shall be
defined in such ordinance, for the purpose of revenue and provide penalties
from the nonpayment thereof.  Such taxes may be computed upon, but shall in
no event exceed an amount equal to one percent (1%) of gross proceeds of
sales, gross income or gross proceeds; except that taxes amounting to an
additional two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of sales or gross income
from the businesses of restaurants, bars, hotels and motels (as such
businesses shall be defined by ordinance) may be imposed by ordinance.  It
shall be the policy of the city to apply such two percent (2) taxes at an
annualized rate which may be used to pay the costs of acquisition,
construction, operation, maintenance, promotion, administration, repair and
reconstruction for the following purposes:



   (1)   $2,500,000 to Citywide parks, recreation, arts and cultural
activities, Yuma Art Center, City golf courses, the City's
baseball/recreation complex, existing Yuma Civic Center and necessary and
appropriate service and administrative facilities appurtenant thereto.



   (2)   $600,000 to the historic Yuma Crossing area (Heritage Area)
located within the City limits; and



   (3)   $400,000 to conventions and tourism.



Any balance of such two percent (2%) taxes may be applied only for the above
purposes. Such two percent (2%) tax shall begin July 1, 2009 and shall
terminate on June 30, 2024. 



(Sp. Elec. 10/5/93; Sp. Elec. 5/19/09)



Sec. 17.  Penalties.



   The City of Yuma shall have the power to prescribe fines, forfeitures
and penalties for the violation of any provision of this Charter, or of any
ordinance and resolution of the City; but no penalty, fine or forfeiture
shall exceed the limit which may be prescribed by the laws of the State of
Arizona relative to incorporated cities.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 18.  Liberal construction.



   This granting of power to the City of Yuma is to be liberally construed
for the purpose of securing the well-being of the municipality and its
inhabitants and in the absence of any procedure for carrying out or
effectuating any granted or implied power or authority, the general law of
this State, where applicable and where not inconsistent with any express
provision of this Charter, may be followed.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Article IV
Elections



Sec. 1.  Permitted types of elections.



   Elections to be held in the City shall be primary, general or special.



   (a)   Primary elections shall be held for the purpose of nominating
candidates for the general election, and for such other purposes as the City
Council may prescribe.



   (b)   General elections shall be held for the purpose of electing a
mayor, councilmembers and magistrate of the City and for such other purposes
and offices as the City Council or this Charter may prescribe.



   (c)   All other municipal elections that may be held by authority of
this Charter, or any law, shall be known as special elections.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Qualifications of electors; registration.



   The qualifications of electors shall be as required by the Constitution
and laws of the State of Arizona for state and county electors.  Residents
of an area annexed by the City, who are qualified electors, as set forth
above under state law, in respect to their own area immediately prior to
annexation, shall be considered as qualified electors of the City upon
annexation, and shall be eligible to vote in municipal elections immediately
following annexation.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



Sec. 3.  Arrangement of names not to reveal source of candidacy or support
of candidates.



   The names of the candidates for each office shall be arranged as
provided by law, and nothing on the ballot shall be indicative of the source
of the candidacy or of the support of any candidate. (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 4.  Time of holding primary and general elections.



   There shall be a primary and general election held in the City of Yuma
in every odd numbered year.  The primary and general elections shall be held
in accordance with state law. (Gen. Elec. 12/6/83; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07; Sp.
Elec. 11/8/11)



Sec. 5.  Majority to elect in primary election.



   Any candidate who shall receive at the primary election, a number of
votes constituting a majority of all the ballots cast, shall be declared to
be elected to the office for which he is a candidate effective as of the date
of the general election, and no further elections shall be held as to said
candidate provided that if more candidates receive the number of votes
constituting a majority of all the ballots cast than there are offices to be
filled, then those candidates, equal in number of the offices to be filled
receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared to be elected. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 6.  Nomination for primary election.



   The City Council, by ordinance, shall direct the City Clerk to make
available to all candidates for any City office a petition form for
nomination at a primary election.  The nomination form must contain the
signatures of qualified electors of the City aggregating not less than three
percent (3%) nor more than five percent (5%) of the total number of valid
ballots cast at the last preceding general municipal election.  The
petitions may be presented to the City Clerk not earlier than one hundred
twenty (120) days nor later than ninety (90) days before the date set for the
primary election.  The City Clerk shall certify the petition indicating that
the required number of signatures of qualified electors has been obtained and
such certification shall cause the candidate's name to be printed on the
ballot.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/81; Sp. Elec. 11/2/99)



Sec. 7.  Special elections.



   The City Council, by ordinance, shall provide the time, manner and
means of holding any special election provided that no election shall be
called less than thirty (30) days following publication in an official
newspaper of the City.  All special elections shall be conducted in the same
manner and under the same provisions as are provided for the holding of
general elections.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 8.  Early voting.




    The City Council shall provide for early voting in accordance with the
laws of the State of Arizona. Any qualified elector may vote by early
ballot. 





(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Sp. Elec. 11/2/99; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07 )




Sec. 9.  Canvassing returns and declaring of election results.



   Within the time required by law after any election, the Mayor and City
Council shall canvass returns and declare by resolution the results of such
election.  The City Clerk shall issue a certificate to each successful
candidate elected to office at any primary or general election.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



Sec. 10.  Ballots for ordinances and charter amendments.



   An ordinance or charter amendment requiring a vote of the electors
shall be presented for voting by ballot title.  The ballot title of a
measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise
statement describing the substance of the measure without argument or
prejudice.  Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: 
“Shall the above described (ordinance) (amendment) be adopted?” 
Immediately below such question shall appear the words, “yes” and
“no” and a square by each in which by making a cross (X) the elector may
cast his vote.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 11.  Mechanical voting.



   The City Council may provide for the use of mechanical or other devices
for voting or counting of votes at any general, primary or special election
so long as such devices are not inconsistent with the Constitution or
statutes of the State.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 12.  Conduct of elections.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the provisions of the
election laws of the State of Arizona shall apply.  The City Council shall
adopt by ordinance all necessary election regulations consistent with law and
this Charter.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/81)



Sec. 13.  Registration lists; cooperation with county.



   The City Council may contract with the County to furnish registration
lists of qualified electors.  To the extent possible, the City shall work
with the County in the conduct of elections to avoid unnecessary delays and
duplication of services and supplies during the conduct of elections. 



(Gen. Elec. 12/1/81; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



Article V
Initiative, Referendum and
Recall of Elected Officials



Sec. 1.  General authority.



   (a)   Initiative, referendum and recall. There is reserved to the
qualified electors of the City of Yuma the powers of initiative, the
referendum and the recall of elected officials, as prescribed by the
Constitution and the statutes of the State of Arizona.  The required number
of signatures of qualified electors required for initiative or referendum
shall be computed on the basis of the total number of ballots cast for mayor
in the mayoral election, whether primary or general, immediately preceding
the request for initiative or referendum.  The required number of signatures
for recall of elected officials shall be computed on the basis of the total
number of ballots cast for all candidates for the office held at the last
general election.



(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93; Sp. Elec. 11/2/99)



   (b)   Initiative.  The City Council shall, upon receipt of
notification from the City Clerk that valid petitions for initiative have
been filed, either adopt the initiative measure within fifty (50) days of the
presentation by the City Clerk or set a date for a special election no later
than the next ensuing primary or general election.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93; Sp.
Elec. 11/2/99)



   (c)   Referendum.  The City Council shall, upon receipt of
notification from the City Clerk that valid petitions for referendum have
been filed, either repeal the ordinance or resolution within fifty (50) days
of the presentation by the City Clerk or submit the ordinance or resolution
to the electors of the city either at the next general election or at a
special election to be called for that purpose. (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Sp.
Elec. 11/2/99)



   (d)   Recall.  The City Council shall, upon receipt of notification
from the City Clerk that valid petitions for recall have been filed, and if
the officer does not resign within the time period allowed by state law, set
a date for a special election no later than one hundred twenty (120) days
from the date of presentation by the City Clerk.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



Article VI
City Officials



Sec. 1.  Term, election of mayor, councilmembers.



   There shall be a mayor and six councilmembers who shall be elected from
the city at large.  The mayor and councilmembers shall hold office for a
period of four years from on and after the first day of January succeeding
the day of their election and until their successors are elected and
qualified. 



(Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



Sec. 2.  When mayor, councilmembers elected.



   Elections for mayor and councilmembers shall be held in odd numbered
years.  A mayor and three councilmembers shall be elected, commencing with
the elections held in 1973, and three councilmembers shall be elected two
years thereafter. 



(Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



Sec. 3.  Appointive officers.



   (a)   City administrator.  There shall be a city administrator, who
shall be appointed in accordance with Article VIII of this Charter.  (Sp.
Elec. 4/7/70)



   (b)   City clerk.  From on and after January 1, 1971, there shall
be a city clerk who shall be appointed and his compensation fixed by the city
administrator with the approval of the city council.  The city clerk shall
give notice of formal city council meetings to its members and to the public,
keep a journal of its proceedings and perform such other duties as are
assigned to him by charter, by city council, or by the city administrator. 
The city clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the city administrator.  (Sp.
Elec. 4/7/70)



   (c)   City attorney.  From on and after January 1, 1971, there
shall be a city attorney who shall be appointed and his compensation fixed by
the city administrator with the approval of the city council.  The city
attorney shall serve as the chief legal advisor to the city council, the city
administrator, and all city departments, offices and agencies.  He shall
represent the City in all legal proceedings, and shall perform any other
duties prescribed by this charter, law or ordinance.  The city council shall
have control of all litigation of the city, and may employ other attorneys to
take charge of any litigation or to assist the city attorney therein, and may
provide for the payment for such additional legal services and all proper
service or work done on behalf of the city in connection with its legal
matters.  The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city
administrator.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (d)   Finance director.  From and after January 1, 1994, there
shall be a city Finance Director who shall be appointed and his compensation
fixed by the city administrator with the approval of the city council.  The
duties shall be prescribed and carried out as provided by ordinance.  The
finance director shall serve at the pleasure of the city administrator. 
(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



Sec. 4.  Bond—Prerequisite of office.



   Before entering upon the performance of the duties of his office, any
officer of whom a bond is required by the Charter or by ordinance, shall make
and execute and file his official bond. (OC)



Sec. 5.  Bonds or insurance.



   The City Council may by ordinance require official bonds of officers or
employees of the city and fix the amount thereof.  Cost of said bonds will
be paid by the city.  In lieu of such bonds, or in addition thereto, the
City Council may purchase fidelity insurance coverage. 



(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



Secs. 6 through 9.



   Repealed.  (Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



Sec. 10.  Oath.



   Before entering upon the duties of his office, each officer of the
city, whether elected or appointed under the provisions of this Charter, or
under ordinance of the city, shall take and subscribe an oath of office in
the form of an official oath required by the constitution.  The oath so
taken and subscribed, if by an official required to give a bond, shall be
endorsed upon or attached to the bond; if by an official not required to give
a bond, such oath shall be filed with and kept by the city clerk.  (OC)



Sec. 11.  Vacancy in elective office—Filling.



   Any vacancy occurring in an elective office provided for in this
Charter shall be filled by appointment by the City Council by a majority vote
thereof, and the appointee shall hold office for the remainder of the
unexpired term of the office so filled.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   A vacancy in the City Council shall be filled by a majority vote of all
its remaining members.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   If the City Council fails to make such an appointment within thirty
days following the occurrence of the vacancy, it shall call a special
election to fill the vacancy.  Such election shall be held not sooner than
ninety days and not later than one hundred twenty days following the
occurrence of the vacancy, and be otherwise governed by the provisions of
Articles IV and V.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 12.  Same—Determining vacancy.



   A vacancy shall exist, except under the recall provision of this
Charter, when an elective officer fails to qualify within ten (10) days after
the commencement of his term, dies, resigns, removes from the city, absents
himself continuously for thirty (30) days from the duties of his office
without the consent of the City Council, is convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this Charter, or of a felony, or is adjudicated an
incapacitated person pursuant to state law.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



Sec. 13.  Residency.



   No person shall be eligible to hold any elective office in the City of
Yuma, whether filled by election or appointment unless he be a resident and
elector therein, and shall have resided in the city or in any area annexed to
the city for at least one year preceding the day of such election or
appointment.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 14.  Compensation.




   (a)   From and after January 1, 1998, the Mayor shall receive
compensation of $12,000 a year and each Councilmember shall receive
compensation of $3,600 a year.  (Gen. Elec. 12/3/85; Sp. Elec. 11/5/96)





   (b)   Compensation of all other officers, except as otherwise
provided in this Charter, whether elected or appointed, shall be fixed from
time to time by the City Council.  (Gen. Elec. 12/3/85)




Sec. 15.  Creation, discontinuance of offices, boards and commissions.



   The City Council shall have the power by ordinance or by resolution to
create and discontinue offices, deputyships, assistantships, boards and
commissions, other than those prescribed in this charter and to combine or
merge any appointive office, department, board or commission prescribed in
this Charter with another so prescribed or with an appointive office,
department, board or commission created by ordinance or resolution under such
title as the city council shall designate.  Such ordinances or resolutions
shall provide the mode of appointment, prescribe the term, if any, and duties
pertaining thereto according to the City Council's best judgment of the needs
of the City and determine the mode of removal.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Gen.
Elec. 11/6/01)



   The direction and supervision of all departments, offices, and
agencies, and the appointment of all administrative officers of such
departments, offices and agencies, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, shall be as prescribed in Article VIII.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 16.  Multiple compensation to councilmembers prohibited.



   Except where authorized by state law, or this Charter, no member of the
City Council shall hold any other public office or have other employment in
the municipal government or any subdivision, thereof, the compensation for
which is paid out of municipal moneys, during the term for which he was
elected to the City Council.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   No former member of the City Council shall hold any compensated
appointed city office or city employment until one year after the expiration
of the term for which he was elected.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   No former elected city official shall hold the office of city
administrator within four years of holding office.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Gen.
Elec. 11/6/01).



Sec. 17.  Conflict of interest.



   Where there is possible conflict of interest, the provisions of Arizona
Revised Statutes, Section 38-503, or any existing state law relating to
conflict of interest shall govern.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



Article VII
The City Council



Sec. 1.  Powers of the city council.



   All powers herein granted to and vested in the City of Yuma shall,
except as herein otherwise provided, be exercised by a city council, to be
designated the City Council of the City of Yuma.  Said City Council shall be
the governing body of the City and shall consist of a mayor and six
councilmembers, and, subject to the express limitations to this Charter,
shall be vested with all powers of legislation in municipal affairs adequate
to a complete system of local government consistent with the Constitution and
laws of the State.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  The mayor.



   (a)   The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city,
and ex officio chairman of the city council, and shall see that the
ordinances thereof are enforced; shall call meetings, administer oaths and
issue proclamations.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (b)   The mayor shall be a voting member of the City Council, the
president thereof, and shall preside at its meetings when present.  The City
Council shall elect a deputy mayor who shall act as Mayor during the
temporary absence of the mayor.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (c)   The mayor shall annually and from time to time give the City
Council information relative to the affairs of the city, and recommend for
its consideration such matters as he may deem expedient.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (d)   The mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the city
by the courts for the purpose of service of civil process upon the city and
instituting any action or proceeding at law or equity for and in behalf of
the city, and appearing in any manner before the courts on behalf of the
city; he shall be recognized by the governor and other state officials as the
chief and official head of the city.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (e)   The mayor shall take command of the police and govern the city
by proclamation during times of great danger when an extraordinary local
emergency or natural disaster causes or threatens to cause loss of or
jeopardizes life or property.  He shall be recognized as head of the city
government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of
military law.  Violation of any proclamation issued by the mayor hereunder
during such times shall be a misdemeanor.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Gen. Elec.
11/6/01)



Editor's Note:
   Sp. Elec. 12/7/93 added Sections (f),(g) and (h) to Art. VII, Sec. 2;
Sp. Elec. 11/5/96 repealed Sections (f), (g), and (h) to the Article.



Sec. 3.  Meetings.



   The City Council shall, by ordinance, provide for the time and place of
holding its meetings and the manner in which its special meetings may be
called.  All sessions of the City Council, whether regular or special, shall
be open to the public as provided under state law.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77;
Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



Sec. 4.  Quorum.



   A majority of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 5.  Rules.



   The City Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, may punish
its members for disorderly conduct and compel their attendance at City
Council meetings.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 6.  Council action.



   (a)   The City Council shall act by ordinance, resolution or verbal
motion.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (b)   The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the adoption of all
ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the proceedings of
the City Council.  Upon request of any member, the ayes and noes shall be
taken and recorded on any vote.  No member shall be excused from voting
except:



   (1)   Upon matters involving the consideration of his own official
conduct.



   (2)   Matters in which he declares a conflict of interest.



   (3)   He is absent during the vote.



In all other cases a failure to vote shall be entered on the minutes as an
affirmative vote.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/81)



   (c)   No ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or become
effective without receiving the affirmative votes of a majority of all the
members of the City Council.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (d)   Every ordinance shall be preceded by a brief title which shall
indicate the subject and purport thereof.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (e)   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be:  "Be it
ordained by the City Council of the City of Yuma as follows:" and the
enacting clause of all resolutions shall be:  "Be it resolved by the City
Council of the City of Yuma as follows:".  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (f)   No ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council on the day
of its introduction, nor within five (5) days thereafter, nor at any other
time than at a regular meeting.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (g)   In addition to other acts required by law or by specific
provisions of this Charter to be done by ordinance, those acts of the City
Council shall be by ordinance which:  ((Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (1)   Levy any tax or assessments;  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (2)   Acquire, sell, lease or dispose of public real property except
for leases with a term less than 5 years;  (Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



   (3)   Establish or change a zoning district;  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (4)   Impose or provide for imposing a fine or other penalties; 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (5)   Adopt a code by reference or amend the City Code;  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



   (6)   Establish, alter or abolish any City department, or office; 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (7)   Authorize the borrowing of money;  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (8)   Grant, renew or extend a franchise;  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (9)   Amend or repeal any ordinance; (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (10)   Authorize the expenditure of any public money in excess of
the sum of $5,000.00 unless the amount has been appropriated in the
officially adopted budget for the expenditure requested.  (Gen. Elec.
12/1/81)



Editor's Note:
   Art. VII, Secs. 6(g)(4) through (10) were renumbered as a result of
Gen. Elec. 11/6/01, which deleted "(3)  Establish or change fire limits or
zones."



   (h)   When an ordinance is put upon its final adoption and fails to
adopt, and a motion to reconsider is adopted, the vote upon the final
adoption of the ordinance shall not be taken except at a meeting of the City
Council held not less than one week after the meeting at which such passing
motion to reconsider was made.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (i)   No ordinance shall be revised, re-enacted or amended by
reference to its title only, but the ordinance to be revised or re-enacted,
or the section or sections thereof to be amended, or the new section or
sections to be added thereto, shall be set forth and adopted in the manner
provided in this Section for the adoption of ordinances.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



   (j)   After adoption by the City Council, all ordinances,
resolutions and franchises shall be signed by the mayor, attested by the city
clerk, and transcribed in the proper books therefor.  No ordinance,
resolution or franchise shall take effect and become operative until thirty
(30) days after its adoption by the City Council, except measures necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health or safety of the City. 
No such emergency measure shall be immediately operative unless it shall
state in a separate section the reasons why it is necessary that it should
become immediately operative.  Such emergency measures further must be
adopted by the affirmative vote of five-sevenths (5/7) of the members
constituting the City Council.  The vote on such emergency measure shall be
taken by roll call.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/87)



   All ordinances and resolutions having the effect of ordinances and
other measures required to be published, with the exception of emergency
measures, shall be published one (1) time, except where otherwise provided in
the Charter, prior to the effective date.  When properly adopted pursuant to
this section, emergency measures shall become immediately effective without
any necessity for prior publication.  Such emergency legislation shall,
however, be published one (1) day for notice purposes.  The official
newspaper must be a daily newspaper and one printed and published in the City
of Yuma.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/87)



   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the following matters are
not to be classified as "emergencies" for the purpose of adopting emergency
measures:  levying taxes; granting, renewing or extending franchise;
regulating the rate charged by any public utility for its services; annexing
property; and rezoning property.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/87)



   (k)   Ordinances and resolutions adopted pursuant to Section (j)
above shall be prima facie evidence of the contents of such ordinance or
resolution and of the due adoption and publication of the same, and shall be
admissible in evidence in any court in the State of Arizona, or in any
proceeding where the contents of such ordinance or resolution, or any of them
in question; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent the proof of the adoption and publication of an
ordinance or resolution in the manner otherwise prescribed by law.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 7.  Claims or demands against the city.



   All claims or demands against the City of Yuma shall be presented in
the manner and according to the limitations of time prescribed by ordinance
of the City Council.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions, see Charter Art. 13, § 8



Sec. 8.  Codification.



   There shall be a City Code and it shall be made available to the public
at cost.  All City ordinances and resolutions having the effect of law shall
be codified.  The name of the code shall be the Yuma City Code.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 9.  City council, councilmembers not to dictate removal, appointment of
city administrators appointees.



   Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall in any manner
dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officer or
employee whom the city administrator or any of his subordinates are empowered
to appoint, but the City Council may express its views and fully and freely
discuss with the administrator anything pertaining to the manner in which any
of the municipal services are being rendered to the public.  (Sp. Elec.
4/7/70)



Sec. 10.  City council power to investigate.



   The City Council may make investigations into the affairs of the City
and the conduct of any City department, office or agency and for this purpose
may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the
production of evidence.  Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful
order issued in the exercise of these powers by City Council shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 11.  City employees managed through city administration.



   Except for the purposes of investigation, and as otherwise provided in
this Charter, the City Council or its members shall deal with city officers
and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the City
Administrator, solely through the City Administrator, and neither the City
Council nor its members shall give any orders to any such officer or
employees, either publicly or privately.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Article VIII
City Administrator



Sec. 1.  Appointments; qualifications and compensation.



   The City Council shall appoint a city administrator for an indefinite
term and fix his compensation.  The city administrator shall be appointed
solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications.  He
need not be a resident of the City of Yuma at the time of his appointment but
shall reside in the city while in office.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 2.  Removal of city administrator.



   The City Administrator or Acting City Administrator may be removed with
or without cause at any regular or special meeting by vote of four or more
members of the city council.  In the event of his removal, the city council
may at its discretion pay the city administrator any sum not exceeding two
months salary as severance pay.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   A dismissed city administrator shall be entitled, upon request, to a
public hearing before the City Council.  However, the action of the city
council shall be final and conclusive, and not subject to review by any court
or agency.  It is the intention of this charter to vest all authority and
fix all responsibility for such suspension and removal in the city council.
(Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 3.  Acting city administrator.



   The city administrator shall designate as acting city administrator,
subject to the approval of the city council, a qualified city officer to
exercise the powers and perform the duties of city administrator during his
absence or disability.  The designation shall be by letter filed with the
city clerk.  During such absence or disability the city council may revoke
such designation at any time and shall appoint another officer of the city to
serve as acting city administrator until the city administrator shall return
or his disability shall cease.  The city council may also appoint an Acting
City Administrator at any time there is a vacancy in the office of City
Administrator.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



Sec. 4.  Responsibilities and duties of the city administrator.



   The City Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of the
city.  He shall be directly responsible to the city council for the
administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this
charter, or by ordinance.  He shall have the following responsibilities and
duties:  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (a)   He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good
of the city, suspend or remove any city employee or appointive administrative
officer provided for by or under this charter, except as otherwise provided
by law, this charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. 
He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction
and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that
officer's department, office or agency.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (b)   He shall direct and supervise the administration of all
departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided
by this charter or by law.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (c)   He shall attend all city council meetings and shall have the
right to take part in discussion but may not vote.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (d)   He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter and
acts of the city  council, subject to enforcement by him or by officers
subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.  (Sp.
Elec. 4/7/70)



   (e)   He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital
program to the city council.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (f)   He shall submit to the city council and make available to the
public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
city as of the end of each fiscal year.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (g)   He shall make such other reports as the city council may
require concerning the operation of the city departments, offices and
agencies subject to his direction and supervision. (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (h)   He shall keep the city council fully advised as to the
financial condition and future needs of the city and make such
recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as he
deems desirable.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (i)   He or the Acting City Administrator shall execute, attested by
the City Clerk all contracts for amounts exceeding $25,000 and such other
documents as may be authorized by the City Council, and not prohibited by
law.  The Purchasing Agent may authorize contracts of $25,000 or less in
accord with this Charter and the purchasing ordinance of the City on the
terms set forth in such ordinance.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Gen. Elec. 12/1/81;
Sp. Elec. 11/2/99)



   (j)   He shall draft for the consideration of the city council such
ordinances and resolutions as may be necessary for implementing and
supplementing the provisions of this charter as to organization and
procedures, as well as any other ordinances or resolutions necessary for the
conduct of the affairs of the city.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



   (k)   He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this
charter or as may be required by the city council or by ordinance.  (Sp.
Elec. 4/7/70)



Article IX
Boards and Commissions



Sec. 1.  Boards and commissions.



   (a)   City Council powers.  The City Council may, by ordinance or
resolution, create, change or abolish such Boards and Commissions as, in its
judgment, are now required or hereinafter provided by law; and may grant to
such Boards and Commissions powers and duties that are consistent with the
provisions of the Charter.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



   (b)   Appointment and removal.  The City Council, upon a majority
vote of all its members, shall appoint or remove any Board and Commission
member.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (c)   Terms.  The terms of Board and Commission members shall be no
more than five (5) years.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (d)   Residency.  All Board and Commission members shall be
residents of the City of Yuma and their term of office shall cease upon their
removal from the City.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (e)   Sunset law.  The City Council shall on an annual basis review
all current Boards and Commissions and determine whether such Board or
Commissions are necessary or should be abandoned.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/81)



Article X
Personnel System



Sec. 1.  Merit system.



   The City Council shall, by ordinance, provide for the establishment of
a merit system for the purpose of regulating and controlling the
appointments, promotions, demotions, discharges and reinstatement of all
officers and employees of the City except those elected by the people,
members of appointive Boards and Commissions, volunteers who serve without
pay, the City Administrator, the City Attorney and the Municipal Judge. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Article XI
Municipal Court



Sec. 1.  Name.



   There shall be and is hereby established in the City of Yuma a
municipal court to be known and designated “The Municipal Court of the City
of Yuma, Yuma County, State of Arizona,” which court shall always be open
except on non-judicial days, and on such non-judicial days it may transact
such business within its jurisdiction as is authorized by general law to be
transacted by courts of Justice of the Peace relative to business within
their jurisdiction.  The term “Municipal Court of the City of Yuma, Yuma
County, State of Arizona” as used in this section includes “The City
Court of the City of Yuma, Yuma County, State of Arizona” and all other
courts established by law in incorporated cities and towns.  The term
“Municipal Judge” as used in this Article includes “City
Magistrate.”  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Jurisdiction.



   Said court shall, within the territorial limits of said city, have and
exercise jurisdiction as follows:



   (a)   It shall have and exercise exclusive original jurisdiction of
all proceedings of a criminal nature for the violation of any ordinance of
said city; and of every action of a civil nature for the enforcement of a
penalty or the recovery of a penalty or forfeiture imposed by any ordinance
of said city for violation thereof, or for neglect to perform any duty by any
ordinance imposed; and of every action for the collection of any license-tax
or penalty due from any person to said city and required to be paid, or which
is due and collectible under the ordinances of said city.



   (b)   Appeals may be taken to the Superior Court of Yuma County,
State of Arizona, on the judgments and orders of said municipal court in all
cases in which appeals now or hereafter may be taken to said Superior Court
from the Justices' Courts.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 3.  Municipal judge.



   (a)   There shall be a Municipal Judge who shall be elected from the
City at large.  Commencing with the elections held in 1973, and at the
biennial elections held every four (4) years, thereafter, a Municipal Judge
shall be elected who shall serve a term of four (4) years.  On and after
January 1, 1995, at such time as City Council shall deem necessary, other
Municipal Judges shall be elected, at staggered elections, for a term of four
years.  The Municipal Judges shall receive at stated times, a compensation
to be fixed by ordinance by the City Council, which compensation shall not be
increased or diminished after their election or during their term of office. 



(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (b)   The chief officer of the Municipal Court shall be the
Presiding Judge who shall be elected commencing with the elections held in
2009. 



(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



   (c)   The qualifications for election to the position of presiding
judge shall be the same as for pro tem judges set forth in Article VI,
Section 31 of the Arizona Constitution. 



(Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



   (d)   The qualifications of municipal judges other than the
presiding judge shall be: at least 30 years of age, of good moral character
with no felony convictions, and, in addition to the requirements of the Yuma
City Charter, Article VI, Section 13, be a resident of the city for at least
five (5) years preceding the day of election or appointment. 



(Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



Sec. 3.1.  Powers and duties of municipal judge.



   The powers and duties of the Municipal Judge shall be the same, within
the city limits of the City of Yuma, as those set forth by the statutes
governing justices of the peace and police courts.  (Gen. Elec. 12/1/81)



Sec. 4.  Operation.



   The City Council shall provide the Municipal Court with a proper court
room and all reasonable and necessary personnel, supplies and equipment. 
The Municipal Judge shall be responsible for administration of the Municipal
Court as required by the laws of the State and ordinances of the City
applicable to Municipal Courts.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (a)   The City Council shall have the power to appoint a Municipal
Judge Pro Tempore.  The Judge Pro Tempore shall serve upon any absence of a
Municipal Judge.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (b)   In the event of a vacancy in the Office of the Municipal Judge
or at other times as deemed necessary by the City Council, the City Council
shall have the power to appoint a Municipal Judge, subject to the
qualifications of Section 3 of this Article, pending the next ensuing primary
or general election. 



(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93; Sp. Elec. 11/6/0)



Sec. 5.  Court order.



   The City shall make available necessary personnel for attendance at
said court to preserve order therein and to enforce its orders and serve its
process.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



Sec. 6.  Writs and process.



   For the proper carrying out of the jurisdiction, vested in said city
magistrate, he shall be entitled and authorized, to issue and cause to be
served, any and all writs and processes, and he shall have full authority to
hear and determine all matters properly coming before him and coming within
his jurisdiction herein specified.  The writs and processes to be used by
said magistrate shall be similar to those used by Justices of the Peace in
cases of a similar nature, and proper record shall be kept of the issuance of
writs and processes and returns, and of any and all other actions taken
relative thereto, and the actions of the court thereon.  The police of the
City of Yuma are hereby authorized and directed to execute and serve any and
all writs and processes issued out of said municipal court by said judge, and
proper return shall be made by such officer to the same extent as is required
of constables and sheriffs in the service and execution of similar papers. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Article XII
Contracts and Competitive Bidding



Sec. 1.  Competitive bidding.



   (a)   Informal bidding.  The City shall obtain, if possible,
informal competitive bids in writing from at least three suppliers or
contractors on expenditures greater than five percent of the amount stated in
the procurement laws of the State of Arizona.  The City shall accept the
informal competitive bid which, under all the circumstances, appears to be in
the best interest of the City or it may reject all informal competitive
bids. 



(Sp. Elec. 12/7/93; Sp. Elec. 11/2/99; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



   Whenever possible informal competitive bids shall be obtained from
those businesses on an approved vendor list which vendors must have a valid
City business license.  The responsibility for being placed on the vendor
list shall be the vendor's pursuant to regulations adopted by the City
Council.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (b)   Formal bidding.  For expenditures in excess of the highest
amount authorized in subsection (a) above, advertising for formal competitive
bids shall be required.  A one-time advertisement in the official city
newspaper may be in summary form.  It shall specify in general the terms,
the goods or services sought and shall specify the time and place where such
bids will be opened and read at a public meeting by or in the presence of the
contracting officer of the City.  The advertisement shall also contain a
statement of the place that copies of the official call for bids, including
plans and specifications, if any, and instructions to bidders may be
obtained.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (c)   Acceptance of bids.  The City Council shall accept the formal
bid which, under all circumstances, appears to be in the best interest of the
city or the city council may reject all bids and readvertise.  (Sp. Elec.
4/7/70)



   (d)   Further regulations.  Further regulations concerning
purchasing and the awarding of contracts shall be established by city
ordinance.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



   (e)   Advertising contract.  The city council shall let annually
contracts for the advertising for the ensuing fiscal year.  For this purpose
they shall advertise by publication in the official newspaper by a one-time
advertisement, setting forth distinctly and specifically the work
contemplated to be done, and asking for sealed proposals therefor.  The
proposals shall specify the type and spacing to be used at the rate or rates
named in the bids.  The city council shall accept the bid which, under the
circumstances, appears to be in the best interest of the city, or the city
council may reject all bids and readvertise for new bids.  The newspaper to
which the award for such advertising is made shall be known as the official
newspaper.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 2.  Local, preference.



   The City Council shall authorize local preferences for the purposes of
awarding contracts for any improvements, materials, equipment, supplies,
construction and professional services as defined in A.R.S. Title 32, Chapter
1, and any successor statute or amendment, so long as such preferences are
not inconsistent with the Constitution or statutes of the State.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/1/81; Spec. Elec. 5/18/10)



Article XIII
Revenue, Taxation and Finance



Sec. 1.  Fiscal powers.



   The powers of the City concerning budget, taxation, finance and fiscal
matters shall be limited only by the provisions of the Constitution and laws
of the State and by this Charter.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Fiscal year.



   The fiscal year of the City shall commence upon the first day of July
of each year.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 3.  Administrators estimate—Preparation.



   On or before the first Monday in May in each year, or on such date in
each year as shall be fixed by the City Council, the chief administrative
officer of the city shall prepare a careful estimate in writing of the
amounts of money specifying in detail the objects thereof, required for the
business and conduct of the affairs of the city during the next ensuing
fiscal year.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 4.  Same—Submission to city council.



   On or before the first Monday in June in each year, or on such date in
each year as shall be fixed by the City Council, the chief administrative
officer of the city shall submit to the city council the estimates of each
department, and his own personal report and recommendation and estimate as to
the probable expenditures of the city for the next ensuing fiscal year,
stating the amount in detail required to meet all expenditures necessary for
city purposes, including interest and sinking funds for outstanding
indebtedness, if any therein, also an estimate of the amount of income
expected from all sources in each department and the probable amount required
to be raised by taxation to cover such expenditures, interest and sinking
funds.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70)



Sec. 5.  Budget.



   The City Council shall meet annually prior to fixing the tax levy and
make a budget of the estimated amounts required to pay the expenses of
conducting the business of the city government for the ensuing fiscal year. 
The budget shall be prepared in such detail as to the aggregate sum and the
items thereof allowed to each department, office and subdivision of the city
government, as the City Council shall deem advisable.  (OC)



Sec. 6.  Adopting tax rate.



   The City Council must finally adopt, not later than the third Monday in
August, an order levying upon the assessed valuation of the property of the
City, subject to the provisions of this Charter, a rate of taxation upon each
one hundred (100) dollars of valuation sufficient to raise the amounts
estimated to be required in the annual budget, less the amounts estimated to
be received from fines, licenses and other sources of revenue.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



Sec. 7.  Taxes.



   (a)   Transaction privilege tax.  The City Council shall have the
power to levy a transaction privilege tax (commonly called sales tax)
provided that no such tax, if based on gross income, gross proceeds of sale
or gross receipts, shall be levied at a rate in excess of one percent (1%),
unless such rate is approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting
on the question at a general or special election.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (b)   Income tax.  No tax shall be levied on incomes unless
approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon at a general
or special election.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 8.  Claims or demands against the city.



   The City Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the manner in which
claims or demands against the City shall be presented, audited and paid and
may impose reasonable requirements with regard to notice and prompt
presentation as a condition of payment.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Cross-reference:



   Similar provisions, see Charter Art. VII, § 7



Sec. 9.  Special funds and reserve accounts.



   The City Council may establish such cash basis funds, special funds and
reserve accounts as it deems necessary.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 10.  Capital improvement program.



   (a)   Submission to City Council.  The City Administrator shall
prepare and submit to the City Council not less than a five-year capital
improvement program by May 1 of each year. 



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



   (b)   Contents.  The capital improvement program shall include: 



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



      (1)   A clear general summary of its contents. 



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



      (2)   A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to
be undertaken during the program fiscal years, with appropriate supporting
information as to the necessity for such improvements. 



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77; Sp. Elec. 11/6/07)



      (3)   Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement. 



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



      (4)   The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining
the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard
to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or
acquisition.



(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 11.  City council action on capital improvement program.



   (a)   Notice and hearing.  Prior to adoption, the City Council
shall publish a general summary of the capital improvement program and a
notice stating:  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



      (1)   The times and places where copies of the capital
improvement program are available for inspection by the public.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



      (2)   The time and place, not less than two (2) weeks after
such publication, for a public hearing on the capital improvement program. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (b)   Adoption.  The City Council by resolution shall adopt the
capital improvement program with or without amendment on or before the first
of July of each year.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 12.  Independent annual audit.



   Prior to the end of each fiscal year, the City Council shall designate
a Certified Public Accountant, who shall perform, as of the end of the fiscal
year, a certified audit of the financial transactions of the City
government.  He shall submit a report, including recommendations concerning
policy and fiscal procedure, to the City Council and the City
Administrator.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 13.  Ordinances and resolutions on budget.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Charter, all ordinances or
resolutions necessary in connection with the adoption of the annual budget
may be adopted and go into effect immediately on the affirmative vote of at
least five-sevenths (5/7) of the members of the City Council.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



Sec. 14.  Deposit of city moneys, investments.



   In addition to the authority granted by the laws of this State, the
City Council may cause City moneys to be deposited or invested in
Certificates of Deposit or other forms of deposits or investments, in any
financial institution, upon sufficient security being given the City therefor
by said financial institution, approved by the City Council.  The City
Council may adopt ordinances implementing this authority and the appropriate
City official may, pursuant to said ordinance, invest City moneys not needed
to pay current bills as therein directed.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 15.  Transfer of appropriations.



   At any time during the fiscal year the City Administrator may transfer
part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a
department, office or agency.  Upon written request by the City
Administrator the City Council may by ordinance transfer part or all of any
unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to
another.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 16.  Permission to exceed the budget.



   Nothing in this Article shall prevent the City Council from seeking
permission from the Arizona State Tax Commission to exceed the adopted budget
in the event an emergency should arise.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Article XIV
Franchise and Public Utilities



Sec. 1.  Franchises.



   (a)   A person desiring to obtain a franchise to operate a public
utility from this City shall present the franchise desired to the City
Council of the City and it shall be filed among its records.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



   (b)   If the City Council deems the granting of the franchise
beneficial to the City, it shall pass a resolution stating that fact, and
shall submit the question to the qualified voters, as to whether or not the
franchise shall be granted, at the following regular election held in the
City or at a special election called for that purpose.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (c)   The proposed franchise shall be published, as set forth under
state law and the cost of same, together with the election expenses shall be
paid by the applicant for such franchise.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (d)   If a majority of the votes cast are in favor of granting the
franchise, the City Council shall grant the franchise only in the form filed
and published.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (e)   A franchise shall not be granted, extended or renewed for a
longer term than twenty-five (25) years.  (Sp. Elec. 12/7/93)



   (f)   Before calling any such election, the estimated expense of
publication and election thereof (to be determined by the City Council) shall
be first deposited by the applicant for such franchise with the City Clerk. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Establishment of municipally owned and operated utilities.



   (a)   The City shall have the power to own and operate any public
utility, to construct and install all facilities that are reasonably needed,
and to lease or purchase any existing utility properties used or useful to
public service.  The City may also furnish service to adjacent and nearby
territories which may be conveniently and economically served by the
municipally owned and operated utility, subject to the limitations of the
provisions of the general laws of this State.  The City Council may provide
by ordinance for the establishment of such utility and provide for its
regulation and control and the fixing of rates to be charged.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



   (b)   The City Council may by ordinance provide for the extension,
enlargements or improvement of existing utility, and provide reasonable
reserves for such purpose.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 3.  Establishment of classifications and regulations of rates of public
utilities.



   (a)   The City shall have full power to and may prescribe just and
reasonable classifications to be used and just and reasonable rates and
charges to be made and collected by all corporations rendering public utility
service within the corporate limits of the City of Yuma as now or hereafter
constituted, except public service corporations as such corporations are
defined and the regulation thereof delegated to the Arizona Corporation
Commission by Article 15, Section 2, Arizona Constitution.  (Sp. Elec.
12/6/77)



   (b)   The City Council may establish such boards as are necessary
and convenient to discharge its duties pursuant to this enactment.  The
powers hereby conferred shall be exercised by the City Council pursuant to
ordinance providing for hearings and investigations and establishing
procedures to be followed in determining and fixing fair value of any such
utility property and a reasonable rate of return and providing for suitable
penalties, civil and criminal, for violation of any lawful order or
requirement made or imposed pursuant to any regulatory ordinance or in
furtherance of any regulatory investigation.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 4.  Revocable temporary permits, licenses.



   The city administrator of the city shall have the right and power to
issue revocable temporary permits and licenses to any person, association or
corporation operating under a franchise or grant from the city, for the
purpose of temporarily making use of a part of the streets, avenues, alleys
or other public places in the city, for the better carrying out of the object
of the said franchise or grant and as an aid for rendering better or more
convenient service to the people of the city, or such of them to whom such
service is or might be rendered within the contemplation of such franchise or
grant; such license or permit to be subject to the revocation or
discontinuance at any time in the discretion of the city administrator of the
city or city council, and shall be subject to such restrictions, limitations,
burdens and regulations as the city council may impose.  The licensee or
permittee of such license or permit, upon receiving notice from the city
administrator of the city of the revocation of such license or permit, shall
forthwith remove any property or obstruction on, in or under any street,
alley, public place or building described in such notice; and upon failure to
remove said property or obstruction immediately upon the receipt of such
notice, the licensee or permittee of such license or permit revoked, and all
other persons acting for or in behalf of such licensee or permittee,
operating upon or using any street, avenue, alley or public place or building
for the operation or use of which the licensee or permit therefor is revoked,
shall be considered and treated as trespassers, be removed therefrom, and
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  (Sp. Elec. 4/7/70; renumbered Gen. Elec.
12/6/77; Gen. Elec. 11/6/01)



Article XV
Transitional Powers



Sec. 1.  Rights of officers and employees preserved.



   Nothing in this or any subsequent amendment except as specifically
provided, shall affect or impair:  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (a)   The functions and responsibilities of any office, department
or agency existing at the time this Charter amendment takes effect.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



   (b)   Any provision of the law in force at the time this Charter
amendment takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions of such
Charter amendment in relation to the personnel, appointment, rank, grades,
tenure of office, promotion, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil
rights, or any other privileges of offices or employees of the City, or any
office, department or agency.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 2.  Continuance of present officers.



   (a)   Mayor and councilmembers.  The mayor and members of the City
Council serving at the time this Charter amendment takes effect shall serve
until the Mayor and Councilmembers provided for in Article VI of this Charter
amendment shall have been elected and qualified.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (b)   Elective officers.  All persons holding elective offices at
the time this Charter amendment takes effect shall continue in office and
carry out their duties as specified by law until the expiration of the terms
for which they have been elected or until such earlier time as the position
may be vacated.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (c)   Appointive officers.  All persons holding appointive office
by the City Council at the time this Charter amendment takes effect shall
continue in office and in the performance of their duties unless relieved of
office, or until such office or duties are abolished or changed.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 3.  Continuance of present offices, departments and agencies.



   Continuity of certain powers and duties.  Any department, office or
agency provided for in this Charter amendment with powers and duties the same
or substantially the same as those heretofore existing, shall be deemed a
continuation of such department, office, or agency, and shall have powers to
continue any business proceedings or other matters within the scope of the
powers and duties prescribed by this Charter and the Charter amendment. 
(Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 4.  Continuance of appointive boards and commissions.



   All appointive boards and commissions, heretofore existing, shall
continue with such powers and duties as were granted them until such boards
and commissions shall be changed or abolished by the City Council as
heretofore provided in this Charter amendment.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 5.  Transfer of records and property.



   All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any department,
office or agency or part thereof, existing when this Charter amendment is
adopted shall be transferred to the department, office or agency assuming its
powers and duties.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 6.  Pending matters.



   (a)   Continuance of contracts.  All contracts entered into by the
City, or for its benefit, prior to the time this Charter amendment takes
effect, shall continue in full force and effect.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



   (b)   Pending actions and proceedings.  The adoption of this
Charter amendment shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or
proceedings, civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect, brought by
or against the City or any department, office or agency thereof.  (Gen.
Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 7.  Conformity of charter with state law.



   The enumeration of the powers made in this Charter as amended shall
never be construed to preclude, by implication or otherwise, the City from
doing any and all things not inhibited by the Constitution and Laws of
Arizona.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Sec. 8.  Inauguration of government under this charter.



   If a majority of the qualified electors of the City, voting on a
question, vote to ratify this Charter, the provisions of this Charter shall
go into effect for all purposes immediately upon approval of the Governor as
provided by the Constitution of the State.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Article XVI
Amendments



Sec. 1.  Amendments.



   This Charter, or any part or subdivision thereof may be amended, in the
manner provided in the Constitution of the State of Arizona.  (Gen. Elec.
12/6/77)



Article XVII
Gender



Sec. 1.  Gender.



   Whenever the context of this instrument so requires, words used in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural; and the plural is singular; the word person includes a
corporation, company, partnership or association, or society as well as a
natural person.  (Gen. Elec. 12/6/77)



Historical Information



Original charter approved January 12, 1915, by Governor W.P. Hunt.



Charter Amendments Approved



 

Type
Election
 
Date of
Election
 
Governor
Approving
 
Date
Approved




General
 
12-05-1916
 
George W. P. Hunt
 
12-19-1916


Special
 
07-19-1917
 
Thomas E. Campbell
 
08-03-1917


Special
 
12-20-1920
 
Thomas E. Campbell
 
02-05-1921


Primary
 
10-30-1934
 
Robert Jones
 
11-13-1934


Special
 
11-01-1938
 
Robert Jones
 
02-10-1939


Primary
 
10-27-1942
 
Sidney P. Osborn
 
11-21-1942


Special
 
12-31-1943
 
Sidney P. Osborn
 
- - - -1944


Special
 
06-03-1947
 
Sidney P. Osborn
 
06-10-1947


Special
 
09-14-1954
 
Howard Pyle
 
09-23-1954


Primary
 
10-28-1954
 
Howard Pyle
 
11-12-1954


Special
 
09-21-1960
 
Paul Fannin
 
10-25-1960


Primary
 
11-01-1966
 
Samuel Goddard
 
11-17-1966


Special
 
04-07-1970
 
Jack Williams
 
04-22-1970


Primary
 
10-27-1970
 
Jack Williams
 
11-12-1970


General (partial)
 
12-06-1977
 
Bruce Babbitt
 
08-11-1978


General (partial)
 
12-01-1981
 
Bruce Babbitt
 
06-07-1982


General
 
12-06-1983
 
Bruce Babbitt
 
04-17-1984


General
 
12-03-1985
 
Bruce Babbitt
 
06-04-1986


General
 
12-01-1987
 
Rose Mofford
 
07-14-1988


Primary/Special
 
10-05-1993
 
Fife Symington
 
11-05-1993


General/Special (part)
 
12-07-1993
 
Fife Symington
 
03-16-1994


Special
 
11-05-1996
 
Fife Symington
 
07-02-1997


General/Special
 
11-02-1999
 
Jane D. Hull
 
12-29-1999


General/Special
 
11-06-2001
 
Jane D. Hull
 
01-02-2002


Special
 
11-06-2007
 
Janet Napolitano
 
01-24-2008


Special
 
05-19-2009
 
Janice K. Brewer
 
06-16-2009


Special
 
05-18-2010
 
Janice K. Brewer
 
09-28-2011


Special
 
11-08-2011
 
Janice K. Brewer
 
10-12-2012


Special
 
11-08-2011
 
Janice K. Brewer
 
10-12-2012


 
 
 




 



Charter Amendments Disapproved



 

Type
Election
 
Date




Special
 
09-15-1922


Primary
 
10-31-1950


Primary
 
10-28-1958


Special
 
06-28-1966


General (partial)
 
12-06-1977


 
12-01-1981


General/SpecialGeneral (partial)
 
12-05-1989


General/Special (part)
 
12-07-1993


Special
 
12-05-1995


Special
 
11-05-1996


Special
 
11-05-1996


General/Special
 
11-08-2005


Special
 
11-06-2007


Special
 
11-08-2011


 




 



Other Legislation



 

Ordinance Number
 
Date
 
Disposition


2090
 
09-22-1982
 
Art. XII, § 2 footnote


02011-39
 
02-01-2012
 
Art. XII, § 2


 
 



 



Title 1:  General Provisions



   Chapter



      10.   General Provisions



      11.   City Seal



Chapter 10:  General Provisions



Section



   10-01   Title of code



   10-02   Interpretation



   10-03   Application to future ordinances



   10-04   Captions



   10-05   Definitions



   10-06   Rules of interpretation



   10-07   Severability



   10-08   Reference to other sections



   10-09   Reference to offices



   10-10   Errors and omissions



   10-11   Official time



   10-12   Reasonable time



   10-13   Ordinances repealed



   10-14   Ordinances unaffected



   10-15   Effective date of ordinances



   10-16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10-17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10-18   Section histories; statutory references



   10-19   Incorporation by reference



   10-20   Police power extended to city property



   10-21   Altering code



   10-22   Penalty not exclusive



   10-99   General penalty



§ 10-01  Title of Code.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Yuma shall be
designated as the Yuma City Code and may be so cited.



Charter reference:



   Codification required, to be known as Yuma City Code, see Charter Art.
VII, § 8



§ 10-02  Interpretation.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10-03  Application to Future Ordinances.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10-04  Captions.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10-05  Definitions.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY, or TOWN.  The City of Yuma,
Arizona.



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNCIL OR CITY COUNCIL.  The governing body of the city.



   COUNTY.  Yuma County, Arizona.



   DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.  Whenever a provision appears in this code
requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections,
it is to be construed to authorize such officer to designate, delegate and
authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required
inspection unless the terms of the provision or section expressly designates
otherwise.



   EASEMENT.  A right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit
which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another.  A
right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use
the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general
property right in the owner.



   IN THE CITY.  Any territory within the corporate limits of this city
and the police jurisdiction thereof, and any other territory over which
regulatory power has been conferred on the city by general or special act,
except as otherwise specified.



   JOINT AUTHORITY.  Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise
specifically declared.



   LAW.  Any statute, ordinance or regulation promulgated by the United
States, the state, the county, the city or any agency thereof, as well as the
rules and regulations of other bodies politic that may be appropriate.



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, BOARD, or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission, board, or department of this
municipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



   OWNER.  When applied to a building or land, includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Money, goods, chattels, evidences of debt, things
in action, and any other species of property, except real property.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   PROPERTY.  Real, personal and mixed property.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open
space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business
open to the use of the public in general, open to public view or to which the
public has access.



   PUBLIC WAY.  Any street, alley, boulevard, parkway, highway, sidewalk
or other public thoroughfare.



   REAL PROPERTY.  This term includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



   RESIDENCE.  The place adopted by a person as his place of habitation,
and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. 
When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such
person sleeps shall be deemed to be his residence.



   ROADWAY.  That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIDEWALK.  Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral
line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of
pedestrians.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of Arizona.



   STREET.  Public streets, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, alleys,
lanes, viaducts, bridges, public ways and approaches thereto and other public
thoroughfares in the city devoted to public use.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT, OCCUPANT.  Applied to a building or land, shall mean any
person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



('80 Code, § 1-2)



§ 10-06  Rules of Interpretation.



   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)    AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10-07  Severability.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid or unconstitutional
by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity does
not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10-08  Reference to Other Sections.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10-09  Reference to Offices.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10-10  Errors and Omissions.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and
such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of such error.



§ 10-11  Official Time.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of
all municipal business.



§ 10-12  Reasonable Time.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last.



§ 10-13  Ordinances Repealed.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10-14  Ordinances Unaffected.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10-15  Effective Date of Ordinances.



   All ordinances adopted by the legislative body shall take effect 30
days after adoption.



(Ord. O2006-21, passed 3-1-06)



§ 10-16  Repeal or Modification of Ordinance.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10-17  Ordinances Which Amend or Supplement Code.



   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to
such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance,
a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10-18  Section Histories; Statutory References.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute.



   Example:  (A.R.S. § 9-240 28(b))  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
20, passed 1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the
reader should refer to that statute for further information.



   Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.




   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.




   Statutory reference:



      For provisions concerning the inspection of public records,
seeA.R.S. § 39-121



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1980 and subsequently amended, the 1980
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('80 Code, §  
  ).”



§ 10-19  Incorporation by Reference.



   All standard codes, rules, regulations and other subject matter herein
or hereafter properly incorporated by reference, together with subsequent
amendments thereto, pursuant to state law, and future incorporations by
reference shall be kept and preserved in the office of the City Clerk.



('80 Code, § 1-4)



Charter reference:



   Power to adopt codes by reference, see Charter Art. VII, § 6(g)(6)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to incorporate by reference, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801 et seq.



   Ratification of certain material previously adopted by reference, see
A.R.S. § 9-804



§ 10-20  Police Power Extended to City Property.



   The police power of the city is hereby extended to include all lands or
property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city and the
general ordinances of the city shall be applicable on such property.



('80 Code, § 1-8)



Charter reference:



   Power of city to obtain real property outside city limits, see Charter
Art. III, § 2



§ 10-21  Altering Code.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby;
provided, that supplementation of this code by authorized persons shall be
permitted.



('80 Code, § 1-9)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 10-22  Penalty Not Exclusive.



   (A)   The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this code
shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or
permit issued or granted under the provisions of this code.



   (B)   In the event any violation of this code is designated as a
nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily
abated by the city in addition to the imposition of a fine or imprisonment.



('80 Code, § 1-11)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to define, abate nuisances, see A.R.S. § 9-276(A)(16)



   Power to license, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(19)



§ 10-99  General Penalty.



   (A)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision or
the failure to perform any such act shall be a class 2 misdemeanor punishable
by a fine of not exceeding $750 or by imprisonment not to exceed five days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court.



   (B)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is made or declared to be a class 1 misdemeanor, violation of such provision
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not
more than ten days or by both such fine and imprisonment.



   (C)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is made or declared to be a class 2 misdemeanor, violation of such provision
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $750 or by imprisonment for not
more than five days or by both such fine or imprisonment.



   (D)   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act
is made or declared to be a class 3 misdemeanor, violation of such provision
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not
more than one day or by both such fine or imprisonment.



   (E)   Each day any of the above violations shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense or misdemeanor, unless otherwise specifically
provided.



('80 Code, § 1-10)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Statutory reference:



   Power to enforce ordinances by fine, imprisonment, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(28)(b)



Chapter 11:  City Seal



Section



   11-01   City seal



§ 11-01  City Seal.



   The seal of the city shall be circular in form, with the words “CITY
OF YUMA, STATE OF ARIZONA, OFFICIAL SEAL” thereon:  The words “CITY OF
YUMA, STATE OF ARIZONA” shall be around the entire margin; the words
“CITY OF YUMA” being at the top, and the words “STATE OF ARIZONA” at
the bottom; the remaining words shall be within the inner circle; the words
“OFFICIAL” being in the center and immediately beneath the words “CITY
OF YUMA”; the word “SEAL” in the center and immediately beneath the
word “OFFICIAL,” and immediately above the words “STATE OF ARIZONA.”



('80 Code, § 2-1)  (Ord. 128, passed 12-14-15)



Title 3:  Administration



   Chapter



      30.   City Council



      31.   Departments



      32.   Police Department



      33.   Elections



      34.   Personnel Policies



      35.   Emergency Management



      36.   Purchasing



      37.   Taxation



      38.   City Policies



      39.   Municipal Court



Chapter 30:  City Council



Section



General Provisions



   30-01   Regular meetings



   30-02   Special meetings



   30-03   Notice of meetings



   30-04   Adjourned meetings



   30-05   Rules of order



   30-06   Presiding officer



   30-07   Addressing meeting



   30-08   Executive sessions



   30-09   Work sessions



   30-10   [Repealed]



   30-11   Regular City Council meeting order of business



Legislation



   30-25   Possession of copies by Mayor and City Council



   30-26   Reading of proposed ordinances and resolutions



   30-27   Copies for public; when full reading required



   30-28   Amendments to proposed ordinances



   30-29   Emergency ordinances and resolutions



Charter reference:



   City Council, see Charter Art. VII



Statutory reference:



   Public meetings and proceedings, see A.R.S. §§ 38-431 et seq.



General Provisions



§ 30-01  Regular Meetings.



   The regular meetings of the City Council shall be held each first and
third Wednesday of every month at the hour of 5:30 p.m. in the Council
Chambers of the City Hall, City of Yuma, Arizona, One City Plaza, Yuma,
Arizona; provided that if such meeting shall occur on a holiday, the meeting
shall be on the next secular day following; provided further, that the
regular meeting day may be changed by motion  upon majority vote of the
Council at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting date which is to be
changed, provided further that any permanent change in the day and time of
meeting shall be done by ordinance.



('80 Code, § 2-18)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. 2005, passed 5-6-81;
Ord. O98-78, passed 10-14-98; Ord. O2002-51, passed 8-21-02)



Charter reference:



   Council to provide for time, place of meetings, see Charter Art. VII,
§ 3



§ 30-02  Special Meetings.



   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or majority of
Council members in any of the following ways:



      (1)   By motion at a regularly scheduled meeting;



      (2)   By at least 24 hours' written notice to every member of
the Council, provided that the requirements of a notice shall not be binding
in any special meeting at which all of the members of the Council are present;



      (3)   Upon 24 hours' notice by telephone in which event the
caller must file an affidavit with the City Clerk stating the name of all
persons called and the time of such call;



   (B)   Except as provided in subdivisions (1) and (2) below, meetings
shall not be held without at least 24 hours' notice to the members of the
public body and to the general public:



      (1)   In case of an actual emergency, a meeting may be held
upon such notice as is appropriate to the circumstances.



      (2)   A meeting may be recessed and resumed with less than 24
hours' notice if public notice  of the initial session is given as required
in § 30-03, and if, prior to recessing, notice is publicly given as to the
time and place of the resumption of the meeting or the method by which notice
shall be publicly given.



('80 Code, § 2-19)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. 2005, passed 5-6-81)



Charter reference:



   Council to provide for manner of calling special meetings, see Charter
Art. VII, § 3



Statutory reference:



   Notice of meetings other than regularly scheduled meetings, see A.R.S.
38-431.02(C) and (D)



§ 30-03  Notice of Meetings.



   Notice of meetings of the City Council shall be provided as required by
A.R.S. § 38-431.02, or its successors.



('80 Code, § 2-20)  (Ord. 2005, passed 5-6-81; Ord. O98-78, passed 10-14-98)



§ 30-04  Adjourned Meetings.



   (A)   Lack of quorum.  Should a quorum of the City Council not be
in attendance at the time for holding any regular meeting, the Council
members in attendance may adjourn the meeting to any day and hour prior to
the time of the holding of the next regular meeting.  Such adjourned
meeting, if a quorum be then in attendance, shall have the same force and
effect as if held on the regular day. ('80 Code, § 2-21)



   (B)   Continuation of meetings.  If at any regular meeting of the
City Council, or at any adjourned regular meeting thereof, there shall be
such a volume of business for its consideration that the same cannot be
conveniently disposed of at such meeting, there may be an adjournment of such
meeting to any day and hour prior to the holding of the next regular
meeting.  Such adjourned meetings, and re-adjournments thereof, shall have
the same force and effect as if held on the regular day. ('80 Code, § 2-22)



(Ord. 143, passed 2-13-17)



Charter reference:



   Majority of Council shall constitute a quorum, see Charter Art. VII, §
4



§ 30-05  Rules of Order.



   ““Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised” or its successors shall
govern the proceedings of the City Council where applicable and when not in
conflict with state law, the Yuma City Charter, the Yuma City Code, or any
ordinance or resolution of the city.



('80 Code, § 2-23)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Am. Ord. O98-78, passed
10-14-98; Ord. O2006-21, passed 3-1-06)



Charter reference:



   Council to determine its rules of order, see Charter Art. VII, § 5



§ 30-06  Presiding Officer.



   The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the City
Council.  In the absence of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall act in place
of the Mayor.  In the absence of the Mayor and the Deputy Mayor, the Council
members present shall elect a Mayor Pro Tem to act in place of the Mayor or
Deputy Mayor.



('80 Code, § 2-24)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. O2006-21, passed
3-1-06)



Charter reference:



   Mayor to preside at Council meetings, see Charter Art. VII, § 2(b)



§ 30-07  Addressing Meeting.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to address or attempt to address
any regular or special meeting of the Council, except when recognized by the
presiding officer.



('80 Code, § 2-25)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 30-08  Executive Sessions.



   Executive sessions of the City Council may be held as set forth in
A.R.S. § 38-431.03, or its successors.



('80 Code, § 2-26)  (Ord. 2005, passed 5-6-81; Am. Ord. O98-78, passed
10-14-98)



§ 30-09  Work Sessions.



   (A)   Notice requirements:



      (1)   To establish or change the regular time or place of a
work session, or to cancel the same, requires a motion of the City Council at
the regular meeting preceding the date to be changed, whenever possible.



      (2)   To the extent that the time or place of a work session
needs to be established/changed, or the work session cancelled in its
entirety, and it is not possible to take such action at a regular meeting,
such action could be taken or a cancellation made in the same manner as set
forth above for the calling of special meetings.



   (B)   A work session is an interaction between City Council and city
staff and is for the purpose of information, discussion, and deliberation
only.  No formal action is to be taken at a work session.



('80 Code, § 2-27)  (Ord. 2005, passed 5-6-81; Am. Ord. O98-78, passed
10-14-98; Ord. O2006-21, passed 3-1-06)



§ 30-10  [Repealed].



§ 30-11  Regular City Council Meeting Order of Business.



   The City Council shall proceed to transact the business at a regular
City Council meeting in the following manner unless the same be temporarily
suspended by the presiding officer or a majority of the City Council:



   (A)   Call to order.



   (B)   Invocation.



   (C)   Pledge of allegiance.



   (D)   Roll call.



   (E)   Presentations.



   (F)   Motion consent agenda.



   (G)   Resolution consent agenda.



   (H)   Ordinances.



      (1)   Adoption of ordinances consent agenda.



      (2)   Introduction of ordinances.



   (I)   Public hearings.



   (J)   Appointments, announcements and scheduling.



   (K)   Summary of current events.



   (L)   Call to the public.



   (M)   Executive session.



   (N)   Adjournment.



('80 Code, § 2-30)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. O98-78, passed
10-14-98; Ord. O2004-24, passed 5-19- 04; Ord. O2006-21, passed 3-1-06; Ord.
O2013-09, passed 2-20-13)



§ 30-25  Possession of Copies by Mayor and Council.



   Copies of any proposed ordinance or proposed resolution shall be in
possession of the Mayor and City Council present at the meeting, prior to the
meeting at which the same is to be considered.



('80 Code, § 2-42)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. O2006-21, passed
3-1-06)



Charter reference:



   Council action, see Charter Art. VII, § 6



Statutory reference:



   Power to make, amend, repeal ordinances, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(28)(a)



   Power to adopt ordinances for government of city and officers,
citizens, see A.R.S. § 9-240(29)



   Notice requirements, publication, see A.R.S. §§ 9-811 et seq.



§ 30-26  Reading of Proposed Ordinances and Resolutions.



   By request of the Mayor or any member of the City Council, a full
reading of any proposed ordinance or resolution shall be ordered, otherwise
such ordinance or resolution shall have the number read and the title read or
displayed publicly.



('80 Code, § 2-43)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. O2006-21, passed
3-1-06)



§ 30-27  Copies for Public; When Full Reading Required.



   Copies of proposed ordinances or resolutions shall be available to the
public for examination when feasible, at the City Clerk's Office not less
than 24 hours before the City Council convenes to act upon the ordinance or
resolution.  Should copies not be available, such ordinance or resolution
must be read in full before the vote thereon.



('80 Code, § 2-44)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. O2006-21, passed
3-1-06)



§ 30-28  Amendments to Proposed Ordinances.



   Amendments to proposed ordinances which are brought before the City
Council for adoption shall be read in full prior to the proposed ordinance's
adoption or available to the public 24 hours in advance of the meeting.



('80 Code, § 2-45)  (Ord. 1400, passed 12-18-74; Ord. O2006-21, passed
3-1-06)



§ 30-29  Emergency Ordinances and Resolutions.



   In the event an ordinance or resolution comes to the Council for final
passage with an emergency clause and sufficient votes are received for
passage, but those votes are not sufficient to adopt the emergency clause,
then such ordinance or resolution is adopted but will not become effective
until 30 days after passage and publication where required; such publication
shall not include the emergency clause.



('80 Code, § 2-46)  (Ord. 1982, passed 1-21-81)



Chapter 31:  Departments



Section



   31-01   Departments established



§ 31-01  Departments established.



   The city shall be comprised of the following departments with titles as
stated:



   (A)   Mayor and Council.



   (B)   Administration.



   (C)   City Attorney.



   (D)   Community Development.



   (E)   Engineering.



   (F)   Finance.



   (G)   Fire.



   (H)   Human Resources.



   (I)   Information Technology Services.



   (J)   Municipal Court.



   (K)   Police.



   (L)   Parks and Recreation.



   (M)   Public Works.



   (N)   Utilities.



(Ord. O98-61, passed 7-15-98; Ord. O2000-34, passed 6-21-00; Ord. O2004-47,
passed 7-21-04; Ord. O2006-41, passed 6-21-06; Ord. O2013-23, passed 5-1-13;
Ord. O2015-030, passed 6-3-15)



Charter reference:



   Similar provisions, see Charter Art. VI, § 15 and Art. VII, § 6(g)(7)



Chapter 32:  Police Department



Section



General Provisions



   32-01   Created



   32-02   Supervision



   32-03   Oath



   32-04   Rule of construction



   32-05   Extraterritorial assistance authorized



   32-06   Pension fund created



   32-07   Pension fund operation to be in accordance with state law



Police Reserve Force



   32-20   Definition



   32-21   Established



   32-22   Purpose



   32-23   Authority to appoint



   32-24   Application blanks to be made available



   32-25   Eligibility requirements



   32-26   Oath



   32-27   Training



   32-28   Duty assignments



   32-29   Supervision



   32-30   Compliance with instruction



   32-31   Official status



   32-32   Badge; equipment



   32-33   Compensation



   32-34   Authorized positions



   32-35   Dismissal



   32-36   Honorary appointments prohibited



Civilian Accident Investigators



   32-45   Definition



   32-46   Established; appointment



   32-47   Official status



   32-48   Uniforms



   32-49   Authority and duties



Charter reference:



   Creation of departments, see Charter Art. VI, § 15 and Art. VII, §
6(g)(7)



Statutory reference:



   Power to establish, regulate police, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(12)



General Provisions



§ 32-01  Created.



   There is hereby created a Police Department for the city.



('80 Code, § 25-16)  (Ord. 113, passed 2-3-14)



§ 32-02  Supervision.



   The Police Department shall be under the direction and control of the
Chief of Police.



('80 Code, § 25-17)  (Ord. 113, passed 2-3-14)



§ 32-03  Oath.



   Every police officer, before entering upon the duties of his office,
shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by law for public officers.



('80 Code, § 25-18)  (Ord. 113, passed 2-3-14)



§ 32-04  Rule of Construction.



   This chapter shall not be construed to relieve the Chief of Police of
any duties imposed upon him by local, state or federal law.



('80 Code, § 25-19)  (Ord. 113, passed 2-3-14)



§ 32-05  Extraterritorial Assistance Authorized.



   The Police Department of the city is authorized to answer calls for aid
and assistance beyond the corporate limits of the city, whenever the Chief of
Police of the Police Department shall deem it necessary to protect lives and
property.



('80 Code, § 25-20)  (Ord. 552, passed 6-5-51)



§ 32-06  Pension Fund Created.



   There is hereby created a Police Pension Fund for the Police Department
of the city, said fund to be in full force and effect from on and after the
first day of July, 1956.



('80 Code, § 25-21)  (Ord. 653, passed 1-3-56)



§ 32-07  Pension Fund Operation to be in Accordance with State Law.



   The Police Pension Fund shall be managed, controlled and distributed in
accordance with applicable law of this state.



('80 Code, § 25-22)  (Ord. 653, passed 1-3-56)



Police Reserve Force



§ 32-20  Definition.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   RESERVE POLICE OFFICER.  A male or female adult appointed by the Chief
of Police, at his discretion, under the authority of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 25-39)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



Charter reference:



   Unpaid volunteers not subject to city personnel system, see Charter
Art. X, § 1



§ 32-21  Established.



   There is hereby established in and for the city a reserve police
officer system.



('80 Code, § 25-40)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-22  Purpose.



   The purpose of the appointment of reserve police officers is to further
the public peace by giving authority to certain individuals to enforce city
and state laws.



('80 Code, § 25-41)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-23  Authority to Appoint.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority, and is hereby authorized,
to appoint male or female persons to be known as reserve police officers.



('80 Code, § 25-42)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-24  Application Blanks to be Made Available.



   The Chief of Police shall make available application blanks designed to
require the information necessary for determining the eligibility for
appointment of the reserve police officers under this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 25-43)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-25  Eligibility Requirements.



   (A)   To be eligible for consideration by the Chief of Police for
appointment as a reserve police officer, a person shall meet the same
background, testing and physical requirements required of a regular officer.



   (B)   The Chief of Police may, at his discretion, refuse to appoint
a person even though he or she may fulfill the above qualifications and
provided it is job-related and not discriminating against any job-protected
class.



('80 Code, § 25-44)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-26  Oath.



   Each appointee appointed by the Chief of Police to be a reserve police
officer shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by law for public
officers.



('80 Code, § 25-45)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-27  Training.



   The Chief of Police may, in his discretion, conduct a period of
preassignment formal training.  The Chief of Police shall require such
training as is necessary to meet the minimum requirements established by the
Arizona Law Enforcement Officer Advisory Council.



('80 Code, § 25-46)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-28  Duty Assignments.



   The Chief of Police, or his designee, shall assign reserve police
officers their duties.  The decision of the Chief, or his designee,
regarding each such assignment shall be discretionary and final.



('80 Code, § 25-47)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-29  Supervision.



   The Chief of Police shall supervise reserve police officers.  The
Chief of Police may assign or appoint a member of the Police Department as
his representative.  The representative shall then in such supervise the
reserve police officers.



('80 Code, § 25-48)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-30  Compliance with Instruction.



   Reserve police officers shall adhere to and be governed by the rules
and regulations laid down for the guidance of Police Department members
insofar as such rules and regulations are applicable to and consistent with
the limited class of duty prescribed for reserve police officers by the Chief
of Police.  Reserve police officers shall also comply with all other
applicable ordinances, rules and regulations adopted by the Council and
instructions of the Chief of Police.



('80 Code, § 25-49)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-31  Official Status.



   Reserve police officers shall exercise such police powers as may be
delegated to them by the Chief of Police.  Reserve police officers shall not
be subject to, or acquire any rights under, the merit system rules or the
Police Pension Fund Act of this state or the city.



('80 Code, § 25-50)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-32  Badge; Equipment.



   The Chief of Police shall designate the type of badge and specify the
type and color of uniform for the reserve police officers.  The reserve
police officers shall conform to these specifications and regulations as
designated by the Chief of Police, and shall purchase such equipment and
uniforms that are not provided by the city at their own expense.



('80 Code, § 25-51)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-33  Compensation.



   Reserve police officers shall receive no compensation from the city or
the Police Department of the city for duties performed as reserve police
officers.



('80 Code, § 25-52)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-34  Authorized Positions.



   The Chief of Police shall determine the number of reserve police
officers who shall be selected, trained and/or retained.  The Chief shall
also determine the maximum number of reserve officers and shall authorize
such positions.



('80 Code, § 25-53)  (Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-35  Dismissal.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to dismiss reserve police
officers when he finds such dismissal to be in the best interest of the city
and provided it is job-related and not discriminating against any
job-protected class.



('80 Code, § 25-54)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



§ 32-36  Honorary Appointments Prohibited.



   The Chief of Police shall not appoint any person as a reserve police
officer who does not meet the minimum requirements for appointment, and who
does not, or will not, serve as an active reserve police officer as specified
herein and as specified by the Chief of Police.



('80 Code, § 25-55)  (Ord. 1096-A, passed 8-7-68; Ord. 2023, passed 7-15-81)



Civilian Accident Investigators



§ 32-45  Definition.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIVILIAN ACCIDENT INVESTIGATOR.  A duly authorized agent (male or
female) employed by the Yuma Police Department under the authority of this
subchapter.



('80 Code, § 25-61)  (Ord. 2341, passed 12-4-86)



§ 32-46  Established; Appointment.



   The position of civilian accident investigator is hereby created within
the Yuma Police Department, which shall be under the control and supervision
of the Chief of Police or his designee.  They shall be appointed in accord
with the personnel rules of the city.



('80 Code, § 25-62)  (Ord. 2341, passed 12-4-86)



§ 32-47  Official Status.



   The civilian accident investigator will be “non-sworn personnel
authorized to investigate traffic accidents occurring within the city limits,
and issue both criminal and civil traffic citations pursuant to A.R.S. §
28-627, or pursuant to the traffic rules of this code.  The civilian
accident investigator will not have powers of physical arrest.  They will
not be subject to or acquire any rights to the Police Pension Fund Act of
this state.”



('80 Code, § 25-63)  (Ord. 2341, passed 12-4-86)



§ 32-48  Uniforms.



   The Chief of Police shall designate and specify the type and color of
uniform for the civilian accident investigator.



('80 Code, § 25-64)  (Ord. 2341, passed 12-4-86)



§ 32-49  Authority and Duties.



   The authority and duties of the civilian accident investigator shall be
as follows:



   (A)   The civilian accident investigator shall have the authority to
issue civil and criminal traffic citations per A.R.S. § 28-627.



   (B)   The civilian accident investigator shall have the authority to
enforce city ordinances under the traffic rules of this code, and to issue
civil and criminal traffic citations for a violation of said traffic rules.



   (C)   The civilian accident investigator shall investigate traffic
accidents occurring within the city limits, and related duties as assigned.



('80 Code, § 25-65)  (Ord. 2341, passed 12-4-86)



Chapter 33:  Elections



Section



   33-01   Elective process



   33-02   Nomination for city office by petition



Charter reference:



   Authority to provide for elections, see Charter Art. III, § 14



   Elections, see Charter Art. IV



Statutory reference:



   Elections and voters, see A.R.S. §§ 9-821 et seq.



   Elections and electors, see A.R.S. Title 16



   Financial disclosure, see A.R.S. §§ 38-541 et seq.



§ 33-01  Elective Process.



   The registration of voters, early voting and all other particulars of
the elective process for municipal elections shall be as provided by state
law.



('80 Code, § 10-1) (Ord. O2006-21, passed 3-1-06)



§ 33-02  Nomination for City Office by Petition.



   (A)   Pursuant to Art. IV, § 6 of the City Charter, the City Clerk
is hereby directed to make available to all candidates for any city office a
petition form for nomination at a primary election.  Said nomination form is
to contain the signatures of qualified electors of the city aggregating not
less than three percent nor more than five percent of the total number of
valid ballots cast at the last preceding general municipal election.  Said
petitions shall be made available to the candidates at least ten days prior
to the first date on which petitions may be presented to the City Clerk.



   (B)   Said petitions may be presented to the City Clerk not earlier
than 120 days nor later than 90 days before the date set for the primary
election.



   (C)   The City Clerk is hereby directed to certify the petition
indicating that the required number of signatures of qualified electors has
been obtained and said certification shall cause a candidate's name to be
printed on the ballot.



('80 Code, § 10-3)  (Ord. 2142, passed 8-3-83; Am. Ord. O98-78, passed
10-14-98; Am. Ord. O2002-58, passed 11-6-02)



Chapter 34:  Personnel Policies



Section



   34-01   Personnel rules and regulations to remain in effect



   34-02   Merit System Board



   34-03   Authorization of inquiries of criminal history records of
prospective employees



   34-04   Health and welfare benefits for full-time employees



   34-05   Employee Benefit Trust



   34-06   Workers' Compensation Trust



§ 34-01  Personnel Rules and Regulations to Remain in Effect.



   (A)   The effective date of this section will coincide with the
effective date of the new City of Yuma Personnel Rules.  It is the intent of
this section that the current City of Yuma Personnel Rules remain in full
force and effect until such time as they are replaced and superseded by the
new rules.



   (B)   The adoption of and any amendment to City of Yuma Personnel
Rules shall be by resolution of the City Council.



('80 Code, § 22-1)  (Ord. 2617, passed 6-16-93)



§ 34-02  Merit System Board.



   (A)   A Merit System Board is hereby established.  The Board shall
consist of five members who support merit system principles of the city. 
The Board is appointed by the City Council, as provided for in the City
Charter.



   (B)   The members shall be appointed for staggered terms of five
years, and must be qualified electors of the city, who must reside within the
city limits during their terms of office and will serve without
compensation.  Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will expire on December 31
of the term expiration year.



   (C)   Vacancies on the Board will be filled by the City Council for
the unexpired term.  Each member will serve until a successor member is
appointed.



   (D)   The City Council will have the power to remove members of the
Merit System Board as provided for in the City Charter.



   (E)   In January of each year, the Merit System Board shall elect a
chairperson from among the appointed members.



   (F)   The Board shall have the duties and powers to:



      (1)   Conduct appeal hearings of classified employees.



      (2)   Empower one or more of its members or a hearing officer
to administer oaths, examine witnesses under oath, and compel their
attendance or production of evidence by subpoena to be served.



      (3)   Certify its finding(s) and recommendation(s) to the City
Administrator.



      (4)   Review amendments and changes to these personnel rules,
upon request by the City Administrator, and submit recommendations to the
City Administrator.



      (5)   Promulgate rules and procedures for the conduct of its
meetings.



('80 Code, § 22-2)  (Ord. 2617, passed 6-16-93; Ord. O2010-66, passed
1-5-11)



§ 34-03  Authorization of Inquiries of Criminal History Records of
Prospective Employees.



   (A)   The city, pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750, is hereby authorized
to receive criminal history record information for the purpose of evaluating
the fitness of prospective employees.



   (B)   All prospective employees of the city are required to submit
fingerprints to the Director of Human Resources for the purpose of obtaining
a state and national criminal history records check except prospective
temporary and provisional employees who shall be employed less than 90 days.



   (C)   Such fingerprints shall be submitted to the Arizona Department
of Public Safety pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750 and Public Law (P.L.) 92-544
to obtain current state and national criminal history record information on
each prospective employee.  The Arizona Department of Public Safety is
authorized to exchange this fingerprint information with the Federal Bureau
of Investigation.



   (D)   The completed fingerprint card shall be returned to the City
Chief of Police or his/her designee.



   (E)   All inquiries of criminal history record information be in
accordance with the City Personnel Rules and Administrative Regulations, and
A.R.S. § 41-1750 and related rules set forth by the Arizona Department of
Public Safety pursuant to A.R.S. § 41-1750.



('80 Code, § 22-3)  (Ord. 2641, passed 3-17-94; Ord. 2673, passed 9-21-94)



§ 34-04  Health and Welfare Benefits for Full-Time Employees.



   (A)   The city shall provide health and welfare benefits to regular
full-time employees.



   (B)   The city is hereby directed to subrogate against third party
tort-feasors in accordance with A.R.S. § 12-962, or other applicable
statutes.



   (C)   This section shall not be construed to repeal § 34-05.



('80 Code, § 22-4)  (Ord. O95-003, passed 2-1-95)



§ 34-05  Employee Benefit Trust.



   (A)   There is hereby established a special trust fund to be called
City of Yuma “Employee Benefit Trust,” and all monies of whatever nature
and whatsoever source that are paid into said fund, together with all
earnings from the investment and reinvestment thereof, are hereby declared to
be a trust fund to be used solely to provide health and welfare benefits may
provide for, but shall not be limited to, life, accidental death and
dismemberment, basic or major medical coverage for accidents or sicknesses,
dental any other benefits as may be determined hereafter by the City Council,
whether through self-funded or insured programs or both.  There shall be
paid into the fund such monies as the City Council shall from time to time
designate from the general funds of the city, together with such employee
contributions as may be provided from time to time, based on premium rates
adopted by the City Council.



   (B)   The Employee Benefit Trust shall be administered by the
Trustees.  The Trustees shall consist of five persons, consisting of one
employee, one member of the governing body, and three other persons. 
Trustees are appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City
Council, and may resign or be removed at any time.  The initial term of each
Trustee shall be as follows:  one member whose term shall expire January 31,
1984; one member whose term shall expire January 31, 1985; one member whose
term shall expire January 31, 1986; one member whose term shall expire
January 31, 1987; and one member whose term shall expire January 31, 1988. 
After the initial terms set forth above, Trustees shall be appointed for
terms of five years, except that in the event of the death, resignation or
removal of a Trustee, the vacancy is to be filled for the unexpired term. 
Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will expire on December 31 of the term
expiration year. A Trustee shall continue to serve after the expiration of a
term until an appointment is made by the City Council.  In the event of a
removal, resignation, disability or death of a Trustee, the City Council
shall designate and appoint a successor Trustee who, upon acceptance of their
appointment in writing, shall succeed to the legal interest of their
predecessor, and have the same powers and duties.



   (C)   The Trustees of the trust must be bonded, a stop-loss
provision must be incorporated in the trust agreement, and an annual audit
must be performed by an external auditor and a copy of the report kept on
file in the offices of the governing body of the city, town or county for a
period of not less than five years.



(Res. 2242, passed 8-5-81; Res. 2346, passed 12-21-83; Ord. O2010-66, passed
1-5-11)



§ 34-06  Workers' Compensation Trust.



   (A)   There is hereby established a special trust to be called the
City of Yuma Workers' Compensation Trust and all monies of whatever nature
and whatsoever source that are paid into said trust, together with all
earnings from the investment and reinvestment thereof, are hereby declared to
be a Trust Fund to be used solely to provide health and welfare benefits
associated with industrial injury claims. There shall be paid into the Trust
Fund such funds as the City Council shall from time to time designate from
the General Fund of the City, based on rates adopted by the City Council. The
Trust Fund shall be administered by the Board for the purpose of providing
for payment of the City's workers' compensation obligations as follows:



      (1)   All monies received by the City for the purpose of
funding the City's workers' compensation obligations shall be deposited into
the Trust Fund, including all contributions, premiums, credits, rebates,
refunds, and third-party lien recoveries.



      (2)   The Trust Fund shall be used for the purpose of
administering, staffing, managing, and funding the City's obligations arising
under the provisions of A.R.S. Title 23, Chapters 5 and 6 or any other
compensation due to a former or current City of Yuma employee which is in the
nature of workers' compensation.



      (3)   The City shall adopt a Trust Agreement that sets forth
the specific terms of the Trust. A stop-loss provision shall be incorporated
into the Trust Agreement.



      (4)   An annual audit of the Trust Fund shall be conducted by
an external auditor designated by the City Administrator. A copy of the audit
report shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk for a period of
not less than five years.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purposes of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BOARD. The City of Yuma Workers' Compensation Trust Board.



      CITY. The City of Yuma.



      PLAN. The trust arrangement pursuant to which the City provides
self-insurance for obligations arising under A.R.S. Title 23, Chapters 5 and
6 or similar obligations arising under the City Charter, Code, or
Administrative Rules.



      TRUST. The City of Yuma Workers' Compensation Trust.



      TRUST AGREEMENT. A separate document adopted by the City setting
forth the specific terms for the administration of the City of Yuma Workers'
Compensation Trust, including any amendments or supplements to the Trust
Agreement.



      TRUST FUND. The City of Yuma Workers' Compensation Trust Fund.



      TRUSTEE. A person appointed and serving on the Board.



   (C)   Workers' Compensation Trust Board.  A Workers' Compensation
Trust Board is hereby established for the City of Yuma, which shall serve as
trustees for the Trust.



      (1)   Composition. The Board shall consist of five Trustees.
No more than one Trustee may be a member of the City Council, and no more
than one Trustee may be an employee of the City. One Trustee shall be the
Finance Director of the City of Yuma, as appointed by the City Administrator
with the approval of the City Council, or the Finance Director's designee,
who will serve for so long as he/she is so employed or so designated. Four
Trustees will be citizens of the City of Yuma, however, if a member of the
City Council is appointed as a Trustee, only three citizens may be appointed
as Trustees.



      (2)   Appointment and terms. The Board shall be appointed in
accordance to City Charter Article IX, Section 1(b) and the Trust Agreement.
The initial term of the Trustees shall be as follows: one member whose term
shall expire December 31, 2021, one member whose term shall expire December
31, 2019, and two members whose terms shall expire December 31, 2017. If a
member of the City Council is appointed as a Board member as permitted in
subsection (C) of this section, only one Board member will have a term that
expires on December 31, 2017. After the initial term set forth above, the
Trustees shall be appointed for terms of five years.



      (3)   Filling of vacancies. In the event of a death,
resignation, or removal of a Trustee, the majority of the City Council shall
appoint a new member to serve during the remainder of the unexpired term.



      (4)   Compensation. The Trustees shall serve without
compensation.



      (5)   Bonding. All Trustees shall be bonded in an amount to be
approved by the City Administrator. This requirement may be satisfied by a
blanket performance bond or other coverage provided by City.



      (6)   Duties and powers.



         (a)   The Board shall:



            1.   Administer the Trust Fund in accordance with
the Trust Agreement and this section;



            2.   Pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-981(B), hire an
external auditor to perform an annual audit. A copy of the report shall be
kept on file in the offices of the governing body of the City, for a period
of not less than five years;



            3.   Provide financial oversight of the Trust Fund
by evaluating claim expenses and reserve amounts;



            4.   Review the Trust Fund quarterly to insure
sufficient funds exist to pay outstanding and future benefits, to pay losses
or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and to pay for
a Third-Party Administrator, as defined in the Trust Agreement, for the
purpose of providing health and welfare benefits associated with industrial
injury claims;



            5.   Make recommendations to the City
Administrator on financial issues relating to the Trust;



            6.   Comply with all requirements of state and
federal laws and regulations relating to self-insurance programs for the
management and administration of the Trust or other self-insurance system for
direct payment of benefits, losses or claims or any combination of insurance
and direct payment; and



            7.   Meet at least four times a year, or more
frequently as the Chairperson of the Board deems necessary or upon the
request of the City Administrator.



         (b)   The Board may:



            1.   Adopt rules or policies for the operation of
the Board, which are not inconsistent with the City Code, the laws of the
State of Arizona, the City Charter, or any City ordinances or resolutions;



            2.   Appoint committees;



            3.   Request the City Administrator to designate
City staff to perform assignments necessary for the administration of the
Trust Fund;



            4.   Consult with or advise any committee, task
force, or working group established by the City Council to address workers'
compensation issues to make recommendations to the City Administrator
regarding such issues; and



            5.   Delegate the duties and responsibilities of
the Board solely in a manner consistent with the Board's fiduciary
responsibilities and the Trust Agreement.



   (D)   Risk management consultant or an insurance administrator.
Pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-981(B)(1), the City Administrator shall designate a
risk management consultant or an insurance administrator licensed pursuant to
A.R.S. Title 20, Chapter 2, Article 3 or 9. The City Council shall verify
that any risk management consultant or insurance administrator designated by
the City Administrator is licensed as required by the laws of the State of
Arizona.



   (E)   Termination. The City Council may determine that the City will
no longer provide the Plan or any other self-insured program for the
management and administration of a system for direct payment of benefits,
losses or claims or any combination of insurance and direct payment, and
including risk management consultation, at which time the Trust Fund will be
dissolved after the payment of its outstanding liabilities. Any funds
remaining will revert to the City's General Fund



(Ord. O2016-012, passed 5-28-16)



Chapter 35:  Emergency Management



Section



Emergency Management Agency



   35-01   Established



   35-02   Members



   35-03   Duties and functions prescribed by regulation



Director



   35-15   Created



   35-16   Responsibilities



   35-17   Duties



Charter reference:



   Power of Council to create, fill offices and designate membership in
departments, see Charter Art. VI, § 15



   Power of Mayor during times of great danger, see Charter Art. VII, §
2(e)



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to adopt regulations, appoint director, provide for
emergency services establishment, etc., see A.R.S. §§ 26-307 and 26-308



Emergency Management Agency



§ 35-01  Established.



   There is hereby established an Emergency Management Agency for the city
in accordance with the State Civil Defense Plan and Program.



('80 Code, § 9-16)  (Ord. 781, passed 9-15-59; Am. Ord. O98-83, passed
11-4-98)



§ 35-02  Members.



   The Emergency Management Agency of the city shall consist of the
officers and employees of the city and such volunteer defense workers as may
be designated by the Council, by regulation.



('80 Code, § 9-17)  (Ord. 781, passed 9-15-59; Am. Ord. O98-83, passed
11-4-98)



§ 35-03  Duties and Functions Prescribed by Regulation.



   The functions and duties of the agency shall be distributed between
such divisions and services as shall be prescribed by regulations promulgated
by the Council.



('80 Code, § 9-18)  (Ord. 781, passed 9-15-59; Am. Ord. O98-83, passed
11-4-98)



Director



§ 35-15  Created.



   There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Management.



('80 Code, § 9-35)  (Ord. 781, passed 9-15-59; Am. Ord. O98-83, passed
11-4-98)



§ 35-16  Responsibilities.



   The Director of Emergency Management shall be responsible for the
organization, administration and operation of the Emergency Management Agency
of the city, subject to the direction and control of the Council.



('80 Code, § 9-36)  (Ord. 781, passed 9-15-59; Am. Ord. O98-83, passed
11-4-98)



§ 35-17  Duties.



   The duties of the Director of Emergency Management are:



   (A)   The recommendation for adoption by the Council of a Civil
Defense Plan.



   (B)   The maintenance of such liaison as is required by the Council
between said Council and the Emergency Management Agency of the city, and
with other emergency management organizations.



   (C)   The control and direction of the training of the Emergency
Management Agency as shall be required by the Council.



   (D)   Such other duties as are prescribed by law or by regulation
adopted by the Council.



('80 Code, § 9-37)  (Ord. 781, passed 9-15-59; Am. Ord. O98-83, passed
11-4-98)



Chapter 36:  Purchasing



Section



General Provisions



   36-01   Definitions



   36-02   Purpose; rules of construction



   36-03   Applicability



   36-04   Requirement of good faith



   36-05   Determinations to be maintained on file



   36-06   Local preference



Procurement and Supply Management



   36-15   Creation of procurement policy



   36-16   Centralization of procurement authority



   36-17   Promulgation of supply management operational procedures



   36-18   Cooperative purchasing



Contract Award Process



   36-30   Specifications



   36-31   Modification of standard contract forms



   36-32   Advertising for bids



   36-33   Methods of source selection



   36-34   Competitive sealed bidding



   36-35   Competitive acquisition of professional services including
architecture and engineering



   36-36   Rejection of bids



   36-37   Bidder's preference



   36-38   Small purchases



   36-39   Sole source procurements



   36-40   Emergency procurements



   36-41   Finality of determinations



   36-42   Contract monitoring



Contractual Remedies



   36-55   Authority to resolve protested solicitations and awards



   36-56   Authority to debar or suspend



   36-57   Authority to resolve contract and breach of contract
controversies



   36-58   Time limitations on actions



Ethical Standards



   36-70   Ethics in public contracting



   36-71   Gratuities and kickbacks



   36-72   Restrictions on employment of present and former employees



   36-73   Prohibition against contingent fees



   36-74   Use of confidential information



   36-75   Public access to procurement information



   36-76   Civil and administrative remedies



   36-77   Recovery of value transferred or received



Administration



   36-90   Division of Purchasing created; Purchasing Agent appointed



   36-91   Authority and duties of Purchasing Agent



   36-92   Delegation of authority



Charter reference:



   Contracts, competitive bidding, see Charter Art. XII, §§ 1 and 2



Statutory reference:



   Power of Council to control the finances of the city, see A.R.S. §
9-240(A)



General Provisions



§ 36-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLIND TRUST.  An independently managed trust in which the
employee-beneficiary has no management rights and in which the
employee-beneficiary is not given notice of alterations in or other
dispositions of the property subject to the trust.



   BUSINESS.  Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole
proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other legal entity.



   CITY.  The City of Yuma and shall include the City Council and any
department, commission, council, board, bureau, committee, institution,
authority, agency, government corporation, or other establishment or official
of the government of this city.



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.  Any information which is available to an
employee only because of the employee's status as an employee of this city
and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request.



   CONSTRUCTION.  The process of building, altering, repairing, improving
or demolishing any structure or building, or other improvements of any kind
to any real property.  It does not include the routine operation, routine
repair, or routine maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real
property.



   CONTRACT.  Any type of city agreement, regardless of what it may be
called, for the purchase or disposal of supplies, services or construction. 
It includes contracts of a fixed-price, cost, cost-plus-a-fixed-fee, or
incentive type; contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders;
leases; letter contracts; and purchase orders.  It also includes
supplemental agreements with respect to any of the foregoing.



   CONTRACTOR.  Any person or business having a contract with the
governmental body.



   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.  Procurement conducted by, or on behalf of,
more than one public procurement unit.



   DEBARMENT.  The disqualification of a person or business to receive
invitations for bids or requests for proposals or the award of a contract by
the city, for a specified period of time commensurate with the seriousness of
the offense or the failure or the inadequacy of performance.



   DESIGNEE.  A duly authorized representative or of a person holding a
superior position.



   EMPLOYEE.  An individual drawing a salary from the city, whether
elected or not, and any city board or commission member.



   EXCESS SUPPLIES.  Supplies having a remaining useful life but which
are no longer required by the using agency in possession of the supplies.



   FINANCIAL INTEREST.  A substantial interest as defined in A.R.S. §
38-502.



   GRATUITY.  A payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money,
service, or anything of any monetary value, present or promised, unless
consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received.



   IMMEDIATE FAMILY.  A spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters,
and grandparents or in-laws of same degree of relation.



   INVITATION FOR BIDS.  All documents, including those attached or
incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids.



   PROCUREMENT.  The buying, purchasing, renting, leasing or otherwise
obtaining any supplies, services or construction.  It also includes all
functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or
construction, including description of requirements, selection and
solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of
contract administration.



   PURCHASING AGENT.  The person holding the position of materials
management director or whatever title is assigned in the future to that
position which constitutes the head of the central purchasing office of the
city.



   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS (RFP).  All documents, including those attached
or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals.



   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.  A person who has the capability in all respects
to perform fully the contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability
which will assure good-faith performance.



   RESPONSIVE BIDDER.  A person who has submitted a bid which conforms in
all material respects to the invitation for bids.



   SERVICES.  The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor,
not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which
are merely incidental to the required performance.  This term includes
“professional services” but it does not include employment agreements or
collective bargaining agreements.



   SPECIFICATIONS.  Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics, or of the nature of, a supply, service or construction
item.  It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting,
testing or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery.



   SUPPLIES.  All property, including but not limited to equipment,
parts, materials, printing, insurance and leases on real and personal
property, excluding land or a permanent interest in land.



   SURPLUS SUPPLIES.  Any supplies no longer having any use to the
city.  This includes obsolete supplies, scrap materials, and nonexpendable
supplies that have completed their useful life cycle.



   SUSPENSION.  The disqualification of a person to receive invitations
for bids or requests for proposals or the award of a contract by the city,
for a temporary period pending the completion of an investigation, or during
any legal proceedings that may ensue because a person is suspected upon
probable cause of engaging in criminal, fraudulent or seriously improper
conduct or failure or inadequacy of performance which may lead to debarment.



   USING DEPARTMENT.  Any department, commission, council, board, bureau,
committee, institution, authority, agency, government corporation, or other
establishment or official of the government of this city, which utilizes any
supplies, services or construction purchased under this chapter.



('80 Code, § 12-16)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-02  Purpose; Rules of Construction.



   (A)   Interpretation.  This chapter shall be construed and applied
to promote its underlying purposes and policies.



   (B)   Purposes.  The underlying purposes and policies of this
chapter are:



      (1)   To simplify, clarify and modernize the law governing
procurement by this city;



      (2)   To permit the continued development of procurement
policies and practices;



      (3)   To make as consistent as possible the procurement laws
among the various governmental bodies;



      (4)   To provide for increased public confidence in the
procedures used in public procurement;



      (5)   To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all
persons who deal with the procurement system of this city;



      (6)   To provide increased economy in city procurement
activities and to maximize to the fullest extent practicable the purchasing
value of public funds of the city;



      (7)   To foster effective broad-based competition within the
free enterprise system; and



      (8)   To provide safeguards for the maintenance of a
procurement system of quality and integrity.



('80 Code, § 12-17)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-03  Applicability.



   (A)   General applicability.  This chapter applies only to
contracts solicited or entered into after the effective date of this chapter
unless the parties agree to its application to a contract entered into prior
to the effective date.  Renewal of existing contracts would be subject to
the chapter unless current contract terms provide otherwise.



   (B)   Application to city procurement.  This chapter shall apply to
every expenditure of public funds regardless of source, including state and
federal assistance monies, by this city, under any contract, except that
nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from complying with the terms
and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest or cooperative agreement.  This
chapter shall also apply to the disposal of city supplies.



   (C)   Effect of state or federal assistance requirements.  In the
event state or federal assistance requirements conflict with the provisions
of this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from
complying with the terms and conditions of the federal assistance
requirements and the Purchasing Agent shall have authority to adopt
regulations governing city compliance with federal assistance requirements on
any given project.



('80 Code, § 12-18)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-04  Requirement of Good Faith.



   This chapter requires all parties involved in the negotiation,
performance or administration of city contracts to act in good faith.



('80 Code, § 12-19)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-05  Determinations to be Maintained on File.



   Written determinations and findings required by this chapter shall be
retained in an appropriate official contract file in the office of the
Purchasing Agent.



('80 Code, § 12-20)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-06  Local Preference.



   (A)   A LOCAL BUSINESS shall be defined as a business that is
located within the boundaries of the City of Yuma, paid all its required
taxes, possesses a valid City of Yuma business license, and has its
headquarters in the City of Yuma (defined as principal central office,
including where primary headquarters related functions and services are
performed, including financial, personnel, administrative, legal, planning
and similar business functions).



   (B)   The City of Yuma may award up to a 5% local preference for
award of public bid for any improvements, materials, equipment, construction,
professional services, or supplies up to a contract value of $50,000 to a
local business in order to facilitate increased competition by such local
businesses with larger metropolitan and out of state firms and to prefer the
accessibility and prompt service of a local dealer which is deemed to offset
the price advantage of volume enterprises. If local business subcontracts out
a portion of the work on the contract at least 50% of the subcontracted
amount must be to other local businesses in order to qualify for local
preference award. Preference may be awarded based upon equal quality and
suitability as deemed solely by the city.



   (C)   The City of Yuma may award up to a 5% local preference for
award of public bid for any improvements, materials, equipment, construction,
professional services, or supplies for a contract value over $50,000, with
the preference amount not to exceed $100,000, to a local business in order to
facilitate increased competition by such local businesses with larger
metropolitan and out of state firms and to prefer the accessibility and
prompt service of a local dealer which is deemed to offset the price
advantage of volume enterprises. If local business subcontracts out a portion
of the work on the contract at least 50% of the subcontracted amount must be
to other local businesses in order to qualify for local preference award.
Preference may be awarded based upon equal quality and suitability as deemed
solely by the city.



   (D)   In awarding contracts for furnishing any kind of equipment or
materials or construction to a political subdivision of this state, the
amount of any applicable transaction privilege or use tax of a political
subdivision of this state shall not be a factor in determining the lowest
bidder whenever a competing bidder located outside this state is not subject
to a transaction privilege or use tax of a political subdivision of this
state.



   (E)   This preference shall not be used where state statute or any
applicable federal statute or regulation prohibits the granting of such
preference.



   (F)   In no case, under either state statute or Yuma City Code,
shall any bidder receive more than 5% total preference.



(Ord. O2011-39, passed 2-1-12)



Procurement and Supply Management



§ 36-15  Creation of Procurement Policy.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Administrator
shall have the authority and responsibility to promulgate and approve the
procurement policy of the city in conformance with this chapter and the City
Charter, but the City Administrator shall not exercise authority over the
award of a particular contract or any dispute, claim or litigation pertaining
thereto unless otherwise provided herein.



('80 Code, § 12-41)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-16  Centralization of Procurement Authority.



   (A)   Transfer of functions.  All rights, power, duties and
authority relating to the procurement of supplies, services and construction,
and the management, control, warehousing, sale and disposal of supplies,
services and construction now vested in or exercised by any using department,
regardless of source of funding, are hereby transferred to the City
Administrator and the Purchasing Agent.



   (B)   Relationship with using departments.  The Purchasing Agent
shall obtain expert advice and assistance from personnel of using departments
in the development of specifications and may delegate in writing to a using
department the approval and authority to prepare and utilize its own
specifications.



   (C)   Collection of data concerning procurement.  The Purchasing
Agent shall cooperate with the Financial Service Director in the preparation
of statistical data concerning the procurement, usage and disposal of all
supplies, services and construction.  All using departments shall furnish
such reports as the Purchasing Agent may require concerning usage, needs and
stocks on hand, and the Purchasing Agent shall have authority to prescribe
forms to be used by the using departments in requisitioning, ordering and
reporting of supplies, services and construction.



('80 Code, § 12-42)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-17  Promulgation of Supply Management Operational Procedures.



   The Purchasing Agent may promulgate, with the concurrence of the City
Administrator, operational procedures in conformance with this chapter and
the City Charter governing:



   (A)   The management of supplies during their entire life cycle.



   (B)   The sale, lease or disposal of supplies by public auction,
competitive sealed bidding, or other appropriate methods excepting purchases
of an interest in real property.  However, no employee of the city shall be
entitled to purchase any such supplies, except by public auction or
competitive sealed bidding.



   (C)   Transfer of excess supplies within the city.  For the purpose
of this section, surplus supplies do not include real property.



('80 Code, § 12-43)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-18  Cooperative Purchasing.



   (A)   Purchasing agreements.  The city may either participate in,
sponsor, conduct or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the
procurement of any supplies, services or construction with one or more public
procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the
participants.  Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited
to, joint or multiparty contracts between public procurement units, and
open-ended state public procurement unit contracts which are made available
to other public procurement units.



   (B)   Sale, acquisition or use of supplies.  The city may sell to,
acquire from or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit
independent of the requirements of §§ 36-30 and 36-33.



   (C)   Cooperative use of supplies and services.  The city may enter
into an agreement, independent of the requirements of § 36-16, with any
other public procurement unit for the cooperative use of supplies or
services, under the terms agreed upon between the parties.



   (D)   Joint use of facilities.  The city may enter into agreements
for the common use or lease of warehousing facilities, capital equipment and
other facilities with another public procurement unit under the terms agreed
upon between the parties.



('80 Code, § 12-44)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Charter reference:



   Intergovernmental agreements, see Charter Art. III, § 13



Contract Award Process



§ 36-30  Specifications.



   (A)   Purchasing Agent's duties.  The Purchasing Agent shall
prepare, issue, revise, maintain and monitor the use of specifications for
supplies, services and construction required by the city, in conjunction with
the City Engineer where appropriate, provided that:



      (1)   The Purchasing Agent may delegate to using department
responsibility for the preparation and maintenance of specifications
generally or for specific supplies, services or construction, subject to
approval of any such specifications by the Purchasing Agent; and



      (2)   If the Purchasing Agent does not approve a
specification, the City Administrator may, at his discretion, upon the
request of the using department, modify or reverse such decision of the
Purchasing Agent.  Any determination modifying or reversing the
specifications shall be in writing.



   (B)   Maximum practicable competition.  All specifications shall
seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended and shall be
drafted so as to ensure the maximum practicable competition for the city's
actual requirements.



   (C)   Specifications prepared by architects and engineers.  The
requirements of this section regarding the purposes and nonrestrictiveness of
specifications shall apply to all specifications, including but not limited
to those prepared by architects, engineers, designers and draftsmen for
public contracts.



   (D)   Conflicting opinions on certain specifications.  In the event
of a conflict between the City Engineer and the Purchasing Agent in regard to
specifications requiring the seal of the City Engineer, the opinion of the
City Engineer shall control; subject to review by the City Administrator
pursuant to subdivision (A)(2) of this section.



('80 Code, § 12-51)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-31  Modification of Standard Contract Forms.



   The Purchasing Agent, after consultation with the City Attorney and
with the approval of the City Administrator, may modify or delete existing
and add new contractual provisions and clauses to all form contracts for the
procurement of supplies, services and construction contracts utilized by the
city, provided that such modification, deletions or additions are supported
by a written determination.



('80 Code, § 12-52)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-32  Advertising for Bids.



   Advertising for formal bids for the expenditure of any public money in
excess of the amount as provided for in A.R.S. § 41-2535, as amended, where
such amount has been appropriated in the officially adopted budget for the
expenditure requested, shall be deemed authorized at the time of the adoption
of the budget for each ensuing fiscal year.



('80 Code, § 12-53)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81; Ord. 2195, passed 4-4-84;
Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



§ 36-33  Methods of Source Selection.



   Unless otherwise authorized by law, all city contracts shall be awarded
by competitive sealed bidding, pursuant to § 36-34 except as provided in §
36-35 and §§ 36-38 through 36-40.



('80 Code, § 12-54)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-34  Competitive Sealed Bidding.



   (A)   Invitation for bids.  Where competitive sealed bidding is
utilized, an invitation for bids shall be issued which shall include a
purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to
the procurement.



   (B)   Public notice.  Adequate public notice of the invitation for
bids shall be given a reasonable time prior to the date set forth herein for
the opening of bids, as required by law, or in accordance with policy
approved by the City Administrator.  Such notice may include publication in
a newspaper of general circulation at a reasonable time prior to bid opening.



   (C)   Bid opening.  Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence
of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation
for bids.  The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as may
be specified in the invitation for bids, together with the name of each
bidder, shall be recorded.  The record and each bid shall be open to public
inspection.



   (D)   Bid acceptance and bid evaluation.  Bids shall be
unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as
authorized in this chapter.  Bids shall be evaluated based on the
requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include criteria
to determine acceptability, such as inspection, testing, quality,
workmanship, delivery, availability of follow-up service and suitability for
a particular purpose.  Those criteria that will affect the bid price and
which will be considered in evaluation for award shall be objectively
measurable, such as discounts, transportation costs, and total or life-cycle
costs.  The invitation for bids shall set forth the evaluation criteria to
be used.  No criteria may be used in bid evaluation that are not set forth
in the invitation for bids.



   (E)   Award, generally.  The contract shall be awarded with
reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in
the invitation for bids, subject to the qualifications set forth herein, as
determined by the City Council; and a bid may not be rejected except on the
basis of criteria set forth in the invitation for bids.  In the event all
bids exceed available funds as certified by the appropriate fiscal officer,
and the low responsive and responsible bid does not exceed such funds by more
than five percent, the Purchasing Agent is authorized, where permitted by
law, in situations where time or economic considerations preclude
resolicitation of work or a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the
bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the low responsive
and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of
available funds.



   (F)   Award to other than low bidder.  When the agent is to
recommend the award of the contract to other than the lowest bidder, a full
and complete statement of the reasons for such a recommendation shall be
prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the
transaction.



   (G)   Correction or withdrawal of bids; cancellation of awards. 
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after
award, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes,
shall be permitted in accordance with regulations promulgated by the
materials management division.  After bid opening, no changes in bid prices
or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the city or fair
competition shall be permitted.  Except as otherwise provided by regulation,
all decisions to permit the correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel
awards or contracts based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written
determination made by the Purchasing Agent.



   (H)   Multistep sealed bidding.  When it is considered impractical
to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on
price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of
unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those
bidders whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the
first solicitation.



   (I)   Change orders.  Change orders exceeding ten percent of the
original contract, where such amount is in excess of the amount as provided
for in A.R.S. § 41-2535, as amended, require Council approval unless
otherwise provided for in the original contract as approved by the City
Council.



('80 Code, § 12-55)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81; Ord. 2195, passed 4-4-84;
Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



Charter reference:



   Formal bidding, see Charter Art. XII, § 1(b)



§ 36-35  Competitive Acquisition of Professional Services Including
Architecture and Engineering.



   (A)   Applicability.  Professional services shall be procured in
accord with this policy except where otherwise provided in the purchasing
chapter, exceptions to include but not be limited to small purchases (under
amount set by Charter for formal competitive bidding), sole source
procurement, emergency procurements, and those situations where negotiation
procedure is more appropriate as when only one known contractor can meet all
requirements or when competitive solicitation is impractical.



   (B)   Policy.  It is the policy of this city to publicly announce
all requirements for professional services, unless excepted herein, and to
negotiate contracts on the basis of demonstrated competence and qualification
for the type of services required, and at fair and reasonable prices.



   (C)   Objectives.



      (1)   To secure competent professional services as
competitively as practicable.



      (2)   To require a prohibition against contingent fees in all
professional services contracts.



      (3)   To establish as firmly as possible the total cost,
including fee, of the service to be rendered.



      (4)   To eliminate cost-plus-a-percentage-of-cost type of
contracting.



   (D)   Criteria for selection.



      (1)   Professional technical competence of contractor.



      (2)   Available capacity to perform the specific work within
the stipulated timeframe.



      (3)   The merit of the proposed concept or methods to be used
in achieving the specific desired objective or end product.



      (4)   Proposed total cost, including fee, and construction and
life-cycle costs, where applicable, to the client.



   (E)   Pre-bid activity.  Based on the complexity of the project,
one or more of these steps may be omitted if appropriate:



      (1)   Using department to formulate statement of requirements,
design or other applicable criteria, timeframe for performance, and other
pertinent criteria.  The estimated total cost, including construction if
applicable, should also be established.  The request for proposals shall
also state the relative importance of the various criteria including price.



      (2)   When deemed appropriate in the best interest of the
city, the City Administrator may appoint an ad hoc advisory committee, with
either in-house or outside representatives of the disciplines involved. 
Such committee would review the stated requirements and establish the extent
of anticipated in-house participation.



      (3)   Formalized advertising of stated requirements.



      (4)   Either the Purchasing Agent in conjunction with the
using department head or the ad hoc committee, if one is appointed, shall
review the professional and technical competence of all responding firms and,
by an analysis of prior performance, determine the capacity to render the
required services within the established timeframe.



      (5)   Establishment of a list of prequalified bidders for the
specific project or program by the ad hoc committee or the using department
and procuring activity.



      (6)   Determination of most appropriate method of contracting
based on complexity of the program and extent of in-house participation.



      (7)   Preparation of preliminary set of specifications and
other contract documents by using department and Purchasing Agent for review
and comments of prequalified bidders.  Criteria to be used in the evaluation
of proposals and determination of successful bidder established.



      (8)   Prebid conference conducted by Purchasing Agent
supported by requesting department and other in-house groups as required. 
All prequalified firms invited to attend for review of specification
requirements, predetermined method of contracting and proposed contract
documents.  Recommendations and questions from prospective bidders requested
for consideration.



      (9)   Preparation of all documents required for the
solicitation of proposals by Purchasing Agent and using department subject to
approval of evaluation board.



   (F)   Award process.



      (1)   Single-step competitive:



         (a)   Solicitation from prequalified list of
contractors.  Bid documents to include requirements for the submission of
conceptual approach, total price including fee and assurance of compliance
with stated timeframe.



         (b)   Receipt of proposals.  Proposals shall be opened
so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the
process of negotiation.  A register of proposals shall be prepared and
opened for public inspections.



         (c)   Review and evaluation of conceptual proposals by
ad hoc committee, or representative of requesting department and procuring
activity, and all acceptable proposals identified, with record of actions
involved.  Firms may also be required to have key personnel, to be used on
the project, give a presentation of conceptual approaches to ad hoc committee.



         (d)   Award of contract to lowest bidder meeting all
requirements, including budget limitations, as determined by the City Council
after recommendation by the Purchasing Agent or ad hoc committee.



      (2)   Two-step competitive:



         (a)   Solicitation from prequalified list of
contractors.  Bid documents to include requirements for the submission of
conceptual approach and methods to be utilized in achieving the specified end
product or providing the desired service within the stipulated timeframe. 
Cost or pricing data is not required, unless in two-envelope method.



         (b)   Receipt of proposals.  Proposals shall be opened
so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the
process of negotiation.  A register of proposals shall be prepared and
opened for public inspections.



         (c)   Review and evaluation of conceptual proposals by
ad hoc committee, or representative of requesting department and procuring
activity, and all acceptable proposals identified, with record of actions
involved.  Firms may also be required to have key personnel, to be used on
the project, give a presentation of conceptual approaches to ad hoc committee.



         (d)   Request for cost and pricing data from those firms
that submitted acceptable conceptual proposals.  Cost proposals must include
appropriate cost elements and show all applicable percentages including fee
or profit.



         (e)   Review of all cost elements by Purchasing Agent
assisted by an audit or accounting group, if necessary, and comparison with
in-house estimates.  Award of contract to lowest bidder meeting all
requirements, including budget limitations, as determined by the City Council
after recommendation by the Purchasing Agent or ad hoc committee.



      (3)   Competitive negotiation:



         (a)   Discussion and review of requirements by ad hoc
committee with prequalified firms, if possible, regarding anticipated
concepts and relative value of alternate methods of approach. 
Technical/conceptual proposals only to be submitted as a result of
discussions.



         (b)   Receipt of proposals.  Proposals shall be opened
so as to avoid disclosure of contents to competing offerors during the
process of negotiation.  A register of proposals shall be prepared and
opened for public inspections.



         (c)   Review and evaluation of conceptual proposals by
ad hoc committee, or representative of requesting department and procuring
activity, and all acceptable proposals identified, with record of actions
involved.  Firms may also be required to have key personnel, to be used on
the project, give a presentation of conceptual approaches to ad hoc committee.



         (d)   Request for cost and pricing data from those firms
that submitted acceptable conceptual proposals.  Cost proposals must include
appropriate cost elements and show all applicable percentages including fee
or profit.



         (e)   Review of all cost elements by Purchasing Agent
assisted by an audit or accounting group, if necessary, and comparison with
in-house estimates.



         (f)   Negotiations conducted with top three firms whose
price proposals are within competitive range and whose conceptual proposals
are relatively acceptable or equal.



         (g)   Award of contract, by the City Council upon
recommendation of the ad hoc committee, under mutually acceptable terms and
conditions at compensation that is considered to be fair and reasonable to
both contractor and client.



         (h)   Record of all negotiations shall be made for
contract file and reviewing authorities with sufficient detail to reflect
significant considerations leading to finalization of contract.



('80 Code, § 12-56)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-36  Rejection of Bids.



   All bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or in part as may be
specified in the solicitation, only if it is determined by the Council that
such action is taken in the best interests of the city.



('80 Code, § 12-57)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Charter reference:



   Acceptance of bids, see Charter Art. XII, § 1(c)



§ 36-37  Bidder's Preference.



   (A)   The City Council may grant a monetary preference to local
bidders providing such preference is in the best interest of the city,
further providing that such preference is stated in the bid offer and the bid
exceeds the formal competitive bid amount.  Such preference shall not be
granted where federal or state purchasing policies preclude such preference.



   (B)   The City Administrator or designee may grant a monetary
preference to local bidders providing such preference is in the best interest
of the city, further providing that such preference is stated in the bid
offer and the bid is between the informal competitive bid amount and the
formal competitive bid amount.  Such preference shall not be granted where
federal or state purchasing policies preclude such preference.



('80 Code, § 12-58)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81; Ord. O2010-04, passed
1-6-10)



§ 36-38  Small Purchases.



   Except as otherwise required by law, any procurement not exceeding the
amount established by City Charter or city procurement policy may be made in
accordance with small purchase procedures approved by the City Administrator;
provided, however, that procurement requirements shall not be artificially
divided so as to constitute a small purchase under this section.  If the
actual price of a procurement obtained through such small purchases procedure
exceeds the amount which may be purchased by informal bidding pursuant to the
Charter, the Purchasing Agent shall determine that the procurement be made
using §§ 36-34 or 36-35.



('80 Code, § 12-59)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Charter reference:



   Informal bidding authorized for purchases under $50,000, see Charter
Art. XII, § 1(a)



§ 36-39  Sole Source Procurements.



   Where permitted by law, a contract may be awarded for a supply, service
or construction without competition when the Purchasing Agent or designee
determines in writing that there is only one source for the required supply,
service or construction.



('80 Code, § 12-60)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-40  Emergency Procurements.



   Where permitted by law and notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the Purchasing Agent or a designee may make or authorize others to
make emergency procurements when there exists a threat to public health,
welfare or safety under emergency conditions as defined in policy approved by
the City Administrator provided that such emergency procurements shall be
made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances.  A
written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of
the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file.



('80 Code, § 12-61)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-41  Finality of Determinations.



   The determinations required by §§ 36-34, 36-35, 36-39 and 36-40 are
final and conclusive unless they are clearly erroneous, arbitrary, capricious
or contrary to law.



('80 Code, § 12-62)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-42  Contract Monitoring.



   The using department shall be responsible for monitoring contract
performance unless otherwise designated by the City Administrator.



('80 Code, § 12-63)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Contractual Remedies



§ 36-55  Authority to Resolve Protested Solicitations and Awards.



   (A)   Right to protest.  Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror
or contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award
of a contract may protest to the City Council.  The protest shall be
submitted in writing within ten days to the City Administrator after such
aggrieved person knows or should have known of the facts giving rise thereto,
and he, the Administrator, shall place same on the next Council agenda if not
resolved prior to that time.



   (B)   Authority to resolve protests.  The City Council shall have
the authority, prior to the commencement of an action in court concerning the
controversy, to settle and resolve a protest of an aggrieved bidder, offeror,
contractor, actual or prospective, concerning the solicitation or award of a
contract.



   (C)   Decision.  If the protest is not resolved by mutual
agreement, the Purchasing Agent shall issue notice in writing of the
Council's decision.  The notice shall:



      (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and



      (2)   Inform the protestant of right to judicial review as
provided in this chapter.



   (D)   Notice of decision.  A copy of the decision under this
section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the protestant
and any other party intervening.



   (E)   Finality of decision.  A decision under this section shall be
final and conclusive unless fraudulent, or unless any person adversely
affected by the decision commences an action in court.



   (F)   Stay of procurements during protests.  In the event of a
timely protest under this division, the city shall not proceed further with
the solicitation or with the award of the contract until the Purchasing
Agent, after consultation with the head of the using department and the City
Administrator, makes a written determination that the award of the contract
without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city.



('80 Code, § 12-71)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-56  Authority to Debar or Suspend.



   (A)   Council retains authority; length of debarment or
suspension.  After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable
opportunity for that person to be heard, the City Council, after a report
being submitted by the Purchasing Agent after consultation with the using
department and the City Attorney, shall have authority to debar a person for
cause from consideration for award of contracts.  The debarment shall not be
for a period of more than three years.  The Council shall under the same
terms have authority to suspend a person from consideration for award of
contracts if there is probable cause for debarment.  The suspension shall
not be for a period exceeding three months.



   (B)   Causes for debarment or suspension.  The causes for debarment
or suspension include the following:



      (1)   Conviction for commission of a criminal offense as an
incident to obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or
subcontract, or in the performance of such contract or subcontract.



      (2)   Conviction under state or federal statutes of
embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of
records, receiving stolen property, or any other offense indicating a lack of
business integrity or business honesty which currently, seriously and
directly affects responsibility as a city contractor.



      (3)   Conviction under state or federal antitrust statutes
arising out of the submission of bids or proposals.



      (4)   Violation of contract provisions, as set forth below, of
a character which is regarded by the Purchasing Agent to be so serious so as
to justify debarment action:



         (a)   Deliberate failure without good cause to perform
in accordance with the specifications or within the time limit provided in
the contract; or



         (b)   A recent record of failure to perform or of
unsatisfactory performance in accordance with the terms of one or more
contracts; provided that failure to perform or unsatisfactory performance
caused by acts beyond the control of the contractor shall not be considered
to be a basis for debarment.



      (5)   Any other cause the Purchasing Agent determines to be so
serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a city contractor,
including debarment by another governmental entity for any of the causes
listed in this section.



      (6)   For violation of the ethical standards set forth in this
chapter.



   (C)   Decision.  The Purchasing Agent shall forward in writing
notice of any decision of the Council to debar or suspend.  The notice shall:



      (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and



      (2)   Inform the debarred or suspended firm involved of right
to judicial review as provided in this chapter.



   (D)   Notice of decision.  A copy of the decision under this
section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the debarred or
suspended person and any other party intervening.



   (E)   Finality of decision.  A decision under this section shall be
final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless the debarred or suspended
person commences an action in court.



('80 Code, § 12-72)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-57  Authority to Resolve Contract and Breach of Contract Controversies.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to controversies between
the city and a contractor and which arise under, or by virtue of, a contract
between them.  This includes without limitation controversies based upon
breach of contract, mistake, misrepresentation or other cause for contract
modification or recision.



   (B)   Council retains authority.  The City Council is authorized,
prior to commencement of an action in a court concerning the controversy, to
settle and resolve a controversy described in this section.



   (C)   Decision.  If such a controversy is not resolved by mutual
agreement, the Purchasing Agent shall promptly issue a decision in writing
setting forth the decision of the Council.  The decision shall:



      (1)   State the reasons for the action taken; and



      (2)   Inform the contractor of right to judicial review as
provided in this chapter.



   (D)   Notice of decision.  A copy of the decision under this
section shall be mailed or otherwise furnished immediately to the contractor.



   (E)   Finality of decision.  The decision under this section shall
be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or unless the contractor
commences an action in court.



   (F)   Failure to render timely decision.  If the Purchasing Agent
does not issue the written decision required under this section within 120
days after written request for a final decision, or within such longer period
as may be agreed upon by the parties, then the contractor may proceed as if
an adverse decision had been received.



('80 Code, § 12-73)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-58  Time Limitations on Actions.



   (A)   Protested solicitations and awards.  Any legal action under
this chapter shall be initiated within 30 days after the aggrieved person
knows or should have known of the facts giving rise to the action.



   (B)   Debarments and suspensions for cause.  Any action challenging
a suspension or debarment shall be commenced within six months after receipt
of the decision of the Purchasing Agent under this division.



   (C)   Actions under contracts or for breach of contract.  The
statutory limitations on an action between private persons on a contract
shall apply to any action commenced pursuant to a contract entered into
pursuant to this chapter.



('80 Code, § 12-74)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Ethical Standards



§ 36-70  Ethics in Public Contracting.



   (A)   Standards of conduct; statement of policy.



      (1)   Public employment is a public trust.  It is the policy
of the city to promote and balance the objective of protecting government
integrity and the objective of facilitating the recruitment and retention of
personnel needed by the city.  Such policy is implemented by prescribing
essential restrictions against conflict of interest without creating
unnecessary obstacles to entering public service.



      (2)   Public employees must discharge their duties impartially
so as to ensure fair competitive access to governmental procurement by
responsible contractors.  Moreover, they should conduct themselves in such a
manner as to foster public confidence in the integrity of the city
procurement organization.



      (3)   To achieve the purpose of this section, it is essential
that those doing business with the city also observe the ethical standards
prescribed herein.



   (B)   Standards for employees.  General standards of ethical
conduct for employees are those as set forth in A.R.S. §§ 38-501 et seq.



   (C)   General standards of ethical conduct for nonemployees.  Any
effort to influence any public employee to breach the standards of ethical
conduct is also a breach of ethical standards.



('80 Code, § 12-81)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 36-71  Gratuities and Kickbacks.



   (A)   Gratuities.



      (1)   It is a breach of ethical standards for any person to
offer, give or agree to give any employee or former employee, or for any
employee or former employee to solicit, demand, accept or agree to accept
from another person, a gratuity or an offer of employment in connection with
any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part
of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specifications of
procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing or in any
other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling,
determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining
to any contract or subcontract and any solicitation or proposal therefor.



      (2)   This provision does not prohibit acceptance by a
department head or employee of food and refreshments of insignificant value
on infrequent occasions in the ordinary course of a meeting, conference or
other occasion where the employee and/or department head is properly in
attendance, nor the solicitation nor acceptance by an employee of loans from
banks or other financial institutions on customary terms to finance proper
and usual activities of the employee, nor the acceptance of unsolicited
advertising or promotional material such as pens, pencils, calendars and
other items of nominal intrinsic value.



   (B)   Kickbacks.  It is a breach of ethical standards for any
payment, gratuity or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a
subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier
subcontractor or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the
award of a subcontract or order.



('80 Code, § 12-82)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 36-72  Restrictions on Employment of Present and Former Employees.



   Contemporaneous employment is prohibited.  It shall be a breach of
ethical standards for any employee who is participating directly or
indirectly in the procurement process to be or become, while such an
employee, employed by any person contracting with the governmental body or
own a business which contracts with the governmental body unless such person
or business does so in conformance with the City Charter and state laws
governing conflicts of interest.  For purposes of this section, advisory
recommendations by board and commission members are not considered
participation either directly or indirectly in the procurement process.



('80 Code, § 12-83)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 36-73  Prohibition Against Contingent Fees.



   It shall be a breach of ethical standards to retain a person, or for a
person to be retained, to solicit or secure a city contract upon an agreement
or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee,
except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established
commercial  selling agencies maintained by the contractor for the purpose of
securing business.



('80 Code, § 12-84)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 36-74  Use of Confidential Information.



   It shall be a breach of ethical standards for any employee or former
employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or anticipated
personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other
person.



('80 Code, § 12-85)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 36-75  Public Access to Procurement Information.



   Procurement information, which is not confidential, shall be a public
record to the extent provided by state and federal law and shall be available
to the public as provided by such laws.



('80 Code, § 12-86)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 36-76  Civil and Administrative Remedies.



   (A)   Against employees.



      (1)   Existing remedies not impaired.  Civil and
administrative remedies against employees which are in existence on the
effective date of this chapter shall not be impaired.



      (2)   Supplemental remedies.  In addition to existing
remedies for breach of ethical standards of this chapter, the City
Administrator may impose any one or more of the following, not necessarily in
the order as listed, subject to the procedures set forth in the city
personnel rules:



         (a)   Oral or written warnings or reprimands;



         (b)   Suspension with or without pay for specified
periods of time; and



         (c)   Termination of employment.



      (3)   Recovery from employee.  The value of anything received
by an employee in breach of the ethical standards of this chapter or
regulations promulgated thereunder shall be recoverable by the city.



      (4)   Due process.  All procedures under this chapter shall
be in accordance with due process requirements and existing state law.



   (B)   Against nonemployees.



      (1)   Existing remedies not impaired.  Civil and
administrative remedies against nonemployees which are in existence on the
effective date of this chapter shall not be impaired.



      (2)   Supplemental remedies.  In addition to existing
remedies for breach of the ethical standards of this chapter, the City
Administrator may impose any one or more of the following:



         (a)   Oral or written warnings or reprimands;



         (b)   Termination of a transaction; and



         (c)   Suspension or debarment.



      (3)   Recovery from nonemployee.  The value of anything
transferred in breach of the ethical standards of this chapter or regulations
promulgated thereunder by a nonemployee shall be recoverable by the city.



      (4)   Right of city to suspend or debar.



         (a)   Suspension of a contractor may be imposed during
an investigation of charges of a serious and compelling nature based on
probable cause indicating the existence of a breach of ethical standards
under this chapter or other irregularities of a serious and compelling nature
which would affect the integrity of the contractor.



         (b)   Debarment of a contractor may be imposed by reason
of a finding of any breach of ethical standards under this chapter or for a
finding of other irregularities of a serious and compelling nature affecting
the integrity of the contractor.



      (5)   Due process.  All procedures under this section shall
be in accordance with due process requirements.



('80 Code, §§ 12-87 and 12-88)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



§ 36-77  Recovery of Value Transferred or Received.



   (A)   General provisions.  The value of anything transferred or
received in breach of the ethical standards of this chapter by an employee or
a nonemployee shall be recoverable by the city.



   (B)   Recovery of kickbacks by the city.  Upon a showing that a
subcontractor made a kickback to a prime contractor or a higher tier
subcontractor in connection with the award of a subcontract or order
thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the amount thereof was
included in the price of the subcontract or order and ultimately borne by the
city and will be recoverable hereunder from the recipient.  In addition,
said value may also be recovered from the subcontractor making such
kickbacks.  Recovery from one offending party shall not preclude recovery
from other offending parties.



('80 Code, § 12-89)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Administration



§ 36-90  Division of Purchasing Created; Purchasing Agent Appointed.



   A Division of Purchasing is created within the Department of Financial
Services, which shall be headed by the Purchasing Agent.  The Purchasing
Agent shall be appointed in accord with the personnel rules of the city.



('80 Code, § 12-31)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Charter reference:



   Power of city to establish departments, officers, duties, see Charter
Art. VI, § 15



§ 36-91  Authority and Duties of Purchasing Agent.



   (A)   Principal contracting, procurement officer.  The Purchasing
Agent shall serve as the principal contracting officer and central
procurement officer of the city.



   (B)   Power to adopt internal operational procedures.  Consistent
with the provisions of this chapter, the Purchasing Agent may adopt internal
operational procedures governing the City Purchasing Division with the
approval of the City Administrator.  Such regulations must be consistent
with this chapter and the City Charter.



   (C)   Duties.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this
chapter, the Purchasing Agent shall, in accordance with policy approved by
the City Administrator:



      (1)   Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies,
services and construction needed by the city;



      (2)   Exercise supervision and control over all inventories of
supplies belonging to the city;



      (3)   Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies
belonging to the city;



      (4)   Establish and maintain programs for the inspection,
testing, and acceptance of supplies, services and construction. ('80 Code, §
12-32)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81; Ord. O2013-32, passed 6-19-13)



§ 36-92  Delegation of Authority.



   Subject to written policy approved by the City Administrator, the
Purchasing Agent may delegate authority to designees or to any department
where to do so would be in the best interests of the city.  Any such
delegation must be in writing and set forth the reasons therefor.



('80 Code, § 12-33)  (Ord. 2018, passed 6-17-81)



Chapter 37:  Taxation



Section



   37-01   Tax code adopted



   37-02   Amendments



   37-99   Penalty



§ 37-01  Tax Code adopted.



   That certain document known as “The City Tax Code of the City of
Yuma, Arizona,” three copies of which are on file in the office of the City
Clerk, which document was made a public record by Resolution 2518 of the
city, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set
out in this section.



('80 Code, § 29-1)  (Ord. 2374, passed 9-16-87)  Penalty, see § 37-99



Cross-reference:



   Index to City Tax Code, see § 37-04



§ 37-02  Amendments.



   (A)   1988 Amendments.



      (1)   That certain document known as "The 1988 Amendments to
the City Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2542 of the city, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



      (2)   With the exception of Section 3 of the 1988 amendments,
the provisions of this section are effective retroactively to October 16,
1987.



(Ord. 2400, passed 4-20-88)



   (B)   1990 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 1990
Amendments to the City Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies
of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma,
Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2631 of
the city, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in this section.



(Ord. No. 2498, passed 8-1-90)



   (C)   1995 Amendments.



      (1)   That certain document known as "The 1995 Amendments to
the City Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. 2815 of the city, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



      (2)   The provisions of this section and the public record
adopted herein are effective from and after January 31, 1995, with the
exception of the deletion of the definition of manufacturing in Section 1,
Section 2, Section 14, subsection (u) of Section 15, Section 17, Section 18
and Section 26 which shall be effective from and after June 30, 1995.



(Ord. 2683, passed 12-21-94)



   (D)   1996 Amendments.



      (1)   That certain document known as "The 1996 Amendments to
the City Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. R96-51 of the city, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



      (2)   The provisions of this section and the public record
adopted herein are effective from and after December 31, 1996.



(Ord. O96-105, passed 11-20-96)



   (E)   1998 Amendments.



      (1)   That certain document known as "The 1998 Amendments to
the Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies of which are on file
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which document
was made a public record by Resolution No. R98-26 of the city, is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section.



      (2)   With the exception of the following subsection, the
provisions of this section and the public record adopted herein are effective
from and after July 1, 1998.



      (3)   The following provisions of the public record adopted
herein are retroactive to April 1, 1987:



         (a)   The definition of "Construction Contractor" as
amended and the definition of "remediation" as added in Section 1. Section
29-100.  General Definitions.



         (b)   Subsection (a), paragraph (16) on "Cleanrooms" as
added to Section 2.  Section 29-110.  Definitions:  Income-producing
capital equipment.



         (c)   Section 9.  Subsection (aa) of Section 29-465. 
Retail Sales:  exemptions.



         (d)   Section 11.  Regulation 29-100.5  Remediation
Contracting.



(Ord. O98-48, passed 6-3-98)



   (F)   Two Level Tax Structure Amendment.



      (1)   That the Yuma City Tax Code be amended at § 29-460 by
adding subparagraph d., to read as follows:



         d.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)
above, when the gross income from the sale of a single item of tangible
personal property exceeds $35,000, the 1.7% tax rate shall apply to the first
$35,000.  Above $35,000, the measure of tax shall be at a rate of zero.



      (2)   The provisions of this section are effective from and
after July 1, 2015.



      (3)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of
these amendments to the tax code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor
and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for
not more than five days or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Each day
that a violation continues shall be a separate offense punishable as herein
above described.



      (4)   This section is repealed from and after June 30, 2021.



(Ord. O99-22, passed 4-7-99; Ord. O2002-31, passed 6-5-02; Ord. O2005- 39,
passed 6-1-05; Ord. O2005-55, passed 7-20-05; Ord. O2008-29, passed 7-16-08;
Ord. O2015-02, passed 2-4-15; Ord.O2015-029, passed 5-20-15; Ord. O2018-035,
passed 8-1-18)



   (G)   1999 Amendments.



      (1)   That certain document known as "The 1999 Amendments to
the Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies of which are on file
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, is hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section.



      (2)   Except as provided in the following subsections, the
provisions of this section are effective from and after December 31, 1999.



      (3)   The following provisions of the public record adopted
herein are retroactive to January 1, 1999:



         (a)   Subsection (b)(3) of Section 29-415;



         (b)   Subsection (c)(1)(A) of Section 29-416;



         (c)   Subsection (b)(1)(A) of Section 29-417.



      (4)   The following provisions of the public record adopted
herein are retroactive to May 5, 1999:



         (a)   Subsection (c)(10) of Section 29-450;



         (b)   Subsection (kk) of Section 29-465.



(Ord. O99-88, passed 12-1-99)



   (H)   2001 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2001
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma, Arizona," three copies of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma,
Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2002-54
of the city, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. O2002-62, passed 11-6-02)



   (I)   2002 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2002
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2003-29 of the city, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



(Ord. O2003-28, passed 6-18-03)



   (J)   2006 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2006
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2006-48 of the city, is
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in
this section.



(Ord. O2006-46, passed 7-5-06)



   (K)   2007 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2007
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2007-06 of the City of
Yuma, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. O2007-10, passed 2-21-07)



   (L)   2008 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2008
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2008-31 of the City of
Yuma, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. O2008-17, passed 6-4-08)



   (M)   2009 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2009
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, which
document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2009-68 of the City of
Yuma, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this section.



(Ord. O2009-62, passed 10-21-09)



   (N)   2010-2011 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The
2010-2011 Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of
which are on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma,
Arizona, which document was made a public record by Resolution No. R2011-28
of the City of Yuma, Arizona, is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. O2011-35, passed 10-19-11)



   (O)   2013 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2013
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, and
declared a public record by Resolution No. R2015-01, is hereby adopted by
this reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



      (1)   Section 37-485 shall be amended to read:



      “Sec. 37-485.  Wastewater Removal Services



         (a)   The tax rate shall be an amount equal to 1.7
percent (1.7%) of the gross income from the business activity upon every
person engaging or continuing in the business of providing wastewater removal
services by means of sewer lines or similar pipelines to:



            (1)   Consumers or ratepayers who reside within
the city.



            (2)   Consumers or ratepayers of this city,
whether within the city or without, to the extent that this city provides
such persons wastewater removal services, excluding consumers or ratepayers
who are residents of another city or town which levies an equivalent excise
tax upon this City for providing such wastewater removal services to such
persons.



         (b)   The tax imposed by this section shall not apply to
gross income relating to the providing of wastewater removal services from a
qualifying hospital, qualifying community health center or a qualifying
health care organization.”



      (2)   Regulation 37-270.1 shall be amended to add subsection
(d):



         “(d)   providing wastewater removal services to
consumers or ratepayers by means of sewer lines or similar pipelines.”



      (3)   Regulation 37-460.1(a) shall be amended to read:



         “(8)   food for home consumption, per Section 37-462.



         (9)   telecommunications services, per Section 37-470.



         (10)   utility services, per Section 37-480.



         (11)   Wastewater removal services, per Section
37-485.”



(Ord. O2015-006, passed 2-18-15; Ord. O2019-013, passed 3-6-19)



   (P)   Collection of Special Two Percent Tax.



      (1)   Section 37-447. Rental, leasing, and licensing for use
of real property: additional tax upon transient lodging is amended to insert
the following text:



         In addition to the taxes levied as provided in Section
37-444, there is hereby levied and shall be collected an additional tax in an
amount equal to 2% of the gross income from the business activity of any
hotel engaging or continuing within the City in the business of charging for
lodging and/or lodging space furnished to any transient. This tax rate
expires June 30, 2024.



      (2)   Section 455(a) is amended to read as follows:



         The tax rate shall be at an amount equal to 3.7% of the
gross income from the business activity upon every person engaging or
continuing in the business of preparing or serving food or beverage in a bar,
cocktail lounge, restaurant, or similar establishment where articles of food
or drink are prepared or served for consumption on or off the premises,
including also the activity of catering. Cover charges and minimum charges
must be included in the gross income of this business activity. The 3.7% is
comprised of the 1.7% privilege tax rate and the 2% special tax rate. The 2%
special tax rate expires June 30, 2024.



(Ord. O2015-03, passed 2-4-15; Ord. O2015-015, passed 3-18-15)



   (Q)   2014 Amendments.  That certain document known as "The 2014
Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma," three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, Arizona, and
declared a public record by Resolution No. R2015-014, is hereby adopted by
this reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section.



(Ord. O2015-020, passed 5-6-15)



   (R)   Supplemental Audits. That certain document known as the
“Amendments to the Tax Code of the City of Yuma for Cities and Towns in the
State Collection System Performing Supplementary Local Audits”, three
copies of which are on file in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of
Yuma, Arizona, and declared a public record by Resolution No. R2016-22 is
hereby adopted by this reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this section.



(Ord. O2016-023, passed 8-3-16)



('80 Code, § 29-2)  Penalty, see § 37-99



§ 37-99  Penalty.



   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of these amendments
to the tax code shall be guilty of a class one misdemeanor unless otherwise
specified.  Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as herein above described.



(Ord. O98-48, passed 6-3-98; Ord. O99-88, passed 12-1-99; Ord. O2006-46,
passed 7-5-06)



Chapter 38:  City Policies



Section



General Provisions



   38-01   Disposition of surplus property



   38-02   Disposition of unclaimed property in the custody of the city



   38-03   Repealed



Civil Liability and Claims Against City



   38-15   Notice of defective condition required



   38-16   Form and time limit for damage claims



   38-17   Criminal history record information



General Provisions



§ 38-01  Disposition of Surplus Property.



   (A)   The City Council finds that it would be in the public interest
to allow for the donation or sale of surplus property in its possession to
nonprofit charitable organizations, educational institutions and other
governmental agencies.



      (1)   Donation or sale of surplus property having an estimated
value of more than $2,500 shall be submitted to the City Council, in the form
of a Motion, for their consideration.



      (2)   Donation or sale of surplus property having an estimated
value of $2,500 or less may be approved by the Purchasing Agent following
established procedures pursuant to § 36-02 when such action would be of
public benefit.



   (B)   Surplus property that has not been disposed of as provided in
subsection (A) above may be disposed of through public auction, competitive
sealed bidding or other appropriate methods as may be required by state law
and the Yuma City Charter.



('80 Code, § 2-2)  (Ord. 1946, passed 7-2-80; Ord. 2047, passed 10-7-81;
Ord. O2004-64, passed 12-1-04)



§ 38-02  Disposition of Unclaimed Property in the Custody of the City.



   (A)   Custodian of property used as evidence or other property lost
or unclaimed.  All property used as evidence in any court and remaining
unclaimed after final disposition of the cause in which it was used, all
property seized by a police officer as being used unlawfully or for an
unlawful purpose, and all property coming into the hands of any city police
officer or employee of the city as lost or unclaimed shall be delivered to
the Police Department for safekeeping.  The city shall make reasonable
efforts to ascertain and contact the owner of any such aforementioned
property, money or currency regarding its disposition, except owners as
specified in subsections (C)(4) and (D) of this section.  The city will hold
such property, money or currency for a period of time as stated in A.R.S. §
12-942, or its successor, from the date it was delivered to the Police
Department and shall, if possible, notify the owner of the deadline for
making a claim.



   (B)   Recovery by owner.  If the owner appears within the statutory
time after receipt of the property by the Police Department, proves ownership
of the property, and pays all reasonable charges, the city shall restore the
property to the owner.  The city may require payment by the owner of a
reasonable charge to defray costs of storage and care of the property prior
to restoring the property to the owner.



   (C)   Recovery by finder.



      (1)   If the value of the property is $100 or more, and no
owner appears and proves ownership of the property within the statutory time,
the city shall cause notice of the property to be published at least once in
the official newspaper.  If, after seven days following the publication of
the notice, no owner appears and proves ownership of the property and the
person who found or saved the property pays the cost of the publication, and
any costs incurred in the care and storage of the property, the title shall
vest in the person who found or saved the property unless the property was
found in the course of employment by an employee of the city in which case
the property shall be disposed of pursuant to this chapter.  Title to the
property shall not vest in the person who found or saved the property unless
the costs of publication and handling are first paid to the city.



      (2)   If the reported value of the property is less than $100
and no owner appears and proves ownership of the property within the
statutory time, the title shall vest in the person who found or saved the
property, unless the property was found in the course of employment by an
employee of the city in which case the property shall be disposed of pursuant
to this chapter.



      (3)   If the owner thereof has not claimed and taken away such
property, money, or currency within the statutory time, the finder shall have
30 days within which to claim and take away the property, money or currency.



      (4)   Property, money or currency shall not be returned to a
owner or finder who is a prohibited possessor of such property, money or
currency under any federal, state or local laws unless otherwise provided for
by law.  If there is no other claimant of title to such property, money or
currency, it shall be deemed unclaimed and be disposed of pursuant to the
provisions of this section.



   (D)   Disposition if unclaimed.  If neither the owner nor finder
claims and takes away the property, money or currency within the time periods
specified herein, they shall be conclusively presumed to have made an
unconditional donation of said property, money or currency to the city; and
the initial receipt by the city of said property, money or currency into its
possession shall constitute a receipt of a donation.



   (E)   Disposition of unclaimed property.  If any property referred
to in subsection (A) of this section, except money or currency, is not
claimed and taken away within the time period specified in subsection (A) of
this section, the Police Department shall deliver a complete itemized list or
inventory of such property to the Purchasing Agent. All property, except
money or currency, not desired by any city department shall be disposed of by
the Purchasing Agent pursuant to this chapter.  Money or currency shall be
deposited in the general fund of the city.



   (F)   Exempt property.  The following property shall be exempt from
auction and disposed of as follows:



      (1)   Unlawful property and illegal contraband shall be
destroyed.



      (2)   Alcohol and alcoholic beverages, either open or in
sealed containers, shall be destroyed.



      (3)   Property that is without value in the opinion of the
Purchasing Agent shall be destroyed or discarded.



      (4)   All firearms and deadly weapons, whether operational or
not, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-105 or its successor shall be disposed of by
one of the following methods:



         (a)   The firearm may be returned to the lawful owner.



         (b)   The firearm may be converted to use by the Yuma
Police Department.



         (c)   The firearm may be transferred to other law
enforcement agencies for official law enforcement purposes.



         (d)   Firearms having historical significance may be
transferred to the appropriate museums.



         (e)   Firearms that do not have a legible serial number,
or have been illegally modified, or have been defined as illegal by federal
or state law shall be destroyed.  All other firearms shall be offered at
public bid, such public bid shall be open only to licensed firearms dealers.



         (f)   Deadly weapons, as defined in A.R.S. § 13-105.13
or its successor, which are determined to be inappropriate for offering at
public bid by the City Administrator, or his designee, shall be destroyed.



('80 Code, § 12-1)  (Ord. 2075, passed 6-16-82; Ord. O2004-64, passed
12-1-04)



§ 38-03  Repealed.



Civil Liability and Claims Against City



§ 38-15  Notice of Defective Condition Required.



   No civil action shall be maintained against the city for damages or
injuries to person or property sustained in consequence of any street,
highway, bridge, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, grading, opening, drain, or
other public facility or building being defective, out of repair, unsafe,
dangerous or obstructed, unless at least 72 hours prior to the occurrence
resulting in such damage or injuries, written notice of such defective,
unsafe, dangerous, obstructed condition of such street, highway, bridge,
culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, grading, opening, drain, sewer, or other public
facility such as parks and playgrounds, public buildings or any other city
owned property whatsoever, specifying the particular place and condition
existing, shall have been filed in the office of the public services and
there was a failure or neglect to repair, remedy or remove the defect,
danger, or obstruction within a reasonable time after the filing of such
notice.



('80 Code, § 2-3)  (Ord. 2080, passed 7-21-82)



Charter reference:



   Time limits, etc., upon claims, suits, etc., on city, see Charter Art.
VII, § 7 and Art. XIII, § 8



§ 38-16  Form and Time Limit for Damage Claims.



   All claims for damages against the city shall be in writing and under
oath, and filed and served in accordance with state law.



('80 Code, § 2-4)  (Ord. 2080, passed 7-21-82; Ord. O96-59, passed 6-19-96;
Ord. O2013-32, passed 6-19-13)



Statutory reference:



   Authorization of claim against public entity or public employee, see
A.R.S. § 12-821.01



§ 38-17  Criminal History Record Information.



   (A)   The City Council authorizes the City Administrator or his
designated representative to examine the criminal history information,
including nonconviction information, concerning any employee or candidate for
appointment to an employee position for which it is charged with the duty of
administering.



   (B)   The City Council authorizes the City Administrator or his
designated representative to examine the criminal history information,
including nonconviction information, concerning any incident which will
involve any potential or actual liability, civil or criminal, on the part of
the city or any incident which may give rise to a claim on behalf of the
city, and may furnish the information to the appropriate insurance or legal
personnel charged with the responsibility of disposing of and collecting
claims involving the city.



   (C)   The City Council authorizes the City Administrator or his
designated representative and the City Council, when acting as licensing
authority, to examine the criminal history information, including
nonconviction information, concerning any applicant for a license or permit
required under the city code or any other public law.



('80 Code, § 2-7)  (Ord. 2446, passed 4-5-89)



Chapter 39: Municipal Court



Section



General Provisions



   39-01   Purpose



   39-02   Definitions



Court Service Fees



   39-03   Case processing fees and penalty assessments



   39-04   Diversion program fee



   39-05   Arrest warrant fee



   39-06   DUI investigation fee



   39-07   Blood analysis fee



   39-08   Prosecution fee



   39-09   Defense appointment fee



   39-10   Default fee for default judgements on civil traffic
violation cases



   39-11   Dishonored check fee



   39-12   Collection fee



   39-13   Assessment and collection of fees



   39-14   Authority to waive fees



Municipal Court Judge



   39-25   Judge Pro Tempore



Court Officer



   39-30   Court Officer Training



General Provisions



§ 39-01  Purpose.




   Pursuant to the City of Yuma Charter Article III (Powers of the City)
and Article XI (Municipal Court), certain fees shall be established, assessed
and collected from persons using Municipal Court services in order to defray
the costs of various Municipal Court related services. The Municipal Court
service fees established in this chapter are reasonably calculated to
recover, on average, all or part of the costs and expenses associated with
each service provided or undertaken on behalf of the person assessed fees.





(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-02  Definitions.



   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, unless such meanings would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the chapter or the context clearly requires
otherwise.



   PROSECUTOR.  An attorney or other person authorized to act as an
attorney for the government who prosecutes a person for a criminal, civil
traffic or petty offense in the Municipal Court of the City of Yuma, Arizona.



   MUNICIPAL COURT.  The Municipal Court of the City of Yuma, Arizona as
established by City of Yuma Charter Art. XI, Sec. 1.



   MUNICIPAL JUDGE. Shall include the Presiding Judge, Municipal Judge,
Municipal Judge Pro Tempore, City Magistrate, and any other person authorized
to adjudicate matters for or on behalf of the Municipal Court of the City of
Yuma, Arizona.



   COURT OFFICER. An employee of the Yuma Police Department appointed to
serve the Municipal Court as prescribed by the Yuma City Charter with all of
the powers and duties within the City of Yuma municipal boundaries as
authorized by the Yuma City Charter, the state of Arizona, as directed or
ordered by the Presiding Judge of the Municipal Court or any Municipal Court
Judge.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99; Ord. O2017-006, passed 3-1-17)




Court Service Fees



§ 39-03  Case Processing Fees and Penalty Assessments.




   The Municipal Court shall assess each person a case processing fee of
not less than $10 for each case in which there is an adjudication adverse to
the person, including but not limited to fines, penalties, forfeitures,
sanctions and other assessments imposed against the person by the Municipal
Court.  In addition to the case processing fee, there shall be imposed on
such fee a penalty assessment in an amount equal to the amounts required to
be collected pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 12-116.01, 12-116.02 and 16-954 or as
later may be superceded, and other statutes which may be added or revised by
the Arizona Legislature to include surcharges.





(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99; Ord. O2002-32, passed 6-19-02)




§ 39-04  Diversion Program Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall collect a case diversion fee of an amount not
less than $50 to be established by the Municipal Court. The case diversion
fee shall apply to court-authorized diversion programs in which a person
charged with any criminal, civil or petty offense is not prosecuted on the
charge based upon successful completion of an authorized diversion program,
including authorized defensive driving courses. Payment of the fee shall be
remitted to the Municipal Court through the established diversion program.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-05  Arrest Warrant Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person an arrest warrant fee in
the amount of $50 upon issuing an arrest warrant for the person's failure to
pay a fine, appear before the Municipal Court, or abide by an order of the
Municipal Court. This fee shall be added to the sum or sums set forth in the
arrest warrant.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-06  DUI Investigation Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person a DUI investigation fee in
the amount of $50 for costs incurred by the Yuma Police Department in
investigating the person as suspected of driving or in actual physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any
drug, vapor releasing substance, or any combination thereof as proscribed by
law (the "DUI investigation") in each case in which there is an adjudication
adverse to the person of a charge related to the results of the DUI
investigation.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-07  Blood Analysis Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person a blood analysis fee in an
amount up to $50 based upon the actual costs incurred by the Yuma Police
Department in obtaining a blood analysis of the person in each case in which
there is an adjudication adverse to the person of a charge related to the
results of a blood analysis.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-08  Prosecution Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person prosecuted by a prosecutor
in which an adjudication of guilt is entered a prosecution fee not less than
$100 for each case based upon a criminal offense and not less than $50 for
each case based upon a civil traffic or petty offense. The prosecution fee
for each case prosecuted by a prosecutor in which a deferred prosecution is
entered shall be not less than $100 for each case based upon a criminal
offense and not less than $50 for each case based upon a civil traffic or
petty offense. In a case in which there is an adjudication of guilt or
deferred prosecution of a criminal offense, as well as of either a civil
traffic or petty offense, the prosecution fee for criminal offenses shall
apply.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person prosecuted by a prosecutor
a prosecution fee of not less than $25 for each case dismissed because the
complainant or alleged victim either requests that the case be dismissed or
fails to assist with prosecution of the case, and,



   (A)   The relationship between the complainant or alleged victim and
the person is one of marriage or former marriage or of persons of the
opposite sex residing or having resided in the same household;



   (B)   The complainant or alleged victim and the person have a child
in common;



   (C)   The complainant or alleged victim or the person is pregnant by
the other party; or



   (D)   The complainant or alleged victim is related to the person or
the person's spouse by blood as a parent, grandparent, child, grandchild,
brother or sister or by marriage as a parent-in-law, grandparent-in-law,
step-child, step-grandchild, brother-in-law or sister-in-law.



   For all cases, the amount of the prosecution fee in excess of those
minimum fees established by this section shall be reasonably based upon
various factors including but not limited to the nature, complexity and
seriousness of the charges and any injury, potential injury and amount of
money, loss, or damage at issue.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-09  Defense Appointment Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person a defense appointment fee
in a reasonable amount, not less than $240, for each case in which the person
not indigent or otherwise entitled to a waiver of fee in this Chapter
receives the services of a court appointed defense attorney.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-10  Default Fee for Default Judgments on Civil Traffic Violation Cases.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person a default fee in the
amount not less than $25 for each default judgment entered in a civil traffic
violation case based upon the person's failure to appear, unless such default
judgment is set aside under Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure in Civil
Traffic Violation Cases.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99; Ord. O2002-32, passed 6-19-02)




§ 39-11  Dishonored Check Fee.



   The Municipal Court shall assess each person a service fee of an amount
not less than $25 for each dishonored check or bank draft tendered by or on
behalf of such person to the Yuma Municipal Court.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-12  Collection Fee.



   A person who defaults in his or her obligation for the payment of
monies owed or due to the Municipal Court including, but not limited to,
restitution, fines, sanctions, assessments, penalties, bonds, costs and fees,
is liable for all costs of collection, including any attorney fees, court
costs, costs or charges related to garnishment, attachment, levy setoff or
other collection from private or public persons or entities, and any fees and
charges by a collection agency engaged by the Municipal Court or City of Yuma
to collect and enforce such payment. The attorney's fees and costs and
charges incurred by the Municipal Court and City of Yuma shall be added to
the sum or sums due from and chargeable against the person.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-13  Assessment and Collection of Fees.



   The Municipal Court shall assess and collect fees as provided for in
this chapter. Fees assessed against a person constitute a debt of the person
and may be collected by the City of Yuma. In addition to any other remedies
which will be allowed by law, the City Attorney is authorized to institute
any appropriate civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery
of the fee(s) referred to in this chapter.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




§ 39-14  Authority to Waive Fees.



   The Municipal Judge shall be authorized to waive all or part of the
fees set forth in this Chapter when, in the Municipal Judge's opinion, such
waiver would be in the interest of justice. A finding that the person is
indigent and has no anticipated future source of funds from which the fee(s)
may be paid would support waiver of all or part of the fees in the interest
of justice.




(Ord. O99-90, passed 12-15-99)




Municipal Court Judge



§ 39-25  Judge Pro Tempore.



   (A)   City of Yuma Judges Pro Tempore shall be appointed by the City
Council and hold office for a term of three years, unless sooner removed by
the Presiding Municipal Judge.



   (B)   Any Municipal Court Judge Pro Tempore appointed prior to
October 1, 2016, who has not served as a Municipal Court Judge Pro Tempore
for three years, will continue in their current appointment for a term of
three years from the effective date of their appointment.



   (C)   Any Municipal Court Judge Pro Tempore appointed prior to
October 1, 2016, who has served a term longer than three years, will have
their current appointment expire December 31, 2016.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prevent the
reappointment of any Municipal Court Judge Pro Tempore if the City Council
choose to do so.



   (E)   The City Council may reappoint a person who was previously
appointed as a Municipal Court Judge Pro Tempore.



   (F)   A majority vote of all the members constituting the City
Council shall be required for all appointments to Municipal Court Judge Pro
Tempore.




(Ord. 2016-031, passed 10-19-16)




Court Officer



§ 39-30  Court Officer Training.



   The Municipal Court Presiding Judge and Chief of Yuma Police shall
develop a mandatory course of training for all Court Officers which shall
include recurrent training. All Court Officers shall attend such training and
records shall be maintained documenting the training. Such training shall be
no less than the training described by A.R.S. § 22-137(E) for Arizona
constables.




(Ord. O2017-006, passed 3-1-17)




Title 5:  Beautification and Fine Arts



   Chapter



      50.   Commissions



Chapter 50:  Commissions



Section



Parks, Arts, and Recreation Commission



   50-01   Creation of Parks, Arts, and Recreation Commission



   50-02   Membership and terms of office



   50-03   Compensation of Commission members



   50-04   Organization, rules and records



   50-05   Meetings



   50-06   Functions of the Commission



   50-07   Assigning additional support



Clean and Beautiful Commission



   50-20   Creation



   50-21   Membership and terms of office



   50-22   Compensation



   50-23   Organization, rules and records



   50-24   Meetings



   50-25   Duties



   50-26   Functions of Commission



Parks, Arts, and Recreation Commission Commission



§ 50-01  Creation of Parks, Arts, and Recreation Commission .



   There is hereby established a City of Yuma Parks, Arts, and Recreation
Commission (PARC).



(Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11)



Charter reference:



   Boards and commissions, see Charter Art. IX, § 1



§ 50-02  Membership and Terms of Office.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of not more than 11 voting
members appointed by the City Council, of which seven will be members of the
community and no more than four may be high school students. For the initial
term of community members serving on the Commission, four members shall be
appointed for a term of two years and three members shall be appointed for a
term of five years to establish staggered terms. Thereafter, all members
shall be appointed for a term of five years. All terms shall end on December
31. Terms of high school student members shall be the duration of school year
in which each is appointed.



   (B)   The City Council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms
of any members of the Commission.



   (C)   No member may be appointed to more than two consecutive terms,
full or partial.



   (D)   Members of the Commission may be removed by a majority vote of
the City Council.



(Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11)



§ 50-03  Compensation of Commission Members.



   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



(Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11)



§ 50-04  Organization, Rules and Records.



   Within 30 days after initial appointment of the Commission by the City
Council, the Commission shall meet for the purpose of organization.  At that
meeting, the Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from
among its members.  The term of the chairperson shall be one year with
eligibility for re-election.  Commission members may not serve more than two
consecutive terms as chairperson.  The Commission shall adopt rules for the
transactions of business, and shall keep records of its discussions,
findings, and recommendations.



((Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11)



§ 50-05  Meetings.



   (A)   The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting per
month, which shall at all times be open to the public.  The time and place
of said meeting shall be posted in accordance with applicable Arizona State
Statutes.  There shall be no meeting the month of July.



   (B)   A quorum consisting of a minimum of four City Council
appointed voting members shall be required to conduct business.



   (C)   If a member is absent for four meetings of all the meetings
held within a consecutive 12-month period, excused or unexcused, that member
shall be deemed to have vacated the membership and may be replaced by the
City Council.



(Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11)



§ 50-06  Functions of the Commission.



   The functions of the Commission shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:



   (A)   Acting in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City
Administrator, and the Director of Parks and Recreation concerning matters
affecting the planning and development of the city's parks, arts, and
recreation programs and systems.



   (B)   Acting as supportive liaison between the city government and
the residents of the City of Yuma on subjects including, but not limited to,
capital improvement projects, bond issues, system improvements, Parks and
Recreation Department practices, and development of city parks, arts, and
recreation policies and procedures.



   (C)   Serving as a catalyst and advocate for all matters relating to
the city's parks, arts, and  recreation facilities, programs, and
initiatives.



   (D)   Establishing criteria for recommending award of city funds.
Developing a peer review  process to review requests for city funding and
recommending to the City Council distribution of city funds. Award of city
funds must be approved by City Council.



   (E)   Appointing ad hoc committees as needed to support specific
projects or areas of interest within the Parks and Recreation Department.



   (F)   Recommending legislation that will enhance the city's parks,
arts, and recreation  programs and systems.



   (G)   Promoting activities and community collaboration relating to
parks, arts, and recreation.



   (H)   Identifying grant opportunities, making recommendations, and
reviewing city sponsored grant applications to federal, state, or private
agencies for parks, arts, and recreation purposes.



   (I)   Receiving, and making recommendations on acceptance of
tangible gifts to the city pertaining to art, equipment, or supplies as
deemed necessary.



   (J)   Acting in an advisory capacity to City Council, City
Administrator, and the Director of Parks and Recreation on matters concerning
art in public places. Through vision, leadership and service, Commissioners
will work in an advisory capacity, focusing on the integration of the highest
quality of public art in public places.



   (K)   Acting in an advisory capacity to the City Council, City
Administrator, and the Director of Parks and Recreation the Commission will:



      (1)   Review and advise in matters affecting the planning,
development, and management of the community’s trees.



      (2)   Be a supportive liaison between the city government and
the residents of the city on subjects including the establishment,
management, and protection of community trees.



      (3)   Recommend rules and regulations for the development,
protection, and management of community trees.



      (4)   Assist in the planning and coordination of an annual
Arbor Day event.



(Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11; Ord. O2018-041, passed 10-17-18)



§ 50-07  Assigning Additional Support.



   The City Administrator shall assign such city staff as the
Administrator deems appropriate to support the Commission.



(Ord. O2011-21, passed 6-15-11)



Clean and Beautiful Commission



§ 50-20  Creation.



   There is hereby established a City of Yuma “Clean and Beautiful
Commission.”  The Commission shall consist of seven voting members who
shall meet and perform the duties as hereinafter provided.



('80 Code, § 2-141)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95; Ord. O97-40, passed
6-18-97)



§ 50-21  Membership and Terms of Office.



   (A)   The Commission shall consist of seven voting members appointed
by the City Council.



   (B)   On the initial Commission, three members shall be appointed
for a term of two years and four members shall be appointed for a term of
three years to establish staggered terms.  Thereafter, all members shall be
appointed for a term of five years.  Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will
expire on December 31 of the term expiration year.



   (C)   The City Administrator or the Administrator's designee shall
be an ex officio member of the Commission.  The member shall have no voting
privileges.



   (D)   The City Administrator shall be responsible for staff support
of the Clean and Beautiful Commission.



   (E)   The City Council shall fill vacancies for the unexpired terms
of any of the members of the Commission.



   (F)   Members of the Commission may be removed by a majority vote of
the City Council.



   (G)   A member's term in office shall commence with the first
regular Commission meeting following appointment, and terminate with the
regular Commission meeting at which the successor takes office.



('80 Code, § 2-142)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95; Ord. O97-40, passed
6-18-97; Ord. O2010-66, passed 1-5-11; Ord. O2018-43, passed 11-21-18)



§ 50-22  Compensation.



   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.



('80 Code, § 2-143)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95)



§ 50-23  Organization, Rules and Records.



   Within 30 days after initial appointment of the Commission by the City
Council, the Commission shall meet for the purpose of organization.  At that
meeting, the Commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from
among its members.  The term of the chairperson shall be one year with
eligibility for reelection.  Commission members may not serve more than two
consecutive terms as chairperson.  The city ex officio representative shall
not be eligible for the chair.  The Commission shall adopt rules for the
transactions of business and shall keep records of its discussions, findings,
and recommendations.



('80 Code, § 2-144)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95)



§ 50-24  Meetings.



   (A)   (1)   The Commission shall hold at least one regular
meeting per month, which shall at all times be open to the public, the time
and place of said meeting shall be posted in accordance with the applicable
Arizona State Statutes.



      (2)   A quorum consisting of a minimum of four voting members
shall be required to conduct business.



   (B)   If a member is absent for four meetings within a 12-month
period, excused or unexcused, that member may be replaced by the City Council.



('80 Code, § 2-145)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95)



§ 50-25  Duties.



   The duties of the Commission shall be to:



   (A)   Initiate, develop, promote, and assist in the implementation
of community beautification.



   (B)   Promote, cooperate with and coordinate activities of
individuals, agencies and public or private groups and organizations whose
plans, activities, and programs impact on the appearance of the city.



   (C)   Prepare a five-year plan with both general and specific
proposals, for improving the appearance of the city.  The five-year plan
shall be used as a guideline for future programs.  Said plan shall be
presented to the City Council prior to April 1 of each year.



   (D)   Develop and present to City Council an annual plan outlining
the Commission's program recommendations for the upcoming fiscal year.  Said
plan shall be presented to City Council prior to April 1 of each year.



   (E)   The proposals may include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Establishment of aesthetic goals and standards for
public and private open spaces, public and private buildings, and projects,
and streets and thoroughfares.



      (2)   Sponsorship of beautification days and lean-up projects
in coordination with citizens, business, schools and local organizations.



      (3)   Promotions and competitions to recognize businesses and
private citizens that make noteworthy improvements in the appearance of their
property.



      (4)   Provision of appropriate awards to commercial and
residential properties who show noteworthy improvement in their property or
consistently maintain their property at exceptional levels.



      (5)   Contacts and discussions with citizen groups, business
organizations, and individuals to encourage cooperative efforts to improve
the city's appearance.



   (F)   Perform any additional duties as determined by the City
Council related to beautification activities.



('80 Code, § 2-146)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95)



§ 50-26  Functions of Commission.



   The City Administrator shall assign such city staff as the
administrator deems appropriate to support the Commission.



('80 Code, § 2-147)  (Ord. O95-055, passed 9-20-95)



Title 7:  Business Regulations



   Chapter



      70.   General Business Regulations



      71.   Alcoholic Beverages



      72.   Amusements



      73.   Commercial Sound Trucks



      74.   Secondhand Dealers



      75.   Sexually Oriented Businesses



      76.   Taxicabs



Chapter 70:  General Business Regulations



Section



Occupation License Tax



   70-01   License required



   70-02   Enforcement



   70-03   Conviction no bar to payment of tax



   70-04   Definitions



   70-05   Tax schedule



   70-06   Professionals and professional services defined



   70-07   Unspecified businesses, trades, and the like



   70-08   When tax due and payable



   70-09   Manner of payment



   70-10   Amount of tax restricted



   70-11   Bankrupt stocks



   70-12   Tax a debt; collection



   70-13   Separate businesses and premises



   70-14   Issuance; contents



   70-15   Quarterly report of gross receipts



   70-16   Monthly report to Council



   70-17   Transfer



   70-18   Display



   70-19   Duration restricted



   70-20   Door to door solicitation



   70-21   Swap meets, fairgrounds, farmers markets, and street fairs



   70-22   Zoning



Boards and Commissions



   70-30   Industrial Development Authority



   70-31   Municipal Properties Corporation



   70-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to license for purposes of revenue, regulation, see
Charter Art. III, § 9



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to levy occupational license fee, issue license, see
A.R.S. §§ 9-240(B)(18) and 9-240(B)(19)



Occupation License Tax



§ 70-01  License Required.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as principal or
agent, clerk or employee, either for himself or another person, or for any
body corporate, or as an officer of any corporation or as a member of any
firm or copartnership, or nonprofit organization or otherwise, to practice,
commence, transact, or carry on any trade, calling, occupation or business in
this subchapter specified without first having procured a license from the
city to do so. It shall be considered a separate violation of this subchapter
for each and every day that such business is practiced, transacted or carried
on without such a license. The granting of a license is not to be deemed as
evidence or proof that the licensee has complied with the provisions of this
subchapter, nor shall it be a defense to prosecution by the city for any
violation of this subchapter.



   (B)   Organizations claiming nonprofit status must secure a license
to do business within the city.  Excluded from this requirement are
nonprofit resident businesses whose only business activity is to conduct
fund-raising sales of cookies, candy, raffle tickets or other items in
conformance with § 70-20(H). Nonprofit organizations may be required to
provide documentary evidence supporting their claim of status.



   (C)   Resident businesses seeking secondary location licenses and
itinerant businesses will be required to provide written permission from the
owner of the commercial property upon which the itinerant or secondary
location license holder will conduct business.



('80 Code, § 16-16)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36; Ord. O99-44, passed
8-18-99)  Penalty, see § 70-99



§ 70-02  Enforcement.



   The Chief of Police of the city is hereby required to enforce each and
every provision of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 16-17)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-03  Conviction No Bar to Payment of Tax.



   The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade,
calling, business or occupation without a license shall not excuse or exempt
such person from the payment of any license tax due or unpaid at the time of
such conviction.



('80 Code, § 16-19)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-04  Definitions.



   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the words RETAIL MERCHANT
or WHOLESALE MERCHANT shall mean and include all persons who, at a fixed
place of business, sell goods, wares or merchandise at retail or wholesale or
on commission, consignment or otherwise.



   (B)    MERCHANTS shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Automobile dealers (new or secondhand).



      (2)   Automobile accessories.



      (3)   Art goods and curios.



      (4)   Athletic goods.



      (5)   Bakeries (retail or wholesale).



      (6)   Books, magazines and stationery.



      (7)   Butcher shop.



      (8)   Billiards, pool or bowling alleys.



      (9)   Boarding houses.



      (10)   Cafes.



      (11)   Clothing and furnishings.



      (12)   Confectioneries.



      (13)   Creameries.



      (14)   Cleaning and pressing.



      (15)   Drug stores.



      (16)   Department stores and dry goods.



      (17)   Farmers market proprietor or vendor.



      (18)   Florists.



      (19)   Fuel dealers.



      (20)   Furniture dealers.



      (21)   Grocery stores.



      (22)   Glass and awning.



      (23)   Garage (repair or storage).



      (24)   Hardware stores.



      (25)   Haberdashers.



      (26)   Implement stores.



      (27)   Job printing.



      (28)   Junk dealers.



      (29)   Jewelry stores.



      (30)   Lumber yards.



      (31)   Ladies ready to wear.



      (32)   Laundries (power or steam).



      (33)   Lunch counters.



      (34)   Milk distributors.



      (35)   Machine or repair shop.



      (36)   Motion pictures.



      (37)   Notions.



      (38)   Newspaper publishers.



      (39)   Office supplies and equipment.



      (40)   Plumbing supplies.



      (41)   Restaurants.



      (42)   Sign or car painting.



      (43)   Shoe stores.



      (44)   Shoe repair shops.



      (45)   Seed, hay and grain dealers.



      (46)   Service stations.



      (47)   Secondhand stores.



      (47)   Secondhand stores.



      (48)   Street fair proprietors or vendors.



      (49)   Tire dealers.



      (50)   Wholesale merchants.



      (51)   Water distributors.




   (C)   RESIDENT BUSINESS.  A resident business or resident merchant
is defined as any person, whether owner or otherwise, who engages in a
regular business of selling and delivering goods or providing services from a
fixed place of business within the city.





   (D)   NONRESIDENT BUSINESS.  A nonresident business is defined as
any person whether owner or otherwise who, from a fixed place of business
outside the city, consummates a business transaction initiated at that
outside fixed location by delivery of goods or provision of services to a
customer's location within the city.





   (E)   ITINERANT BUSINESS.  An itinerant business is defined as any
person whether owner or otherwise, whether a resident of the city or not, who
engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods or providing
services within the city, and who, lacking a fixed location within the city
and in furtherance of such purpose, uses any street or other place within the
city, for the temporary exhibition and sale of such goods or provision of
services, either privately or at public auction. The person so engaged shall
not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by
reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a
part of or in the name of any such local dealer, trader, merchant or
auctioneer.





   (F)   SECONDARY LOCATION LICENSE.  A secondary location license is
defined as a temporary license of a sales location for a resident business.





   (G)   CITY LICENSE TAX COLLECTOR.  As used in this subchapter, CITY
LICENSE TAX COLLECTOR shall mean the Finance Director, his or her successor,
or other city designee, charged with the administration of this subchapter.




   (H)   GARAGE SALES.  A garage sale is the sale on residential
property of goods typically associated with residential use, conducted by a
resident of the property.



('80 Code, § 16-20)  (Ord. 729, passed 10-15-57; Ord. O99-44, passed 8-
18-99; Ord. O2012-25, passed 11-21-12; Ord. O2013-41, passed 8-7-13)



§ 70-05  Tax Schedule.




   (A)   Retail merchants.  All resident business and nonresident
business merchants, retail or wholesale, shall pay an occupational license
tax on their gross receipts quarterly in the following amounts:




 


Where Gross Receipts Within the City Are:

 
Amount


Less than $5,000
 
$10


$5,000 but less than $10,000
 
$15


$10,000 but less than $12,000
 
$20


$12,000 but less than $15,000
 
$25


$15,000 or more
 
$30









   (B)   Non-retail merchants. Any person, not otherwise classified in
division (A) above, shall pay the following occupational license tax as
indicated:




 


Non-Retail Merchant

 
License Tax




Payable daily:
 


Circus or ring shows, menageries or other like shows
 
$60


Circus parades
 
$25


Dance halls, public
 
$2.50


Exhibition promoter
 


   Per day
 
$10


   Plus, for each participating itinerant merchant, per day
 
$1


Itinerant business per person selling
 
$20


Motorteria or traveling store
 
$5


Secondary location license (per location)
 
$20


Street ballyhoos or advertising (by means of vehicles containing amplifiers
or loudspeakers) on the public streets)
 
$5









 


Non-Retail Merchant

 
License Tax




Payable daily:
 


Tent shows, tent theaters
 
$5


Theatrical road shows
 
$5


Payable weekly:
 



Carnival company



                showing 5 exhibits or less



                each additional exhibit

 




$1,050



$15



Payable monthly:
 


Merry-go-round
 
$1,000


Payable quarterly:
 


Abstract companies
 
$10


Advertising agencies
 
$10


Agents
 
$10


Auctioneers
 
$20


Auto court
 


   Five rooms or less
 
$10


   Each additional room
 
$2


Auto freight
 


   Local transfer
 
$20


   Outside
 
$30


Auto stage or bus
 
$30


Automobile for hire
 


   Driverless
 
$10


   Passenger
 
$20


Banks
 
$50


Blacksmith, welding and repair
 
$10









 


Non-Retail Merchant

 
License Tax




Bond and stock salesmen
 
$20


Brokers
 
$20


Building contractors
 
$20


Contractors, other than building
 
$20


Electric light companies (no merchandise)
 
$150


Farmers market proprietor (no retail sales)
 
$80


Finance and small loan
 
$20


Freight forwarders
 
$10


Games (test of skill or strength, knife rack, cane rack, ring throwing, ball
or marble machine, striking device or similar devices), each machine
 
$5


Gas companies
 
$150


Hotels, rooming, lodging or apartment houses
 


   5 rooms but less than 15 rooms
 
$10


   15 but less than 25 rooms
 
$16


   25 but less than 50 rooms
 
$20


   50 rooms or more
 
$30


Hucksters
 
$20


Ice cream manufacturing
 
$20


Ice dealers
 
$30


Ice Manufacturers
 


   Except where conducted with cold storage
 
$30


   Ice manufacturing and cold storage
 
$40


Libraries (rental)
 
$10


Manufacturer of soda or carbonated water
 
$20


Parking lots
 
$10


Pawnbrokers
 
$30


Peddlers
 
$20


Petroleum products
 
$30









 


Non-Retail Merchant

 
License Tax




Penny arcades
 
$20


Photographers
 
$10


Professionals and professional services
 
$10


Radio broadcasting
 
$10


Real estate brokers
 
$10


Sewing machine agencies
 
$10


Shooting galleries
 
$20


Skating rinks
 
$50


Street fair proprietor (no retail sales)
 
$80


Swap meet
 
$100


Telegraph companies (on intrastate business)
 
$15


Telephone companies (on intrastate business)
 
$15


Theaters, except motion pictures
 
$50


Tin shops
 
$10


Undertakers
 
$20


Vending machines (merchandise and weighting), per machine
 
$2


Warehouse, storage
 
$20


Water companies or plants
 
$150


Water distributors
 
$10


Unspecified, when not in any of the above classifications
 
$20


Nonprofit organization:
 


   Nonprofit resident businesses on their own developed property
 
$0


   Secondary location license
 
$0 per event


   Itinerant business associated with nonprofit resident business for fund
raising purposes on nonprofit's developed property (separate license required
for itinerant)
 
$0


Nonprofit itinerant business
 
$0 per day










   (C)   Exceptions. Sales of specific products associated with
significant community holidays or events. The following events, sales
periods, and authorized products are included in this exception:





      (1)   Halloween: Sales allowed between October 15th and
November 5th inclusive.  Products authorized: Pumpkins and related Halloween
accessories. The occupation license tax is $25 per the stated period.





      (2)   Christmas: Sales allowed between November 25th and
December 25th, inclusive. Products authorized: Christmas trees. The
occupation license tax is $25 per the stated period.




      (3)   Silver Spur Rodeo: Sales allowed for seven days prior to
the start of the Silver Spur Rodeo, and, on each day of the rodeo. Products
authorized: Rodeo attire and memorabilia. The occupation license tax is $25
per the stated period.



      (4)   Consumer Fireworks: Sales allowed for 14 days prior to
the start of the New Years Eve and the Fourth of July.  The occupation
license tax is $25 per the stated period.



('80 Code, §§ 16-21 and 16-22)  (Ord. 729, passed 10-15-57; Ord. 1535,
passed 9-15-76; Ord. 2433, passed 7-6-89; Ord. 2434, passed 7-6-89; Ord.
2583, passed 9-30-92; Ord. O99-44, passed 8-18-99; O2012-25, passed 11-21-12;
Ord. O2013-41, passed 8-7-13)



§ 70-06  Professionals and Professional Services Defined.



   (A)   As used in this subchapter, PROFESSIONALS and PROFESSIONAL
SERVICES shall include, but not be limited to, any person engaged in the
practice of any of the following, or similar occupations:



      (1)   Architect.



      (2)   Attorney at law.



      (3)   Certified public accountant.



      (4)   Chiropractor.



      (5)   Dentist.



      (6)   Engineer.



      (7)   Geologist.



      (8)   Medicine.



      (9)   Naturopath.



      (10)   Optician.



      (11)   Optometrist.



      (12)   Osteopath.



      (13)   Physician.



      (14)   Podiatrist.



      (15)   Psychiatrist.



      (16)   Psychoanalyst.



      (17)   Psychologist.



      (18)   Psychotherapist.



      (19)   Veterinarian.



      (20)   Assayer.



      (21)   Private investigator.



      (22)   Property manager.



      (23)   Real estate appraiser.



      (24)   Surveyor.



      (25)   Consultant (by whatever definition).



      (26)   Stock broker.



      (27)   Dance, charm or modeling school consultant.



      (28)   Dental and/or medical technician.



      (29)   Insurance and travel agent.



      (30)   Bailsman.



      (31)   Day care center operator.



      (32)   Answering service.



      (33)   Title company.



   (B)   The omission herein of a specific professional is not to be
construed as evidencing an intent to specifically exclude such profession,
business or service from the provisions of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 16-22.1)  (Ord. 2433, passed 7-6-89)



§ 70-07  Unspecified Businesses, Trades, and the Like.



   The city license tax collector shall have the power to license any and
all trades, callings, occupations or businesses not specifically mentioned in
this subchapter, and to collect a license tax thereon.  The city license tax
collector shall investigate the applicant's business, trade, or calling, and
determine the class of such, and place such license tax upon the same as is
paid by any similar business, trade or calling.



('80 Code, § 16-23)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-08  When Tax Due and Payable.



   The daily license tax herein provided for, shall be due and payable
each day in advance; the monthly license tax herein provided for, shall be
due and payable on the first day of each month, in advance; the quarterly
license tax herein provided for shall be due and payable on the first day of
January, April, July and October of each year, in advance.



('80 Code, § 16-24)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-09  Manner of Payment.



   All taxes and license fees required by this subchapter shall be paid in
advance, in legal currency of the United States, to the city license tax
collector.



('80 Code, § 16-25)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-10  Amount of Tax Restricted.



   No greater or less amount of license tax shall be charged or received
for any license issued hereunder than is provided for in this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 16-26)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-11  Bankrupt Stocks.



   No person shall advertise, report or hold forth a sale of goods, wares
or merchandise as a bankrupt, insolvent, assignee, trustee, executor,
administrator, receiver or a closing out sale of any goods damaged by fire,
water or otherwise, unless before so doing, he or it shall have filed with
the City Clerk a surety bond in the sum of $500, payable to the city,
conditioned that the principal will faithfully conform to all provisions of
this code and ordinances of the city, then in force or thereafter adopted,
relating to bankrupt stocks.  Before engaging in such business, he or its,
shall further furnish to the city license tax collector an inventory of the
entire stock of the goods, wares or merchandise to be offered for sale, a
statement of the person and character of such sale including a statement of
the persons or firms from whom purchased and the place where such goods,
wares or merchandise were last exhibited for sale.



('80 Code, § 16-27)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36; Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



§ 70-12  Tax a Debt; Collection.



   The amount of license fee taxed against any trade, calling, business or
occupation shall be deemed a debt in favor of the city and such person so
failing to pay such license tax fee against any such trade, calling, business
or occupation.  In any action brought under the authority of the city shall
have all remedies in aid of such action, as are now provided for by law,
including attachment, garnishment and execution.



('80 Code, § 16-28)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-13  Separate Businesses and Premises.



   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment, or
separate place of business in which any trade, calling, business or
occupation is practiced, carried on, or transacted; however, when two or more
businesses or occupations are conducted at the same location, and under the
same management, and the license tax to be paid on one or more of said
businesses or occupations is based upon the gross sales thereof, the amount
of license tax shall be computed and paid under the aggregate gross amount of
sales of all such businesses under the classification “retail merchant.”



('80 Code, § 16-29)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-14  Issuance; Contents.



   It shall be the duty of the city license tax collector to prepare and
issue a license under this subchapter to every person required under this
subchapter to pay a license, and to state in each license the amount thereof,
the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person for whom issued,
the trade, calling, occupation or business licensed, and the location or
place of business thereof.



('80 Code, § 16-30)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-15  Quarterly Report of Gross Receipts.



   In all cases where the amount of the required license tax to be paid by
any person is based upon the amount of gross receipts from sales, such person
shall file with the city license tax collector each quarter, a written
statement under oath showing the total amount of gross receipts from sales
made in the preceding quarter; said statement shall be confidential and shall
not be made public and shall be used by the city license tax collector as a
guide to ascertain the amount of the license to be imposed and collected for
the next quarter succeeding that for which the said statement is made; said
statement shall not be conclusive as to the facts contained therein, but the
city license tax collector may make such investigation as he may deem
necessary to ascertain the correct amount upon which the license tax is to be
paid.  Should the business be a new business wherein no gross sales report
can be supplied the applicant shall be required to pay the amount charged for
the same or similar kind of business for a similar fixed inventory and the
rate so fixed shall continue until a full quarterly sales report can be filed.



('80 Code, § 16-31)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-16  Monthly Report to Council.



   The city license tax collector shall, on or before the first Tuesday of
each month, report to the City Council, the name of the persons licensed
during the preceding month, setting forth the amount received upon each and
shall also, as a part of the same report, set out the names of all the
persons delinquent in the payment of any license fee.



('80 Code, § 16-32)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-17  Transfer.



   No license issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
transferable or assignable.



('80 Code, § 16-33)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-18  Display.



   Every person licensed under this subchapter shall keep such license
posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of the
licensee's place of business, at all times.



('80 Code, § 16-34)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36)



§ 70-19  Duration Restricted.




   (A)   No license shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter for any period of time other than is provided herein.





   (B)   No itinerant business shall operate for more than three
consecutive days from any one location and no more than nine total days from
all locations during a calendar year. Excluded from this limitation are
businesses listed in § 70-05 (C).





   (C)   Secondary location licenses are limited to thirty total days
from all locations during a calendar year.




('80 Code, § 16-35)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36; Ord. O99-44, passed 8-18-99;
Ord. O2005-32, passed 5-4-05)



§ 70-20  Door to Door Solicitation.




   (A)   Registration required.  It shall be unlawful for any person
to engage in business as a canvasser or solicitor, calling at residences for
this purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or business of any
kind without first having registered in the City of Yuma's Customer Service
Office. When registering with that office, all prospective solicitors will be
required to provide the following information:





      (1)   The solicitor's name and home address and social
security number;





      (2)   The name, business address and telephone number of the
solicitor's employee (or if the solicitor is self employed);





      (3)   The type of business and the purpose of the expected
solicitation;





      (4)   The name, address and telephone number of a party who
would be able to locate the solicitor if the solicitor's address should
change;





      (5)   Fingerprints and photograph of the solicitor taken
within the previous six months;





      (6)   Information concerning whether the applicant has ever
been convicted of a felony under the laws of Arizona or any other state, or
federal law of the United States; and





      (7)   A licensing fee of $120.00.





   Upon completion of the registration process, the applicant will be
issued a business license authorizing such applicant to engage in a
door-to-door solicitation of willing Yuma residents. Such license shall be
carried by the solicitor upon his person, and shall state in bold-faced,
capital letters "THIS CARD DOES NOT INDICATE AN ENDORSEMENT BY THE CITY OF
YUMA OF ANY PRODUCT, GOOD OR SERVICE."  Such license shall be exhibited by
the solicitor whenever he is requested to do so by any police officer or any
person solicited. Any person attempting to engage in door-to-door
solicitations without such a license will be cited as being in violation of
this subchapter.





   (B)   Identification required.  At the time any registrant applies
for and is issued a business license allowing such person to engage in
door-to-door solicitation of residents, the registrant shall also be
presented with an official identification card which must be presented
immediately upon summoning a resident. The identification card shall include
the following information:





      (1)   The name and address of the solicitor;





      (2)   A physical description of the solicitor including
weight, height, hair color and eye color;





      (3)   A mugshot type photograph of the solicitor supplied by
applicant;





      (4)   The solicitor's employer, and





      (5)   A statement informing the resident that they are not
required to listen to or participate in the solicitation.





   In addition to presenting the identification card to a summoned
resident, the solicitor will be required to ask the resident to read the
identification card, inform the resident in clear language of the purpose of
the solicitation and the company or person he represents, and inform the
resident that the resident need not listen to or participate in the
solicitation.





   (C)   "No Solicitation" cards.  All Yuma residents wishing to
prohibit solicitors from their residences may obtain a sign from the City of
Yuma's police department or the City of Yuma's Customer Service Office. These
weatherproof cards, approximately three inches by four inches in size, shall
be exhibited upon or near the mailbox for the residence and shall bear the
words "No Solicitors Invited." In addition to the cards available from the
city, a resident may also provide their own card not less than three inches
in height which contains the same or similar notice that solicitors are not
invited or welcome. It shall be the duty of every solicitor to first look for
such a notice. Such a card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to
any solicitor that they are not welcome at that residence and should
immediately and peacefully depart. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and
shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring
the door bell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for
the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in
soliciting, in defiance of the notice exhibited at that residence.





   (D)   Residents wishing to prohibit solicitors from their
residences, but who do not wish to post the sign required in division (C) 
above, may request that the city place their address on a master address
list. This address list shall be provided to solicitors at the time of
issuance of a business license and shall serve the same purpose as the "No
Solicitation" card referred to in division (C) above.





   (E)   Time limit on soliciting. It is hereby declared to be unlawful
and shall constitute a nuisance for any person whether registered under this
subchapter or not, to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or
near any door of a residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door
or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention
of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience
with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting, prior to nine a.m. or
after nine p.m.





   (F)   Bond required. No business license shall be issued to any
party pursuant to this section until there is deposited with the Collector a
bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars per solicitor executed by a
responsible surety company, which bond shall first be approved by the
Collector. The bond shall be conditioned so that all goods, products and
services shall be as represented by the solicitor, and so that such solicitor
will refund any monies or purchase price on any goods, products or services
which are not as represented. The bond shall also be conditioned so as to
indemnify and reimburse any person dealing with the solicitor in a sum equal
to the amount of payment that the purchaser may have been induced to make
through misrepresentation as to the product, good, or service. Any person so
misled or aggrieved by the representation of any business license holder
under this division shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery
of the amount of his payment or damages suffered, or both. Nothing in this
section shall prevent a single bond from being posted to cover more than one
solicitor; however, the principal amount of the bond shall be equal to the
total amount as would be required for such a number of individual itinerant
solicitors.





   (G)   Revocation.  Any such registration may be revoked by the
mayor or chief of police because of any violation by the registrant of this
subchapter or of any other ordinance of the city, or of any state or federal
law, or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the qualifications and
character required in this subchapter for the original registration.





   (H)   Solicitation for religious or nonprofit charitable purposes
are exempt from the provisions of this section provided such solicitation is
conducted in conformity with all other provisions of this code and all state
and federal laws and provided further that any nonprofit organization working
for a charitable purpose shall have tax-exempt status granted to them by the
federal government and the state.





('80 Code, § 16-36)  (Ord. 2019, passed 6-17-81; Ord. 2024, passed 8-5-81;
Ord. O99-44, passed 8-18-99)




§ 70-21  Swap Meets, Fairgrounds, Farmers Markets, and Street Fairs.



   (A)   As used in this subchapter, SWAP MEET means a place of
commercial activity, popularly known as a swap meet or flea market, which is:



      (1)   Open to the public for the purchase of merchandise on
the premises;



      (2)   Available to the public who contract with the swap meet
proprietor to sell merchandise on the premises, whether such sellers or
vendors are in the business of vending or are making casual sales or some
combination thereof;



      (3)   Composed of 100 or more stalls, stands or spaces
allotted to vendors, at least one of whom does not occupy the same allotted
space or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily basis.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the swap meet proprietor,
and not individual vendors, to obtain the license required by this
subchapter.  Swap meet vendors are not required by this subchapter to obtain
a city business license.  A SWAP MEET PROPRIETOR is any person who rents,
sells, donates, or otherwise makes available to swap meet vendors any space
within premises owned or controlled by the proprietor for the purpose of a
swap meet sale.  The swap meet proprietor shall make available to the city,
upon reasonable notice, records containing names, addresses, and Arizona
transaction privilege numbers of all vendors.




   (C)   FAIRGROUNDS.  As used in this subchapter, shall refer to a
county fair pursuant to A.R.S. § 11-258 or successors.  The fairground
proprietor shall send to the city, on a quarterly basis, a list containing
the names, addresses, and Arizona Transaction Privilege numbers of all
vendors.




   (D)   As used in this subchapter, FARMERS MARKET means a place of
commercial activity that consists of the following elements:



      (1)   Open to the public for the purchase of fresh grown
products, in an open-air setting, or in an enclosed building or structure;



      (2)   Composed of three or more booths, stalls, stands or
spaces allotted to vendors, none of whom occupy the same booth, stall, stand
or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily basis;



      (3)   Primary merchandise for sale is dispensed from
individual booths and consists of fresh fruits and vegetables, food products
for home consumption and flowers;



      (4)   As an auxiliary use, the market may allow the sale of
secondary items such as food prepared and intended for on premise
consumption, arts and crafts (not including second hand goods), and jewelry;
however the booths for such vendors shall not comprise more than 20% of the
total farmers market in number of booths or square footage.



   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the farmers market vendors
and the farmers market proprietor to obtain the appropriate business licenses
required by this subchapter. A FARMERS MARKET PROPRIETOR is any person who
rents, sells, donates, or otherwise makes available to farmers market vendors
any space within premises owned, controlled or leased by the proprietor for
the purpose of a farmers market. The farmers market proprietor shall obtain a
City of Yuma business license with a specific address and location of the
farmers market. A FARMERS MARKET VENDOR is defined as a retail merchant
engaged in the retail sales of products approved for sale at a farmers market
under § 154-01.07. All farmers market vendors are required to have a State
of Arizona Transaction Privilege Tax (TPT) number in addition to a City of
Yuma business license specific to the farmers market location.



   (F)   As used in this chapter, STREET FAIR means a place of
commercial activity that consists of the following elements:



      (1)   Open to the public for the purchase of products, in an
open-air setting, on certain public streets as permitted by the Zoning Code;



      (2)   Composed of three or more booths, stalls, stands or
spaces allotted to vendors, none of whom occupy the same booth, stall, stand
or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily basis.



   (G)   It shall be the responsibility of the street fair vendors and
street fair proprietor to obtain the appropriate business licenses required
by this subchapter.  A STREET FAIR PROPRIETOR is any person who rents,
sells, donates, or otherwise makes available to street fair vendors any space
within premises owned, controlled or leased by the proprietor for the
purposes of a street fair.  The street fair proprietor shall obtain a City
of Yuma business license with a specific address and location of the street
fair.  A STREET FAIR VENDOR is defined as a retail merchant engaged in the
retail sale of products approved for sale at a street fair under §
154-01.07.  All street fair vendors are required to have a State of Arizona
Transaction Privilege Tax (TPT) number in addition to a City of Yuma business
license specific to the street fair location.



('80 Code, § 16-37)  (Ord. 2583, passed 9-30-92; Ord. O99-44, passed 8-
18-99; O2012-25, passed 11-21-12; Ord. O2013-41, passed 8-7-13)



§ 70-22  Zoning.




   (A)   Itinerants. Itinerant businesses as defined in § 70-04 (E),
shall be conducted only in those zoning districts within which that type of
business activity is permitted according to the City of Yuma Zoning Code, and
only in conjunction with an established resident business.





   (B)   Garage sales. Garage sales are limited to three consecutive
days conducted no more frequently than three times per year per residential
location, as defined in Chapter 154 of the Yuma City Code. Sales of this
nature occurring beyond these limits will be considered itinerant businesses
and are prohibited.





(Ord. O99-44, passed 8-18-99)




Boards and Commissions



§ 70-30  Industrial Development Authority.



   (A)   The name of this corporation shall be the Industrial
Development Authority of the City of Yuma, Arizona, and the locations of its
principal place of business shall be in the City of Yuma, Arizona, but the
corporation may have offices within the State of Arizona as shall be fixed by
the Board of Directors from time to time.



   (B)   The incorporators herein received permission to organize the
corporation pursuant to Resolution 2301 duly adopted and approved by the
Mayor and Council of the City of Yuma at a regular meeting of the governing
body held April 20, 1983.



   (C)   This corporation shall perform essential governmental
functions and its activities shall serve public purposes and shall be in
furtherance of the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the greater
Yuma area.  The initial purposes for which this corporation is formed are:



      (1)   In the manner and to the extent provided in A.R.S. §§
35-701 et seq., as amended, to promote industry and develop trade in the
greater Yuma area, to stimulate and encourage the production, development and
use of agricultural products and natural resources, to assist, financially
and otherwise, in the rehabilitation, expansion and development of all kinds
of businesses and industries which will promote and assure job opportunities
and assure an improved standard of living and an increase in prosperity and
health, and to promote the construction, improvement and equipping of
residential real property for dwelling units.  As a matter of policy, the
Authority places particular emphasis on projects designed to enhance,
revitalize and rehabilitate the social, cultural, economic, historical and
physical resources of the old downtown Yuma area.



      (2)   To acquire, own, construct, lease, sell and dispose of
all kinds of properties.



      (3)   To do any and all things and to exercise any and all
powers as provided by A.R.S. §§ 35-701 et seq., and A.R.S. § 10-302, as
such provisions may be amended from time to time.



   (D)   This corporation is a political subdivision of the State of
Arizona and shall have all the powers granted to such corporation by law,
together with all powers incidental thereto or necessary for the performance
thereof, including, without limitation, the powers provided in A.R.S. §§
35-701 et seq., A.R.S. §§ 35-801 et seq., and A.R.S. § 10-302, as such
provisions may be amended from time to time.



   (E)   The corporation shall be a nonprofit corporation and no part
of its net earnings remaining after payment of its expenses shall inure to
the benefit of any individual, firm or corporation, except such reasonable
compensation as may properly be paid for services rendered or property or
materials furnished to the corporation, and no dividends or other pecuniary
profits may be declared for the benefit of any director or other individual,
and no director or officer shall be entitled to participate for profit in any
transaction with the corporation except as hereinabove provided.  No
substantial part of the activities of this corporation shall be devoted to
carrying on propaganda for or otherwise attempting to influence legislation
and this corporation shall not participate in or intervene in any political
campaign on behalf of any candidate for public office.



   (F)   (1)   The corporation shall have a board of directors in
which all powers of the corporation shall be vested and which shall consist
of any number of directors, not less than three nor more than nine, all of
whom shall be qualified as provided by law.  The directors shall serve as
such without compensation except that they shall be reimbursed for their
actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties in the same
manner as is provided for other state officers.  No director shall be an
officer or employee of the city.  The directors shall be elected by the
Mayor and Council of the city, and they shall be so elected that they shall
hold office for overlapping terms.  At the time of the election of the first
board of directors, the Mayor and Council of the city shall divide the
directors into three groups containing as nearly equal whole numbers as
possible.  The first term of the directors included in the first group shall
be two years, the first term of the directors included in the second group
shall be four years, and the first term of the directors included in the
third group shall be six years, and thereafter the terms of all directors
shall be six years.



      (2)   The affairs of the corporation shall be conducted by the
board of directors and such officers, including a president, vice-president,
treasurer, secretary, and such other officer as the board of directors shall
elect or appoint.  The board of directors shall have the power to adopt,
amend and rescind bylaws and other rules and regulations and to appoint an
executive committee with such powers as the board may, by resolution,
delegate to such committee.



      (3)   Meetings held by the Board of Directors for any purpose
whatsoever shall be open to the public.



   (G)   The city shall not, in any event, be liable for the payment of
the principal of, or interest in, any bonds of the corporation, or for the
performance of any pledge, mortgage, obligation or agreement of any kind
whatsoever which may be undertaken by the corporation, and none of the bonds
of the corporation or any of its agreements or obligations shall be construed
to constitute an indebtedness or obligation of the city, or the State of
Arizona within the meaning of any constitutional or statutory provision
whatsoever.



   (H)   The Articles of Incorporation may at any time, and from time
to time, be amended to make any changes therein and add any provisions
thereto which might have been included in the Articles of Incorporation in
the first instance, provided that the members of, the board of directors of
the corporation first shall file with the Mayor and Council of the city an
application in writing seeking permission to amend the Articles of
Incorporation, specifying in such application the amendment proposed to be
made.  The Mayor and Council of the city shall consider such application
and, if it finds and determines it is wise, expedient, necessary or advisable
that the proposed amendments be made, authorizes the same to be made, and
approves the form of the proposed amendment, then the persons making such
application shall proceed to amend the Articles in accordance with the
provisions of Title 10 of the Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended.



   (I)   The time of the commencement of this corporation shall be the
day these Articles of Incorporation are marked “filed” by the Arizona
Corporation Commission.  The duration of the existence of the corporation
shall be perpetual unless it shall be sooner dissolved pursuant to A.R.S. §
35-752, as amended, in which case the property of the corporation remaining
after payment of its debts and charges shall be distributed to and vest in
the city.



   (J)   The private property of the officers and directors of this
corporation shall be exempt from liability for its debts and obligations.



   (K)   The affairs of this corporation shall be conducted on a fiscal
year basis.  The fiscal year for the corporation shall end on the 30th day
of June of each year.



   (L)   When the board of directors of the corporations by resolution,
shall determine that the purposes for which the corporation was formed have
been substantially complied with and that all bonds theretofore issued and
all obligations theretofore incurred by the corporation have been fully paid,
the members of the board of directors of the corporation shall thereupon
dissolve the corporation in accordance with the provisions of Title 10 of the
Arizona Revised Statutes, as amended.



(Res. 2301, passed 4-20-83)



§ 70-31  Municipal Properties Corporation.



   (A)   That the formation of the City of Yuma Municipal Property
Corporation, a nonprofit Arizona corporation, as set forth above, is hereby
found to be beneficial to the City of Yuma, Arizona, and to the citizens
thereof for the reasons above set forth; and that the formation of said
corporation is hereby consented to by the Mayor and City Council of the city.



   (B)   That the plan of financing the construction and acquisition by
the city of part or all of the facilities, appears in all respects to be
proper and appropriate to accomplish the desired end results; and that all
staff members of the City of Yuma, be, and they are, hereby authorized to
cooperate with the officers, directors and staff of the City of Yuma
Municipal Property Corporation in formulating final plans and documents with
respect to the construction and acquisition project.  Beginning July 1,
2011, all terms will expire on December 31 of the term expiration year.



   (C)   That the immediate operation of this resolution is necessary
for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety of the City of
Yuma, and an emergency is hereby declared to exist; and this resolution shall
be in full force and effect from and after its passage and approval by the
Mayor and City Council of the city and publication as required by law, and is
hereby exempt from the referendum provisions of the Constitution and Laws of
the State of Arizona.



(Res. 1532, passed 8-20-69; Ord. 2010-66, passed 1-5-11)



§ 70-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 16-18)  (Ord. 352, passed 4-7-36; Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82;
O2012-25, passed 11-21-12)



Chapter 71:  Alcoholic Beverages



Section



General Provisions



   71-01   Definitions



   71-02   Consuming spirituous beverages



Licensing



   71-15   Required



   71-16   Issuance of license



   71-17   Each location to be licensed



   71-18   Personal right; nonassignable



   71-19   Display



   71-20   Expiration; renewal; fractional years



   71-21   Fee schedule



   71-22   Application fees



   71-23   Revocation



   71-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to license, regulate, see Charter Art. III, § 9



Statutory reference:



   Issuance of license, see A.R.S. §§ 4-201 et seq.



   Power to tax, but not prohibit, sale, manufacture, possession,
distribution, disposal of spirituous liquors, see A.R.S. § 4-223



General Provisions



§ 71-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BEER.  Any beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation, infusion
or decoction of barley malt, hops, or other ingredients not drinkable, or any
combination of them.



   CLUB.  Any establishment defined the A.R.S. § 4-101, or any
successors thereto.



   DISTILLED SPIRITS.  Includes alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, tequila,
mescal, gin, absinthe, a compound of mixtures of any of them or of any of
them with vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing
alcohol, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and any alcoholic mixture or
preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which may in sufficient
quantities produce intoxication.



   GOVERNMENT LICENSE.  A license to serve and sell spiritous liquor on
specified premises available only to a county, city, town, or state
university or the Arizona Coliseum and Exposition Center upon application by
the governing body of a county, city, town or state university or the Arizona
Exposition and State Fair Board.



   LICENSE.  A license or an interim retail permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this title.



   LICENSE FEES.  Fees collected for license issuance, license
application, license renewal, interim permit issuance and license transfer
between persons or locations.



   LICENSEE.  A person who has been issued a license or an interim retail
permit pursuant to the provisions of this title or a special event licensee.



   OFF-SALE RETAILER.  Any person operating a bona fide regularly
established retail liquor store selling spiritous liquors, wines and beer,
and any established retail store selling commodities other than spiritous
liquors and engaged in the sale of spiritous liquors only in the original
unbroken package, to be taken away from the premises of the retailer and to
be consumed off the premises.



   ON-SALE RETAILER.  Any person operating an establishment where
spiritous liquors are sold in the original container for consumption on or
off the premises or in individual portions for consumption on the premises.



   PREMISES or LICENSED PREMISES.  The area from which the licensee is
authorized to sell, dispense or serve spiritous liquors under the provision
of the license.



   SELL.  Includes soliciting or receiving an order for, keeping or
exposing for sale, directly or indirectly delivering for value, peddling,
keeping with intent to sell and trafficking in.



   SPECIAL EVENT LIQUOR LICENSE.  The sale of spiritous liquor on a
temporary basis for consumption on the premises where sold.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.  Includes alcohol, brandy, whisky, rum, tequila,
mescal, gin, wine, porter, ale, beer, any malt liquor or malt beverage,
absinthe, a compound or mixture of any of them or of  any of them with any
vegetable or other substance, alcohol bitters, bitters containing alcohol,
any liquid mixture or preparation, whether patented or otherwise, which
produces intoxication, fruits preserved in ardent spirits, and beverages
containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.



   WINE.  The product obtained by the fermentation of grapes or other
agricultural products containing natural or added sugar or any such alcoholic
beverage fortified with grape brandy and containing not more than 24% of
alcohol by volume.



('80 Code, §4-1)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35; Ord. 847, passed 3-20-62; Ord.
O2004-70, passed 12-1-04)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions under state law, see A.R.S. § 4-101



§ 71-02  Consuming Spirituous Beverages.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous liquors
in, upon or adjacent to any public thoroughfare, public right-of-way, common
mall area or business district.



('80 Code, § 4-2)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 71-99



Licensing



§ 71-15  Required.



   Every person who engages in the business of selling or disposing in any
manner of spirituous liquors, either as a manufacturer, restaurant retail
liquor dealer or retail liquor dealer, shall be licensed in the manner as set
forth in this chapter, and it shall be unlawful to engage in any such
businesses until the provisions of this chapter are complied with, the
license fee paid in advance and a license issued.



('80 Code, § 4-23)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35)  Penalty, see § 71-99



§ 71-16  Issuance of License.



   The Finance Department of the city shall be authorized to issue the
city license required by this chapter after making application and upon being
notified by the State Liquor Board that the applicant has been approved for
issuance of a state liquor license.



('80 Code, § 4-24)  (Ord. 1382, passed 9-18-74)



§ 71-17  Each Location to be Licensed.



   A separate license shall be issued for each specific business at each
location and each license is applicable only to the premises in respect to
which it is issued.  Persons in business in more than one location shall be
required to procure a license for each location, and all licenses set forth
herein shall be in addition to all other licenses required by law.



('80 Code, § 4-25)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35)



§ 71-18  Personal Right; Nonassignable.



   All licenses, when issued, shall be valid only for the person in whose
name it is issued and shall give to the person named therein the right to
manufacture, sell or deal in spirituous liquors at the place and in the
manner named therein unless sooner revoked.  It shall not be assignable, and
no refund shall be made for the fractional part of a quarter.



('80 Code, § 4-26)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35)



§ 71-19  Display.



   The license required by this chapter shall be displayed in a prominent
place on the licensed premises in view of the customers of the licensed
premises.



('80 Code, § 4-27)  Penalty, see § 71-99



§ 71-20  Expiration; Renewal; Fractional Years.



   All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which the
license was issued.  The license shall be renewed annually.  Fractional
parts of a year shall be computed to include the quarter in which application
is made.



('80 Code, § 4-28)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35)



§ 71-21  Fee Schedule.



   The annual license fee required by this section shall be as follows:



 


Type of License

 

License Fee





(01)  In-State Producer
 

$500



(02)  Out-of-State Producer
 

$500



(2D)  Out-of-State Craft Distillery
 

TBD



(2L)  Limited Out-of-State Winery
 

TBD



(2M)  Out-of-State Microbrewery
 

TBD



(2W)  Out-of-State Winery
 

TBD



(03)  Microbrewery
 

$500



(04)  Wholesaler
 

$60



(05)  Government
 

$300



(06)  Bar
 

$300



(07)  Beer and Wine Bar
 

$120



(08)  Conveyance
 

$300



(09)  Liquor Store
 

$140



(09S)  Liquor Store Sampling Privileges
 

TBD



(10)  Beer and Wine Store
 

$60



(10S)  Beer and Wine Store Sample Privileges
 

TBD



(11)  Hotel/Motel
 

$300



(12)  Restaurant
 

$300



(12G)  Restaurant Growler Privileges
 

TBD



(13)  Farm Winery
 

$500



(14)  Club (Private)
 

$150



(17)  Direct Shipment
 

$0



(17W)  Direct Shipment Wine
 

TBD



(18)  In-state Craft distillery
 

TBD



(19)  Remote Tasting Room
 

TBD



(20)  Alternating Proprietorship
 

TBD



(21)  Custom Crush
 

TBD





 



('80 Code, § 4-29)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35; Ord. 847, passed 3-20-62;
Ord. O2004-70, passed 12-1-04; Ord. O2019-008, passed 2-20-19)



§ 71-22  Application Fees.



   The non-refundable application fee required by this section shall be as
follows:




   (A)   Liquor license application fee   $250





   (B)   Special event liquor license application fee   $50




(Ord. O2004-70, passed 12-1-04; Ord. O2019-008, passed 2-20-19)



§ 71-23  Revocation.



   Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by the City Council for the violation by the licensee of any applicable
provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.



('80 Code, § 4-30)  (Ord. 349, passed 5-17-35; Ord. O2004-70, passed
12-1-04)



§ 71-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 4-7)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 72:  Amusements



Section



   72-01   Bond and liability insurance required



   72-99   Penalty



§ 72-01  Bond and Liability Insurance Required.



   No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any ferris wheel,
merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose
of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with
the City Clerk a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of
at least $100,000, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by
reason of the operation of such ride.  Such bond or certificate of insurance
shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license or permit is required by
any other provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or
regulation.



('80 Code, § 5-1)  Penalty, see § 72-99



§ 72-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 5-2)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 73:  Commercial Sound Trucks



Section



   73-01   Definitions



   73-02   License required



   73-03   License fee



   73-04   Term valid; proration



   73-05   Issuance of license



   73-06   Display



§ 73-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMPLIFIED MUSICAL SYSTEM.  A mechanical or electrical musical
instrument, or music-producing device, equipped with an electrical amplifier
or loudspeaker unless such meaning would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of this chapter, be repugnant to the context of the provisions or the
context clearly requires otherwise.



('80 Code, § 18-20)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 73-02  License Required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an automobile, truck,
vehicle or motor vehicle equipped with an amplified musical system without
first obtaining to do so a license from the city.



('80 Code, § 18-21)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 73-03  License Fee.



   (A)   A license fee is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using on
the city streets or alleys any vehicle equipped with an amplifying musical
system in connection with the sale or display of merchandise from such
vehicle.



   (B)   License fees shall be payable by the registered owner of such
vehicle in the amount of $100 per annum for the first vehicle and $50 per
annum for each additional vehicle registered to the same owner and used for
the aforesaid purpose.



('80 Code, § 18-22)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 73-04  Term Valid; Proration.



   Such license shall be issued for a period of one year and shall run
from the first day of January in each calendar year to the 31st day of
December of such year.  This license shall be prorated to the nearest month.



('80 Code, § 18-23)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 73-05  Issuance of License.



   Upon payment of the license fee, the license clerk shall issue a
numbered tag for each fee.



('80 Code, § 18-24)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 73-06  Display.



   The tag shall be exhibited at all times on the left side of the
licensed vehicle, automobile or truck, at a place where it is clearly visible.



('80 Code, § 18-25)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Chapter 74:  Secondhand Dealers



Section



General Provisions



   74-01   Definitions



   74-02   Applicability to particular businesses



Pawnbrokers



   74-15   Display of regulations



   74-16   Identification of customers



   74-17   Interest charges



   74-18   Right of police entry and inspection



   74-19   Identification and notice that goods are fruits of crime



   74-20   Reports required



   74-21   Contents of report



   74-22   Forms



   74-23   When reports filed



   74-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to regulate, license businesses, occupations, see Charter
Art. III, § 9



General Provisions



§ 74-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUCTION.  Offering for sale at a place of business goods or wares
where such items are sold one by one, each going to the last and highest
bidder on such item.



   AUCTIONEER.  The person crying the offer to sell goods or wares at an
auction, whether the owner or agent for the owner of such goods.



   JUNK DEALER.  Any person either having or not having a fixed place of
business in the city engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the
business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, either at wholesale or
retail, any rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals or articles of junk,
or who goes from house to house, or from place to place, in said city,
gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in, any rags,
sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metal or other articles commonly known as junk.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person engaged in the business of loaning money upon
tangible personal property which he holds in possession to secure the loan.



   SECONDHAND DEALER.  A person engaged in, conducting, managing or
carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in
secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise, other than as a junk dealer,
pawnbroker or auctioneer.



('80 Code, § 27-1)  (Ord. 119, passed 1-8-15; Ord. 133, passed 4-11-16)



§ 74-02  Applicability to Particular Businesses.



   (A)   A business licensed and operated as an auction house shall not
be subject to licensing or regulation as a pawnbroker.



   (B)   A business licensed and operated as a pawnbroker shall not be
subject to licensing or regulation as an auction house.



   (C)   Each business shall, based upon the definitions and all of the
circumstances, be licensed and regulated as an auction house or pawnbroker. 
No business shall be subject to licensing and regulation as a combination of
the above.



('80 Code, § 27-2)  (Ord. 133, passed 4-11-16; Ord. 2573, passed 5-20-92)



Pawnbrokers



§ 74-15  Display of Regulations.



   Every person engaged in business as a pawnbroker shall prominently
display a copy of this subchapter in a conspicuous place on the premises of
the business.



('80 Code, § 27-72)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)  Penalty, see § 74-99



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see A.R.S. §§ 44-1621 et seq.



§ 74-16  Identification of Customers.



   All pawnbrokers required to submit reports in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter shall require each person with whom he
transacts business to show proof of his identification by exhibiting state or
federal identification, unless such person is known to the reporting party.



('80 Code, § 27-73)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)



§ 74-17  Interest Charges.



   Persons engaged in business as pawnbrokers may charge an interest rate
as set forth under laws of the State of Arizona.



('80 Code, § 27-74)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76; Ord. O95-019, passed
6-7-95)



§ 74-18  Right of Police Entry and Inspection.



   The business premises of any pawnbroker along with the transaction
records and stock of goods and articles, shall be open at reasonable hours to
reasonable inspection by representatives of the Police Department
Investigations Bureau.



('80 Code, § 27-75)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)



§ 74-19  Identification and Notice That Goods are Fruits of Crime.



   Upon notification by representatives of the Police Department that
goods and articles received on deposit or consignment, in pawn, pledge, trade
or exchange, or by purchase are the fruits of a crime, no pawnbroker shall
dispose of such property.  Interest upon such goods and articles pawned or
pledged shall cease to accrue on the date of such notification.



('80 Code, § 27-76)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)  Penalty, see § 74-99



§ 74-20  Reports Required.



   Every person engaged in business as a pawnbroker shall make out and
deliver to the Chief of Police a true, complete and legible report of all
goods and articles received on deposit or consignment, in pawn, pledge, trade
or exchange, or by purchase.



('80 Code, § 27-77)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)  Penalty, see § 74-99



§ 74-21  Contents of Report.



   Each report shall contain:



   (A)   A description of the property including brand name and serial
number, if any.



   (B)   The amount loaned or paid for the property or amount allowed
in trade.



   (C)   The number of the pawn ticket.



   (D)   The date and time the property was received.



   (E)   The signature of the person from whom the property was
received along with his name (printed), address and age.



   (F)   A description of such person consisting of height, weight,
complexion and hair color.



('80 Code, § 27-89)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)



§ 74-22  Forms.



   The report required by this subchapter shall be made upon forms
furnished to the pawnbroker at no charge by the Police Department.



('80 Code, § 27-90)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)



§ 74-23  When Reports Filed.



   Reports of each preceding week's transactions shall be filed with the
Police Department on Monday.



('80 Code, § 27-91)  (Ord. 1478, passed 2-18-76)



§ 74-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 27-3)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 75:  Sexually Oriented Businesses



Section



General Provisions



   75-01   Purpose and findings



   75-02   Definitions



   75-03   Classification



   75-04   License required



   75-05   Issuance of license



   75-06   Fees



   75-07   Inspection



   75-08   Expiration of license



   75-09   Suspension



   75-10   Revocation



   75-11   Hearing; License denial, suspension, revocation; appeal



   75-12   Transfer of license



   75-13   Injunction



Regulations for Specific Businesses



   75-25   Regulations for escort agencies



   75-26   Regulations concerning public nudity



   75-27   Adult motels



   75-28   Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos



   75-29   Prohibition against children in a sexually oriented business



   75-30   Exceptions



 



   75-99   Penalty



General Provisions



§ 75-01  Purpose and Findings.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate
sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration
of sexually oriented businesses within the city.  The provisions of this
chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials.  Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material.



   (B)   Findings.  Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the City Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,  475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas,
493 U.S. 215 (1990), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City
of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other
communities, including, but not limited to:  Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis,
Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia;
Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin;
and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group
on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of
Minnesota), the City Council finds:



      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments.  Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the
activities that occur on their premises.



      (2)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses,
defined in this chapter as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in
higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments.



      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal
sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live
sex shows,



      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.



      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades,
and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex
within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.



      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections.



      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
in the United States:  600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in
1985, and 253,448 through December 31, 1992.  The Center for Disease Control
indicates that of the 753,907 AIDS cases reported in the United States
through June of 2000, Arizona accounted for 7,234 of those cases.  At the
end of 1999, there were 3,195 people reported to be living with AIDS in
Arizona.



      (8)   As of December 2001, there have been 7,966 reported
cases of AIDS in the State of Arizona.



      (9)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody
test in Yuma County, Arizona.



      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982, and 45,200 through November 1990.



      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases
being reported in 1990.



      (12)   In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General
of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother
to her newborn.



      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts.



      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.



      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen
is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view
"adult oriented films".



      (16)   The findings noted in subsections (1) through (15)
raise substantial governmental concerns.



      (17)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational
characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect
those substantial governmental concerns.



      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
operators of the sexually oriented businesses.    Further, such a licensing
procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. 
It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the
actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully  in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein.



      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult theatres.



      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to
keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will
help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in such establishments.



      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons
ultimately responsible for the  day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related
to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will
aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.



      (22)   In the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is
designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct.



      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has
been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this
chapter.



      (24)   The barring of such individuals from the management of
adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents
conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.



      (25)   The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the
citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter.



('80 Code, § 16-41)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-02  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is permitted or invited,
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters
exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE .  A
commercial establishment which has as a significant  or substantial portion
of its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or
display space for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:



      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter,
or photographs, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures,
video reproductions, compact discs, slides, or other visual representations
which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or



      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are
designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.



   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:



      (1)   Persons who appear semi-nude; or



      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of "specified anatomical area" or by "specified sexual activities;"
or



      (3)   Films, motion pictures, computer simulations, holograms,
video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are
characterized by the exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities"
or "specified anatomical areas."



   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
which:



      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of
consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions,
films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
exhibition or display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which
advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
and either



      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time
that is less than ten hours; or



      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to
subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial establishment where, for
any form of consideration, films, holograms, computer simulations, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are
regularly shown or displayed which are characterized by the depiction or
description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas.”



   ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS.  This term is synonymous with SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret,
adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, adult video store,
escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.



   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear nude or
semi-nude, or in live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities.”



   ADULT VIDEO STORE.  See ADULT BOOKSTORE.



   EMPLOYEE , EMPLOY , and EMPLOYMENT .  Describe and pertain to any
person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented
business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether
the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or
by another status.  EMPLOYEE   does not include a person exclusively on the
premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of
goods to the premises.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER .  The Chief of Police, City Zoning Administrator
or such person as may be designated by the City Council.



   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, and for another person,
agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, date or to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease.



   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.



   ESTABLISH or ESTABLISHMENT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented
business as a new business.



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a
sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;



      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any
other existing sexually oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.



   LICENSEE.  A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a
sexually oriented business.



   NUDE, NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft with less than a
fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a
fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who appears in a state of
nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" [a commercial establishment
which regularly features a person (or persons) who appears semi-nude and] is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of
consideration.  A NUDE MODEL STUDIO does not mean a modeling class, or the
facility for such class, operated:



      (1)   By a proprietary school licensed by the State of
Arizona; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.



   OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED.  To cause to function or to put in a
state of doing business.  OPERATOR means any person on the premises of a
sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control
of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation,
the business.  A person may be found to be operating or causing to be
operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.



   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.



   REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN.  A consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.



   SEMI-NUDE or IN A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.  The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks.  This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human breast, but shall not include
any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel, provided the
areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or commercial establishment, that
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:  a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate,
or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities."  The definition
of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented businesses shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.



   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  This term is synonymous with ADULT
ORIENTED BUSINESS and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture
theater, adult video store, escort agency, semi-nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals in a state of sexual
arousal .



      (1)   The human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered; or



      (2)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or a female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.



   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.



      (1)   Any one of the following offenses:  Prostitution or
promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution, or
display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child;
possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent
exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity
relating to a sexually oriented business; sexual assault; molestation of a
child; distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to
those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or
countries;



      (2)   For which:



         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;



         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or



         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date
of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or
more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring
within any 24 month period.



      (3)    The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have
no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The fondling of another person's genitals, pubic region,
anus, or female breasts;



      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated,
including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or



      (3)   Excretory functions as part of, or in connection with,
any of the activities set forth in subdivisions (1) through (2) above.



   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT.  The increase in floor areas occupied by the
business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter
takes effect.



   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Any
of the following:



      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;



      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar
means; or



       (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except
for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.



('80 Code, § 16-42)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-03  Classification.



   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:



   (A)   Adult arcades;



   (B)   Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores



   (C)   Adult cabarets.



   (D)   Adult motels.



   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters.



   (F)   Escort agencies.



   (G)   Nude model studios.



   (H)   Sexual encounter centers.



('80 Code, § 16-43)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-04  License Required.



   (A)   It is unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to operate a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to
this chapter.



      (2)   For any person who operates a sexually oriented business
to employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to
this chapter.



      (3)   For any person to obtain employment with a sexually
oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.



   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided
by the city.  All applications must be qualified according to the provisions
of this chapter.



   (C)   An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a
sexually oriented business employee license shall file with the Enforcement
Officer a completed application made on a form prescribed and provided by the
city.  An application shall be considered complete if it includes the
information required in this section.  The applicant shall be qualified
according to the provisions of this chapter.  The application shall be
notarized.  The application shall include the information called for in
subsections (1) through (6), and where applicable subsection (7) as follows:



      (1)   The full true name and any other names used in the
preceding five years.



      (2)   The current business address.



      (3)   Either a set of fingerprint suitable for conducting
necessary background checks pursuant to this chapter, or the applicant's
social security number, to be used for the same purpose.



      (4)   If the application is for a sexually oriented business
license, the name, business location, legal description, business mailing
address and phone number of the proposed sexually oriented business.



      (5)   Written proof of age, in the form of either:



         (a)   A copy of a birth certificate and current photo,



         (b)   A current driver's license with picture, or



         (c)   Other picture identification document issued by a
governmental agency.



      (6)   The issuing jurisdiction and the effective dates of any
license or permit held by the applicant relating to a sexually oriented
business, and whether any such license or permit has been denied, revoked, or
suspended, and if so, the reason or reasons therefor.



      (7)   If the application is for a sexually oriented business
license, the name and address of the statutory agent or other agent
authorized to receive service of process.



   The information provided pursuant to subsections (1) through (7) above
shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the Enforcement Officer within ten working days of a change of
circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false
or incomplete.



   (D)   The application for a sexually oriented business license shall
be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but
shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the
interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.



   (E)   If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is an individual, he or she shall sign the application for a license
as applicant.  If the person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual (such as a corporation),  each officer,
director, general partner, or other person who will participate directly in
decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application
for a license as the applicant.  Each applicant must be qualified under §
75-05 and each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a license is
granted.



   (F)   A person who possesses a valid business license is not exempt
from the requirement of obtaining any required sexually oriented business
license.  A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses a
business license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this
chapter, where applicable.



   (G)   The information provided by an applicant in connection with
the application for a license under this chapter shall be maintained by the
Enforcement Officer on a confidential basis, and may be disclosed only:



      (1)   To other governmental agencies in connection with a law
enforcement or public safety function, or



      (2)   As may otherwise be required by law or a court order.



('80 Code, § 16-44)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03) Penalty, see § 75-99



§ 75-05  Issuance of License.



      (A)   Upon the filing of a completed application for a
sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee
license, the Enforcement Officer shall issue a temporary license to the
applicant, which temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of
the Enforcement Officer to deny or grant the license.  Within 20 days after
the receipt of a completed application, the Enforcement Officer shall either
issue a license, or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license, to
the applicant.  The Enforcement Officer shall approve the issuance of a
license unless one or more of the following is found to be true:



      (1)   An applicant is less than 18 years of age.



      (2)   An applicant is delinquent in the payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business.



      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information as
required by § 75-04 for issuance of the license.



      (4)   An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
under this subsection.  For purposes of this subsection, CONVICTION:



         (a)   Means a conviction or a guilty plea; and



         (b)   Includes a conviction of any business entity for
which the applicant had, at the time of the offense leading to the conviction
for a specified criminal activity, a management responsibility or a
controlling interest.



      (5)   The license application fee required by this chapter has
not been paid.



      (6)   An applicant has falsely answered a question or request
for information on the application form.



      (7)   The proposed sexually oriented business is located in a
zoning district other than a district in which sexually oriented businesses
are allowed to operate under Chapter 154 of this code, or is not in
compliance with the location restrictions established for sexually oriented
businesses in the appropriate zoning district(s).



      (8)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in
violation of or is not in compliance with §§ 75-25 through 75-29.



   (B)   An applicant who is ineligible for a license due to subsection
(A)(4) above may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when
the time period required by the applicable subsection of SPECIFIED CRIMINAL
ACTIVITY , as defined in § 75-02, has elapsed.



   (C)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of
the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued
to that applicant, the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually
oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business.  A
sexually oriented business employee license shall contain a photograph of the
licensee.  The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business
so that it may be easily read at any time.  A sexually oriented business
employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the
premises where the licensee is then working or performing, and shall produce
such license for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or
other authorized city official.



('80 Code, § 16-45)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-06  Fees.



   (A)   The non-refundable initial license fee for a sexually oriented
business license is $500 and the annual renewal fee for a sexually oriented
business license is $250.



   (B)   The non-refundable initial license fee for a sexually oriented
business employee license is $200 and the annual renewal fee for a sexually
oriented business employee license is $100.



('80 Code, § 16-46)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-07  Inspection.



   (A)   For the purpose of ensuring compliance with this chapter, an
applicant, operator or licensee shall permit law enforcement officers and any
other federal, state, county or city agency in the performance of any
function connected with the enforcement of this chapter, normally and
regularly conducted by such agencies, to inspect, at any time the business is
occupied or open for business, those portions of the premises of a sexually
oriented business which patrons or customers are permitted to occupy.



   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an
adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a
permanent or temporary habitation.



('80 Code, § 16-47)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-08  Expiration of License.



   (A)   Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance
and may be renewed only by making application as provided in § 75-04.  An
application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration
date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.



   (B)   When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.  If,
subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final.



('80 Code, § 16-48)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-09  Suspension.



   The city shall issue a written intent to suspend a license for a period
not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee has:



   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this
chapter.



   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented
business premises as authorized by this chapter.



('80 Code, § 16-49)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-10  Revocation.



   (A)   The Enforcement Officer shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if a cause of
suspension in § 75-09 occurs and the license has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.



   (B)   The Enforcement Officer shall issue a written statement of
intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the Officer
determines that:



      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the
material submitted during the application process;



      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;



      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;



      (4)   A licensee has knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;



      (5)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur
in or on the licensed premises.  This subsection will not apply to an adult
motel, unless the licensee knowingly allowed sexual activities to occur
either:



         (a)   In exchange for money, or



         (b)   In a public place or within public view.



      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for
hotel two percent taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the
sexually oriented business.



   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the revocation of the license.



   (D)   When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in §
75-11, the Enforcement Officer revokes a license, the revocation shall
continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became
effective, provided that, if the conditions of § 75-11(B) are met, a
provisional license will be granted pursuant to that section.  If,
subsequent to revocation, the Enforcement Officer finds that the basis for
the revocation found in subsections (B)(1) and (B)(4) of this section has
been corrected or abated, the applicant shall be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.



('80 Code, § 16-50)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-11  Hearing; License Denial, Suspension, Revocation; Appeal.



   (A)   (1)   If the Enforcement Officer determines that facts
exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter,
the Enforcement Officer shall notify the applicant or licensee (respondent)
in writing of the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, including
the grounds therefor, by personal delivery, or by certified mail.  The
notification shall be directed to the most current business address on file
with the Enforcement Officer.  Within five working days of receipt of such
notice, the respondent may provide to the City Administrator, in writing, a
response that shall include a statement of reasons why the license or permit
should not be denied, suspended, or revoked.  Within three days of the
receipt of respondent's written response, the City Administrator shall notify
respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, suspension,
or revocation proceeding.



      (2)   Within ten working days of the receipt of respondent's
written response, the City Administrator shall conduct a hearing at which
respondent shall have the opportunity to be represented by counsel and
present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf.  If a response is not
received by the City Administrator in the time stated or, if after the
hearing, the City Administrator finds that grounds as specified in this
chapter exist for denial, suspension, or revocation shall become final five
days after the City Administrator sends, by certified mail, written notice
that the license has been denied, suspended, or revoked.  Such notice shall
include a statement advising the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal
such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.



      (3)   If the City Administrator finds that no grounds exist
for denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, then within five days
after the hearing, the City Administrator shall withdraw the intent to deny,
suspend, or revoke the license, and shall so notify the respondent in writing
by certified mail of such action and shall contemporaneously issue the
license.



   (B)   When a decision to deny, suspend, or revoke a license becomes
final, the applicant or licensee (aggrieved party) whose application for a
license has been denied, or whose license has been suspended or revoked,
shall have the right to appeal such action to a court of competent
jurisdiction. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge,
restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial,
suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved
party a provisional license.  The provisional license shall allow the
aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to
continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee, as the case may
be, and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved
party's action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's
enforcement.



('80 Code, § 16-51)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)



§ 75-12  Transfer of License.



   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall
a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
license at any place other than the address designated in the application.



('80 Code, § 16-52)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)  Penalty, see § 75-99



§ 75-13  Injunction.



   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually operated
business without a valid license or in violation of § 75-12 is subject to a
suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Such
violations shall be punishable by a fine of $200 or 30 days imprisonment. 
Each day a sexually oriented business operates is a separate offense or
violation.



('80 Code, § 16-59)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03) Penalty, see § 75-99



Regulations for Specific Businesses



§ 75-25  Regulations for Escort Agencies.



   (A)   An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of
18 years.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or
agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.



('80 Code, § 16-53)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)  Penalty, see § 75-99



§ 75-26  Regulations Concerning Public Nudity.



   (A)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly and
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity
or engage in specified sexual activities.



   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a person to knowingly or
intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude
condition, unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is at least
six feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from
the floor.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude in
a sexually oriented business, to receive directly any pay or gratuity from
any patron or customer, or for any patron or customer to pay or give any
gratuity directly to any employee, while that employee is semi-nude in a
sexually oriented business.



   (D)   It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while semi-nude, to
knowingly and intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer.



('80 Code, § 16-54)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)  Penalty, see § 75-99



Cross reference:
   Exceptions, see § 75-30



§ 75-27  Adult Motels.



   (A)   Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
chapter.



   (B)   A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that
does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and within ten hours from the time the room is
rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.



   (C)   For purposes of subsection (B) of this section, the terms RENT
or SUBRENT mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of
consideration.



('80 Code, § 16-56)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)  Penalty, see § 75-99



§ 75-28  Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or Videos.



   (A)   A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually
oriented business (other than an adult motel) which exhibits on the premises,
in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video
cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with
the following requirements:



      (1)   Upon application for a sexually oriented business
license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises
showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.  A
manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.  The diagram
shall also designate the place at which the permit, if granted, will be
conspicuously posted.  A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each
diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. 
The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.



      (2)   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by
the applicant.



      (3)   No alteration in the configuration or location of a
manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city.



      (4)   It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure
that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.



      (5)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms.  Restrooms may not contain video reproduction
equipment.  If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated,
then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that
there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's
stations.  The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.



      (6)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials
and, at all times, that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure
that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.



      (7)   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person
at any time.



      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons
are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 5.0 footcandles as
measured at the floor level.



      (9)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.



      (10)   No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist
between viewing rooms or booths.



      (11)   No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of
any kind between viewing booths or rooms.



      (12)   The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly
inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.



      (13)   The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing
booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.



      (14)   The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling
surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material.  No wood, plywood, composition board,
or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.



   (B)   A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14)
above commits a misdemeanor if he or she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.



('80 Code, § 16-57)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91; Ord. O2003-05, passed
2-19-03)  Penalty, see § 75-99



§ 75-29  Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business.



   A person commits a misdemeanor if the person knowingly allows a person
under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.



(Ord. O2003-05, passed 2-19-03)  Penalty, see § 75-99



§ 75-30  Exceptions.



   It is a defense to prosecution under § 75-26 that a person appearing
in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:



   (A)   By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Arizona; a
college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;



   (B)   By a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or



   (C)   In a structure:



      (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available
for viewing; and



      (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student
must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and



      (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at
any one time.



(Ord. O2003-05, passed 2-19-03)



§ 75-99  Penalty.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
violate, or cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter.  Any
person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000, or
by imprisonment for not more than ten days, or by both fine and
imprisonment.  Each separate day or part thereof during which any violation
of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under § 75-04 of this chapter
that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for
sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value.



('80 Code, § 16-58)  (Ord. 2514, passed 2-20-91)



Chapter 76: Taxicabs




Section





   76-01   Purpose





   76-02   Definitions





   76-03   General





   76-04   Requirements for operation





   76-99   Penalty




§ 76-01  Purpose.




   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the safety and welfare of the
public, employees and taxicab companies by regulating certain aspects of the
taxicab business.





(Ord. O2000-01, passed 1-5-00)




§ 76-02  Definitions.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.





   TAXI-SERVICE. Any business in which motor vehicles transport people
from one location to another for revenue seeking purposes by way of open
solicitation on the streets or taxi cab stands.





   TAXICAB. Any car, van, or bus used in the transport of people from one
location to another for revenue seeking purposes. This definition does not
apply to ambulance and limousine services or any transit, para-transit or
demand response transit services which are fully or partially funded with
public funds.





   LIMOUSINE SERVICE. The providing of a motor vehicle designed by its
manufacturer and identified by its vehicle registration as a limousine and in
which both limousine and a driver are provided for hire solely by individual
agreement and which service is not available for open solicitation on the
streets or at a taxicab stand.





   PERSON. Any individual, person, firm, corporation, association, joint
venture, partnership or other form of business or combination thereof.





(Ord. O2000-01, passed 1-5-00)




§ 76-03  General.




   No person shall engage in taxi-service on the public right-of-way
within the City of Yuma without complying with the requirements of this
chapter.





(Ord. O2000-01, passed 1-5-00)  Penalty, see § 76-99




§ 76-04  Requirements for Operation.




   All taxicabs and taxi-service shall comply with the following.





   (A)   The taxi-service shall have proof of current fleet or
individual insurance for any and all vehicles to be used in the business. The
insurance must meet or exceed the minimum requirements as set forth by state
law.





   (B)   Each taxicab shall be currently registered in accordance with
state law. In addition, such registration must be in the vehicle at all times.





   (C)   Each taxi-service shall provide an area within the taxicab
where a business license and proof of insurance can be readily and easily
seen by the customer.





   (D)   Each taxicab shall be in a state of good repair as required by
A.R.S. Title 28 (e.g., good tires, brakes, proper lights and seat belts).





   (E)   Each taxicab shall have openly and clearly displayed to
customers the fares and/or computations of fares.





   (F)   The name of the taxi-service shall be displayed on each front
door of the vehicle. All words shall be legible. Minimum letter size shall be
three inches in height. Magnetic signs are not permitted under this
subsection.





   (G)   Each taxicab shall have openly and clearly displayed to
customers a picture identification of the current driver of the vehicle.





   (H)   Each taxicab shall be supplied with a fire extinguisher and a
first aid kit, which must be in good repair and functional.





(Ord. O2000-01, passed 1-5-00)  Penalty, see § 76-99




§ 76-99  Penalty.




   (A)   Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be
deemed to have committed a class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not more than one day or both such fine
and imprisonment.





   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense
punishable as described above.





(Ord. O2000-01, passed 1-5-00)




Title 9:  Communications



   Chapter



      90.   Advertising



      91.   [Repealed]



      92.   Telecommunications



Chapter 90:  Advertising



Section



   90-01   Official notices exempt



   90-02   Signs and banners across streets



   90-03   Posting of notices



   90-04   Marking on streets and sidewalks prohibited



   90-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to regulate streets, etc., and land use within the city,
see Charter Art. III, § 12



§ 90-01  Official Notices Exempt.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to apply to the
posting or displaying of advertisements or notices by order of any court or
by any public officer in the performance of his duties.



('80 Code, § 3-1)  (Ord. 327, passed 5-12-31)



§ 90-02  Signs and Banners Across Streets.



   No person shall erect or place any sign or banner of wood, cloth, metal
or other material across any street or sidewalk in the city without obtaining
a permit to do so from the City of Yuma.



('80 Code, § 3-3)  (Am. Ord. O98-78, passed 10-14-98)  Penalty, see §
90-99



§ 90-03  Posting of Notices.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills, signs, posters
or advertisements on any buildings, fences, poles or other property belonging
to another without the consent of the owner thereof.  Such consent shall be
secured in writing, and such written consent shall be exhibited by the person
having the same to any police officer on demand.



('80 Code, § 3-4)  Penalty, see § 90-99



§ 90-04  Marking on Streets and Sidewalks Prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, or attempt to
advertise, by marking or painting on any of the streets or sidewalks within
the city.



('80 Code, § 3-5)  Penalty, see § 90-99



Statutory reference:



   Power to regulate use of streets, sidewalks, see A.R.S. § 9-276(A)(1)



§ 90-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 3-6)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 91:  [Repealed]



   [Editor's Note:  Chapter  91 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance O2004-17,  passed 5-21-04.]



Chapter 92:  Telecommunications



Section



General Provisions



   92-01   Purpose and findings



   92-02   Definitions



   92-03   Rights reserved to city



   92-04   City police power; continuing jurisdiction



   92-05   Violation



License or Franchise to Occupy Public Highways



   92-15   License required by telecommunications corporations



   92-16   Telecommunication corporation license proposal



   92-17   License or franchise terms



   92-18   Limited communications provider licenses authorized; fees



   92-19   Right-of-way permit



   92-20   Revocation; refusal to renew



Rental Fees for Use of Public Highways



   92-30   Fees and costs



   92-31   (Repealed)



   92-32   Non-facilities-based resellers



Location and Relocation of Facilities in Public Highways



   92-40   Registration



   92-41   Location and relocation of facilities in public highway



   92-42   Conflicts with city projects



   92-43   Damage to city public highways and facilities



   92-44   Relocation of facilities



 



   92-99   Penalty



General Provisions



§ 92-01  Purpose and Findings.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a competitively
neutral and non-discriminatory policy governing the management of public
rights-of-way for the provision of telecommunications services.  To that
end, the City Council seeks to enable the city to:



      (1)   Authorize non-discriminatory and competitively neutral
access to and use of the public rights-of-way by providers of
telecommunications services, while ensuring that those who have placed
facilities in the right-of-way or otherwise use such facilities to provide
telecommunications services fairly compensate the city for that access and
use; and



      (2)   Manage the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the
impact and cost to Yuma citizens of the placement of telecommunications
facilities within city rights-of-way; and



      (3)   Manage the public rights-of-way so as to maximize their
efficient use, thereby minimizing the foreclosure of future additional uses
of such rights-of-way; and



      (4)   Promote competition among telecommunications service
providers and encourage the universal availability of advanced
telecommunications services to all residents and businesses of the city; and



      (5)   Minimize congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and
other adverse effects on the city's public rights-of-way.



   (B)   The City Council finds that the city's rights-of-way
constitute a valuable public asset:



      (1)   Having been acquired and maintained by the city over
many years at great taxpayer expense;



      (2)   Providing uniquely valuable property that private
telecommunications providers may wish to use for profit-making purposes that
may not necessarily benefit all the residents of the city;



      (3)   Representing public investments for which the taxpayers
are entitled to a fair monetary return on the city's past and future
investment in the city's infrastructure; and



      (4)   Comprising significant assets which the city must manage
as a public fiduciary trust to enhance the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (C)   Therefore, in this chapter the City Council intends:



      (1)   To ensure that locally elected officials manage local
rights-of-way consistent with their fiduciary trust obligations;



      (2)   To ensure compliance with public health, safety, and
welfare measures for city rights-of-way;



      (3)   To encourage public-private partnerships to provide
telecommunications facilities needed for the most cost-effective delivery of
public services, including schools, libraries, police and fire protection, as
well as private services;



      (4)   To conserve the limited physical capacity of the
rights-of-way held in public trust by the city;



      (5)   To assure that the city's current and ongoing costs of
granting and regulating private access to and use of the rights-of-way are
fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs; and



      (6)   To secure fair and reasonable compensation to the city
and the residents of the city for use of the rights-of-way for private
installation of telecommunications facilities, in the exercise of its police
and other powers insofar as permitted by state and federal law.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. 099-52, passed 8-4-99)



§ 92-02  Definitions.




   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number.  The word "shall" is
mandatory, and "may" is permissive.  Words not defined herein or in the
Arizona Public Service Law, A.R.S. §§ 40-201 et seq. or the Federal
Communications Act of 1934, as amended, U.S. Code, Title 47, Chapter 5, shall
be given their generally accepted meaning in the telecommunications industry.





   CABLE SERVICES AND CABLE SYSTEM shall have the same meaning as defined
in City of Yuma Ordinance O95-077.





   COMMERCIAL MOBILE RADIO SERVICE.  Two-way voice commercial mobile
radio service as defined by the Federal Communications Commission in 47 Code
of Federal Regulations Section 20.3, as amended.





   COMMUNICATIONS.  The transmission, between or among points specified
by the user of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form
or content of the information as sent and received, and includes but is not
limited to telecommunications services and interstate communications
services, but excludes cable and open video services. The operator of a fiber
optics communication system shall be deemed to be a provider of
communications services over facilities for the purposes of this chapter.
Except as otherwise specifically provided for or excepted.





   FACILITIES.   The plant, equipment, and property, including but not
limited to poles, wires, pipe, conduits, pedestals, antenna, and other
appurtenances placed in, on, or under highways and not owned by the city and
used in the provision of communications services.





   FIBER OPTICS COMMUNICATION SYSTEM.  An interstate network of fiber
optic cables and all related property including conduit, carrier pipe, cable
fibers, repeaters, power sources, and other attachments and appurtenances
necessary for the fiber optics communication.





   NON-FACILITIES BASED RESELLER.  Any person that provides
telecommunications service over a facility located in whole or in part in the
public highways but who does not own, lease, or have an indefeasible right to
use the underlying facility used for the transmission, does not place any
facilities in the public highway itself, and is not responsible for the
operation, installation or maintenance of facilities in the public highways
under any arrangement; and resells a transmission service provided by the
owner of the facility.





   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, association, corporations legal
entity or organization of any kind.  Whenever used in any clause prescribing
a penalty, the term PERSON as applied to partnerships or associations
includes partners or members thereof, and if applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.  PERSON does not include the City of Yuma.





   PROVIDER.  All persons required to obtain a franchise or license under
this chapter, all telecommunications corporations, and all communications
service providers.





   PUBLIC HIGHWAY OR HIGHWAY.  All roads, streets, and alleys and all
other dedicated public rights-of-way and public utility easements of the city.





   TELECOMMUNICATIONS.   The transmission, between or among points
specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change
in the form or content of the information as sent and received. The term does
not include commercial mobile radio services, pay phone services, or cable
services.





   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION.  Any public service corporation to the
extent that it provides telecommunications services in this state.




   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.   The offering of telecommunications for
a fee directly to the public, or to such users as to be effectively available
directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.



   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services that are provided to the public and
that use licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed or mobile
location using wireless facilities.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2003-48,
passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-03  Rights Reserved to City.



   Without limiting the rights that the city might otherwise have, the
city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers, and
authorities:



   (A)   To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the
full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city.



   (B)   To determine any question of fact relating to the meaning,
terms, obligations, or other aspects of this chapter and the instruments
issued under this chapter.



   (C)   To grant multiple, nonexclusive licenses, franchises,
licenses, or permits within the city to other persons.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98)



§ 92-04  City Police Power; Continuing Jurisdiction.



   (A)   The provider shall at all times be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power by the city, including any and all chapters,
rules, or regulations which the city has adopted or may adopt, and all laws,
rules, regulations, orders, and policies of the state and the United States
Government.  In the event of a conflict between this chapter and other
provisions of the city code, the stricter requirement shall apply.



   (B)   The city shall have continuing jurisdiction and supervision
over any facilities located within or on city public highways.  However, it
is recognized that the daily administrative, supervisory, and enforcement
responsibilities of the provisions of this chapter shall be delegated and
entrusted to the City Administrator or designee to interpret, administer, and
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to promulgate standards regarding
the construction, reconstruction, relocation, maintenance, dismantling,
abandonment, or use of the facilities within the city public highways.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-05  Violation.



   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any provider to occupy the public highways unless the provider is in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.  The city may pursue any
remedy at law, including but not limited to, injunctive relief, civil or
criminal trespass, criminal misdemeanor, and withholding other city permits
and authorizations until the provider complies with this chapter.  These
remedies are cumulative and may be pursued in the alternative.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)  Penalty, see §
92-99



License or Franchise to Occupy Public Highways



§ 92-15  License Required by Telecommunications Corporations.




   (A)   No telecommunications corporation shall install, maintain,
construct or operate telecommunication facilities in any public highway in
the city, unless a license to provide telecommunication services has first
been granted by the City Council under this chapter.





   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A), any telecommunications
corporation that was providing telecommunications service within this state
on November 1, 1997, pursuant to a grant made to it or its lawful
predecessors prior to the effective date of the Arizona Constitution, may
continue to provide telecommunications services, pursuant to that state
grant, until the state grant is lawfully repealed, revoked, or amended, and
need not obtain any further authorization from the city to provide
telecommunication services; provided, however, that such entity must in all
other respects comply with the requirements applicable to telecommunications
corporations, as provided in Title 9, Chapter 5, Article 7, Arizona Revised
Statutes.





   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to affect the terms or
conditions of any franchise, license, or permit issued by the city prior to
November 1, 1997, or to release any party from its obligations thereunder.
Those franchises, licenses, or permits shall remain fully enforceable in
accordance with their terms. The City Administrator with the consent of the
City Council may enter into agreements with franchise holders, licensees or
permittees to modify or terminate an existing franchise, license or agreement.





   (D)   A license to any telecommunications corporation to use the
highways to install, maintain, construct or operate telecommunications
facilities under this chapter shall not authorize the use of the highways to
provide any other service; nor shall the issuance of the same invalidate any
franchise, license or permit that authorizes the use of the highways for such
other service; nor shall the fact that an entity holds a franchise, license
or permit to make any other use of the highway or to provide any other
service authorize installation, maintenance, construction or operation of
telecommunications facilities in any highway in the city, without obtaining a
license hereunder.





   (E)   Any license granted shall not be exclusive.





   (F)   A telecommunications licensee may enter into contracts for use
of its facilities within the public highways to provide telecommunication
services.  Persons using such licensee's facilities must themselves obtain a
telecommunication license if such person constructs, installs, operates or
maintains  telecommunication facilities within the public highway of the
city.  If the persons using such licensee's facilities do not construct,
install, operate or maintain telecommunication facilities within the public
highway of the city, such persons need not obtain a separate license but the
telecommunications licensee must disclose the identity of such persons to the
city.





(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2003-48,
passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)  Penalty, see § 92-99




§ 92-16  Telecommunications Corporation License Proposal.



   (A)   A telecommunications corporation desiring a license to
construct, install, operate and maintain telecommunication facilities in
streets and other highways of the city shall file a proposal with the City
Administrator, in the form prescribed by the city, and shall pay an
application fee determined by the City Engineer. The amount of the
application fee shall be reasonably related to the cost directly incurred by
the city relating to the granting or administration of the license and can be
appealed to the City Administrator.



   (B)   Each application shall, at a minimum:



      (1)   Show where the facilities the applicant will use will be
located, or contain such other information as the city may deem necessary in
order to ensure that the applicant will comply with the requirements for use
of the highways;



      (2)   Identify the applicant, its name, address and telephone
number;



      (3)   Contain a description of the services to be provided; and



      (4)   Set out a description of any agreement with any other
entity that would permit such entity to use the facilities.



   (C)   Upon receiving an application for a license that satisfies the
conditions of subsection (B), the city shall promptly proffer a
telecommunications license to the applicant for its review, and may inquire
into matters relevant to the issuance of the license.  If the applicant
agrees to the terms and conditions of the license, the request shall be
approved.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city need not issue or renew a
license if the applicant has previously had a license or permit revoked, or
for any other reason permitted under Arizona law.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2003-48,
passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-17  License or Franchise Terms.




   (A)   Franchise election.  Upon finding that a franchise proposal
is acceptable and in good order, the City Engineer's Office shall promptly
notify the persons seeking the franchise, and advise them to pay a franchise
election fee to the City Clerk within a specified number of days in an amount
to be determined by the City Clerk that recovers all city costs.  Upon the
City Clerk's receipt of the fee, the City Clerk shall schedule a franchise
election at the next date determined by the City Council.




   (B)   Length of license or franchise.  Any license or franchise
granted by the city pursuant to this chapter shall commence upon adoption of
the license or franchise and acceptance of the license or franchise by the
provider. The license or franchise shall be effective for a period determined
by the City Council, but in the case of a license to a telecommunications
corporation to construct, install, operate or maintain telecommunications
facilities, the period shall be five (5) years. Each license or franchise is
subject to the conditions and restrictions provided in the instrument and
this chapter. The city may terminate a license or franchise in accord with
its terms and conditions if the licensee or franchisee is in default
thereunder, subject to § 92-20.



   (C)   License or franchise agreement.  The city reserves the right,
at its discretion, to require providers seeking a license or franchise under
this chapter to execute a binding agreement setting forth all terms and
provisions of the contractual relationship between the city and the provider
regarding the presence of communications facilities within city public
highways.  Such agreements may be amended only in writing subject to the
mutual consent of the parties, and in the case of agreements relating to
franchises, with the concurrence of the electorate at an election.



   (D)   No warranty.  Providers may choose between requesting a
license or franchise under this section.  The issuance of a license by the
city is neither a representation nor a warranty that such license is a
legally sufficient substitute for a franchise and is neither a representation
nor a warranty that a franchise is not required.



   (E)   As a condition of issuing or renewing a license or franchise
pursuant to this chapter, applicant must:



      (1)   Show, in the case of a telecommunications corporation
seeking a telecommunications license or franchise, that the applicant has and
maintains a valid certificate of convenience and necessity from the Arizona
Corporation Commission or the Federal Communications Commission or the
successor of either, as the case may be and in other cases, applicant must
demonstrate that it is qualified to hold a license or franchise; except that
this requirement shall not apply to a telecommunication corporation that
provides solely interstate telecommunication services within Arizona;



      (2)   Agree to conform to public highway use requirements that
the city may establish from time to time;



      (3)   Agree to provide and maintain accurate locational maps
and drawings of all of applicant’s facilities as proposed and as built in
the public highway, and to comply with such other mapping requirements as the
city may establish from time to time;



      (4)   Satisfy insurance, bonding, and security fund
requirements established pursuant to § 92-41(H); fully indemnify the city,
its Mayor and Councilmembers, employees, officers, agents, boards and
commissions, in a form satisfactory to the city; and agree that applicant
shall have no recourse against the city for monetary damages as a result of
any damage that may result from the city's exercise of its rights under the
license, or applicable provisions of law; and



      (5)   Agree to comply with and be bound by the administrative
and enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter and as may be prescribed
from time to time by the city consistent with state law, which may include:



         (a)   Provisions covering assignment.



         (b)   The right to inspect records to determine
compliance by the licensee.



         (c)   Provisions for renewal.



         (d)   Fees and charges contemplated by A.R.S. §
9-582(C), as amended, may be charged by the city pursuant to Chapter 210 of
the City Code.



   (F)   Nothing herein shall be read to prevent the city from
considering other matters or establishing additional conditions. Except as
prohibited by state law, nothing herein shall be read to require the city to
issue or renew a license if the applicant has previously had a license or
permit revoked, or for any other reason permitted under Arizona law. Every
licensee shall be subject to the city’s exercise of such police, regulatory
and other powers as the city now has or may later obtain, and a license may
not waive the application of the same, and must be exercised in strict
conformity therewith.



   (G)   A cable franchise or license issued under other provisions of
this code shall not constitute for any purpose the license or franchise
required under this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be read to relieve
the operator of an open video system of the obligation to obtain a license or
franchise before installing, constructing, operating or maintaining an open
video system, and before providing open video system services.



   (H)   A license or franchise issued pursuant to this chapter may not
be transferred without the prior, written consent of the city.  A
"transfer"is any transaction, however nominated, that results in a change in
the franchisee or licensee, or a change in the control of the communications
facility, in whole or part, or a change in the control of franchisee,
licensee or its parents, or that purports to transfer or subdivide any of the
rights granted pursuant to the license or franchise.




(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2018-019,
passed 8-1-18)




§ 92-18  Limited Communications Provider Licenses Authorized; Fees.



   The license and proposal requirements set forth in §§ 92-15, 92-16,
and 92-17 shall also apply, with necessary changes, to communications
providers that are not telecommunications corporations. The City Council may
issue limited, non-exclusive licenses under the following circumstances:



   (A)   De minimus license.  The City Council may issue a limited
license to authorize placement of interstate fiber-optic telecommunications
facilities within city public highways in the event the facilities do not
exceed ten lineal miles in total length of installation and connect only to
interstate telecommunication carrier points of presence, and to no other
connection within the city.  Said license shall provide for quarterly
payments to the city of a public highway occupancy fee for each lineal foot
of installation on the basis of fair market value and cost, as determined by
the City Council at the time of the granting of the license and adjusted
periodically thereafter at the city's discretion.  The license may also
contain such additional terms and conditions as the City Council may approve
consistent with the purposes and findings in this chapter and applicable law.



   (B)   Transitting traffic license.  The City Council may issue a
limited license to authorize use of the city's public highways solely for the
purpose of providing telecommunications service where no sale or exchange of
service originates or terminates in the city.  Said license shall provide
for quarterly payments to the city of a public highway occupancy fee for each
lineal foot of installation on the basis of fair market value and cost, as
determined by the City Council at the time of the granting of the license and
adjusted periodically thereafter at the discretion of the city.  The license
may also contain such other terms and conditions as the City Council may
approve consistent with the purposes and findings in this chapter and
applicable law.



   (C)   Wireless services facilities license.  The City Council may
issue a limited license to authorize the installation, operation,
maintenance, or use of wireless services facilities, such as antennas, within
the city's public highways.  Unless no fee is allowed by law, said license
shall provide for quarterly payments to the city of a public highway
occupancy fee for each site or installation on the basis of fair market value
and cost, as determined by the City Council at the time of the granting of
the license and adjusted periodically thereafter at the discretion of the
city.  The license may contain such other terms and conditions as the City
Council may approve consistent with the purposes and findings in this chapter
and applicable law.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-19  Right-of-Way Permit.



   The City Engineer shall not issue an encroachment permit or other
authorization for a provider to construct or install communications
facilities, or facilities for which a license or franchise is required under
this chapter, unless the provider has first obtained all licenses or
franchises required to occupy the city's public highways under this chapter,
and, if applicable, has obtained any wireless application approvals required
by Section 154-19.09. No permit issued shall be valid if the required license
or franchise has not been obtained.




(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2018-019,
passed 8-1-18)




§ 92-20  Revocation; Refusal to Renew.



   The city may revoke or refuse to renew any license or franchise issued
or granted under this chapter for failure to comply with the material terms
and conditions of the license or franchise or applicable law. A license or
franchise may be revoked only if the licensee or franchisee has been given
written notice of the defect or defects in performance and the defect is not
or the defects are not cured within 60 days of the notice, unless the city
finds that the defect is due to intentional misconduct, is a violation of
criminal law, or is part of a pattern of violations if the licensee or
franchisee has already had notice and opportunity to cure. If the licensee
requests a hearing, a hearing shall be held before a license is revoked or
not renewed.




(Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)




Rental Fees for Use of Public Highways



§ 92-30  Fees and Costs.



   (A)   In addition to the application fee set forth in § 92-16, a
telecommunication corporation, including a telecommunications corporation not
required to obtain a license pursuant to the exemption provided by § 92-15,
shall pay an encroachment permit fee for the issuance of an encroachment
permit to place telecommunication facilities in the public highway.



   (B)   A telecommunication corporation that has placed facilities in
public highways that carry interstate traffic between and among the
telecommunication corporation's points of presence exclusive of facilities
used by the local network and the portion of the interstate network that
carries intrastate calls, shall pay an annual fee based on the number of
linear feet of trench in the public highways.  The rate per linear foot
shall be set by City Council resolution and shall not exceed the highest rate
per linear foot a political subdivision charged a licensee or franchisee on
or before December 31, 1999. The rate per linear foot shall not be increased
in any year by more than the increase in the average consumer price index as
published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics.



   (C)   Telecommunication corporations shall bear all of the
reasonable costs associated with construction, maintenance, and operations of
its facilities in the public highways used to provide telecommunications
services including reasonable costs associated with damage to the public
highways.




(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2003-48,
passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)




§ 92-31  (Repealed).



§ 92-32  Non-Facilities-Based Resellers.



   A telecommunications licensee or franchisee may enter into contracts
for the use of its telecommunications facilities within the public highways
to provide telecommunications services. Any person using such licensee's or
franchisee's facilities must obtain a separate telecommunications license or
franchise for his or herself, if such person constructs, installs, operates
or maintains telecommunications facilities within the public highway of the
city. If the persons using such licensee's or franchisee's facilities does
not construct, operate or maintain telecommunications facilities within the
public highway of the city, such person need not obtain a separate license or
franchise but the telecommunications licensee or franchisee must disclose the
identity of such persons to the city.  Each telecommunications licensee or
franchisee shall report to the city on a current basis all other providers
with whom it contracts to use its lines in the public highways within the
city to provide telecommunications services.




(Ord. O99-52, passed 8-4-99; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)




Location and Relocation of Facilities in Public Highways



§ 92-40  Registration.



   Providers using or planning to use the city's public highways must
register with the city on a form prescribed by the city and must include the
following information:  the provider's name, address and telephone number; a
description of the services provided and to be provided; a description of the
facilities used or to be provided by provider; and a description of the
location of the facilities.  A provider shall file a proposed amendment to
the registration before it makes any change that would render the
registration information incomplete or inaccurate.  A change of the
provider's name or address must be filed at least 60 days prior to the date
the change becomes effective; a change in the telephone number must be filed
10 days before the change becomes effective; in the case of change in
facilities (by addition, subtraction or modification or movement) the change
in facilities must be filed at least 60 days before work commences on the
facilities unless the relocation was ordered by the city.  In the case of a
change in services, the change must be noticed 30 days before the earlier of
the date the service commences, or provider begins marketing the service.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-41  Location and Relocation of Facilities in Public Highway.



   (A)   Each provider is responsible for ensuring that its facilities
are installed, constructed and maintained in strict accordance with the city
code; that all required licenses, franchises and permits are applied for and
obtained before any work commences; and that the terms and conditions thereof
are strictly followed.  Where a facility has more than one provider, each
provider is fully responsible for ensuring that all requirements are
satisfied.  Facilities shall be installed, constructed and maintained so
that no additional costs are imposed upon the city, and so that the facility
does not interfere with other uses or users of the public highways.  Without
limiting the requirement of any other provision of the city code, or the
provisions of any license, permit, or franchise issued by the city, this
shall require, at a minimum, compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The facilities to be constructed, installed, operated, and
maintained by the provider shall be so located or relocated as to interfere
as little as possible with traffic or other authorized uses over, under, or
through the public highways.  Those phases of construction relating to
traffic control, backfilling, compaction, and paving, as well as the location
or relocation of said facilities shall be subject to regulation by the City
Council.



   (C)   The provider shall keep accurate installation records of the
location of all facilities in the public highways and furnish the
installation records to the city upon request or at such periodic intervals
as the city may require.  Upon completion of new or relocation construction
of underground facilities in the public highways, the provider shall provide
the city, if requested or as required, with installation records in a format
compatible with the then-current city mapping format showing the location of
the underground and above ground facilities.



   (D)   Whenever the provider shall cause any opening or alteration
whatever to be made for any purpose in any public highways, the work shall be
completed within the time specified in the license, permit, or franchise, or
if no time is specified then within a reasonable time.



   (E)   The installation, use, and maintenance of the provider's
facilities within the public highways authorized herein shall be in such a
manner as not to interfere with the city's placement, construction, use, and
maintenance of its public highways, street lighting, water pipes, drains,
sewers, traffic signal systems, or other city systems that have been, or may
be, installed, maintained, used or authorized by the city.  Upon the city's
request, provider's facilities will be relocated at provider's expense,
unless state law expressly requires otherwise.  Upon the city's request, by
a time specified by the city, if the provider fails to move its facilities,
the city may do so and will bill the provider the costs therefor and the
provider shall pay those costs within 30 days after its receipt of the
invoice.  Further, the provider shall reimburse the city any additional cost
the city incurs due to the location or relocation of the provider's
facilities, including all design and construction costs.



   (F)   The provider shall not install, maintain, or use any of its
facilities in such a manner as to damage or interfere with facilities of
another provider located within the public highways of the city.



   (G)   All facilities shall be installed per plans approved by the
city.  Provider may install facilities on existing utility poles or in
existing conduit where permission is granted by owner of the utility pole or
conduit, except where those same poles are scheduled to be replaced with
buried facilities.  The city may require the provider to prove that it has
such permission from the owner to use the owner's facilities.  No new poles,
or taller poles, will be permitted in the public highways for any new
facilities, without the express written permission of the city.  If provider
installs facilities on existing poles as provided herein, the provider shall
bury its facilities when such poles are removed and not replaced in kind for
any reason.  If the provider makes use of existing conduit of another
provider, the provider shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter in
the use of such conduit in the public highways.



   (H)   Each provider must obtain and maintain such insurance,
bonding, and security fund requirements as specified by the city, or if no
specific requirements are designated, as are required by the city for similar
facilities.  No work shall commence unless these requirements have been
satisfied, and the city may require the provider to remove or stop work on
facilities, or require a provider to cease using the facility, when any
insurance, bonding, or security fund requirements are not satisfied.



   (I)   A permit shall be obtained from the City Engineer prior to a
provider removing, abandoning, relocating, or reconstructing, if necessary,
any portion of a provider's facilities.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
city understands and acknowledges there may be instances when a provider is
required to make repairs, in compliance with federal or state laws, that are
of an emergency nature.  The provider will notify the city prior to such
repairs, if practicable, and will obtain the necessary permits in a
reasonable time after notification.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-42  Conflicts with City Projects.



   (A)   (1)   If, during the design process for public
improvements, the city discovers a potential conflict with proposed
construction, the provider shall either:



         (a)   Locate and, if necessary, expose its facilities in
conflict; or



         (b)   Use a location service under contract with the
city to locate or expose its facilities.  The provider shall reimburse the
city for the cost resulting from the use of such location service.



      (2)   The city shall make reasonable efforts to design and
construct projects pursuant to this section so as to avoid relocation expense
to the provider.  Provider shall furnish location information to the city in
a timely manner, but in no case longer than ten calendar days from the date
of the city's request.



   (B)   The city reserves the prior and superior right to lay,
construct, erect, install, use, operate, repair, replace, remove, relocate,
regrade, widen, realign, or maintain any public highways, aerial, surface, or
subsurface improvements, including, but not limited to, water mains, traffic
control conduits, cable and devices, sanitary or storm sewers, subways,
tunnels, bridges, viaducts, or any other public construction within the
public highways of the city.



   (C)   When the city invokes its prior superior right to the public
highways, the provider shall move its facilities located in the public
highways, at its own cost, to such a location as the city directs.



   (D)   If, during the course of a project, the city determines
provider's facilities are in conflict, the following shall apply:



      (1)   Prior to city notice to proceed to contractor:  the
provider shall, within a reasonable time, but in no event exceeding one
month, remove or relocate the conflicting facility.  This time period shall
begin running upon receipt by the provider of written notice from the city. 
However, if both the city and the provider agree, the time frame may be
extended based on the requirements of the project.



      (2)   Subsequent to city notice to proceed to contractor: 
the city and the provider will immediately begin the coordination necessary
to remove or relocate the facility.  Actual construction of such removal or
relocation is to begin no later than 72 hours, if practicable, after written
notification from the city of the conflict.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-43  Damage to City Public Highways and Facilities.



   (A)   If, in the installation, use, relocation, repair, or
maintenance of its facilities, the provider damages, alters, or disturbs the
surface or subsurface of any public highways or adjoining public property, or
the public improvement located thereon, therein, or thereunder, the provider
shall promptly, at its own expense, and in a manner acceptable to the city,
restore the surface or subsurface of the public highways or public property,
or repair or replace the public improvement thereon, therein, or thereunder,
in as good a condition as before such damage or disturbance in a manner
consistent with the city’s duly adopted standards, or as required by its
permits, licenses, or franchises.  If such restoration, repair, or
replacement of the surface, subsurface, or any structure located thereon,
therein, or thereunder is not completed within a reasonable time, or such
repair or replacement does not meet duly adopted standards or requirements of
its permits, licenses, or franchises, the city shall have the right to
perform the necessary restoration, repair, or replacement, either through its
own forces, or through a hired contractor, and the provider shall pay the
city for its expenses in so doing within 30 days after its receipt of the
invoice.



   (B)   The provider shall reimburse the city for all costs arising
from the reduction in the service life of any public highway or pavement
damage, to the extent required by any other provision of this code, resulting
from pavement cuts of the provider.  The provider shall pay such costs
within 30 days from the date of issuance of an invoice from the city.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-44  Relocation of Facilities.



   (A)   The city shall not bear any cost of relocating existing
facilities, irrespective of the function served, where city facilities or
other facilities occupying the public highways under authority of a city
permit, license, or franchise which must be relocated, are already located in
the public highways and the conflict between the provider's potential
facilities and the existing facilities can only be resolved expeditiously as
determined by the city by the movement of the existing city or other approved
facilities.



   (B)   (1)   If provider's relocation effort so delays
construction of a public project causing the city to be liable for delay
damages, the provider shall reimburse the city for those damages attributable
to the delay created by the provider.  If the provider should dispute the
amount of damages attributable to the provider, the matter shall be referred
to the dispute resolution board.  The dispute resolution board shall consist
of one member selected by the city, one member selected by the provider, and
a third person agreed upon by both parties.  The person agreed upon by both
parties shall be chairperson of the dispute resolution board.  Expenses for
the dispute resolution board shall be shared equally by the city and the
provider.  The board will hear the dispute promptly, and render an opinion
as soon as possible, but in no case later than 60 days after notification by
the city of provider's allocated share of damages suffered by the city.  All
decisions of the dispute resolution board are non-binding on either the city
or the provider, however, the findings of the dispute resolution board shall
be admissible in any legal action.



      (2)   The city and the provider shall accept or reject
findings of the dispute resolution board within 30 days after receipt of the
findings.  If both the city and the provider accept the findings of the
dispute resolution board in writing and damages are assessed by the dispute
resolution board, the provider shall pay the city within 30 days of receipt
of an invoice.  Late charges of five percent and interest charges of one and
one-half percent per month shall be added for late payment.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in a license, franchise, or
permit, or by other provision of law, the entire cost of relocation shall be
borne by the city if the provider is required by the city to relocate
facilities which are located in private easements obtained by the provider
prior to the dedication of the public street or easement from which the
facilities must be relocated.  These prior rights of the provider would also
be unaffected by any subsequent relocation.  A prior rights as used in this
division, means private easement rights obtained by the provider prior to the
dedication of the streets or public ways from which the facilities are
requested by the city to be relocated.  In the case of a facility that
serves multiple purposes, the prior rights must extend to all uses for this
exception to apply.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



§ 92-99  Penalty.



   Among other penalties that may apply, any person, firm or corporation
that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor.  Upon conviction persons shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $2,500, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or
by both such fine and imprisonment.  Upon conviction, firms or corporations
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $20,000.  Each day of violation
continued shall be a separate offense, punishable as described above.



(Ord. O98-02, passed 1-7-98; Ord. O2018-019, passed 8-1-18)



Title 11:  General Offenses



   Chapter



      110.   General Offenses



      111.   Offenses Against Administration of Justice



      112.   Offenses Against Property



      113.   Offenses Against Public Morals



      114.   Weapons



      115.   Aggressive Solicitation



Chapter 110:  General Offenses



Section



   110-01   Curfew



   110-02   Posting of signs in coin-operated businesses



   110-03   Children in unattended vehicle



   110-04   Overnight camping prohibited outside licensed campgrounds



   110-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to exercise powers needed for the inhabitants of the
city, see Charter Art. III, § 1



§ 110-01  Curfew.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a minor person under the age of 18
years to be permitted, caused or suffered to be upon the public streets or in
any public place in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a parent, guardian or other person
having legal care and custody of a minor to allow or permit the minor to go
or be in or upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in
the city within the times provided in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when the minors
are accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult person having the care
and custody of the minor, or when the presence of the minor in or upon any
sidewalk, street, alley or public place in the city is connected with and
required by some legitimate pursuit or occupation in which the minor is
engaged or by some emergency to which the minor is directly connected.



('80 Code, § 20-1)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2084, passed
9-1-82)  Penalty, see § 110-99



§ 110-02  Posting of Signs in Coin-Operated Businesses.



   (A)   In any coin-operated business which is open for business
during hours when no attendant is present there must be posted in a
conspicuous place the name and address of the person to be contacted in
regard to refunds or other problems.



   (B)   The owner of any such business shall be responsible for
posting signs on the property in a conspicuous place which reads:  “Anyone
on the premises not conducting lawful business herein will be considered
trespassing by the establishment.”



('80 Code, § 20-2)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 110-99



§ 110-03  Children in Unattended Vehicle.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a child or other person
unable to care for themselves in any unattended vehicle.  A police officer
discovering this condition shall first attempt to contact the operator of the
vehicle when reasonable to do so.  Any police officer has the authority to
enter the vehicle when he deems it necessary for the protection of the child
or other person.  Such officer will not be liable for any reasonable damages
occurring as a result of action pursuant to this section.



('80 Code, § 20-3)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 110-99



§ 110-04  Overnight Camping Prohibited Outside Licensed Campgrounds.



   (A)   Generally.  Overnight camping by any person, whether or not
such camping takes place in a motor vehicle, shall be prohibited upon any
public or private land, which property is not licensed by the city as a
campground.



   (B)   Camping on own property.  The prohibition of division (A) of
this section shall not apply to the landowner or members of the family when
camping on such land for their own private use and enjoyment provided such
camping is not in violation of Ordinance 583 (Chapter 154).



   (C)   Exemptions.  The prohibition of division (A) of this section
shall not apply to any organized and supervised camping activity on public or
private land and for which the organization has secured the prior permission
of the City Administrator or his designee.



   (D)   Civic and convention center exempt.  The prohibition of
division (A) of this section shall not apply to camping at the Yuma Civic and
Convention Center in compliance with center rules and regulations.



('80 Code, § 20-4)  (Ord. 1908, passed 3-5-80; Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82;
Ord. 2202, passed 4-18-84) Penalty, see § 110-99



§ 110-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 20-5)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 111:  Offenses Against Administration of Justice



Section



   111-01   False request for emergency services



   111-02   False alarms



   111-03   Illegal alarm systems



   111-04   Obedience to officers



   111-05   Impersonating police officer



   111-06   Wearing badges or insignia of officials



   111-07   Obstructing officers



§ 111-01  False Request for Emergency Services.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make a false request
for emergency services; including, but not limited to, police emergency
vehicles, fire emergency vehicles, ambulance services, rescue services, or
any other services designated by the Chief of Police as being emergency
services.



('80 Code, § 20-22)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 111-02  False Alarms.



   (A)   Definitions.  The following words, terms and phrases, when
used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.



      ACT OF GOD.  An unusual, extraordinary, sudden and unexpected
manifestation of the forces of nature, which cannot be prevented by human
care, skill or foresight.



      ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.  A person or persons designated by the City
to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and
administer the provisions of this section.



      ALARM BUSINESS. A person subject to the state and local licensing
requirements, and/or a business engaged in selling, leasing, installing,
servicing or monitoring alarm systems as defined by A.R.S. § 32-101.



      ALARM PERMIT.  A permit issued by the City allowing the
operation of an alarm system within the city.



      ALARM SIGNAL.  A detectable signal; audible, silent, and/or
visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested
to respond.



      ALARM SYSTEM.  Any single device or assembly of equipment
designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or
other illegal activity requiring immediate attention and to which law
enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or
boat alarms, fire alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response.



      ALARM USER.  Any person, corporation, partnership,
proprietorship, governmental or educational entity or any other entity
owning, leasing or operating an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm
system is maintained for the protection of such premises.



      AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION DEVICE.  An automatic dialing device
or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system
which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the Yuma Police
Department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law
enforcement response.



      CANCELLATION.  The process where response is terminated when the
alarm business (designated by the alarm user) notifies the Yuma Police
Department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site
requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation
occurs prior to the Emergency Communication Center dispatching police
officers, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil/criminal
penalty, and no penalty will be assessed.



      CITY.  The City of Yuma or its agent.



      FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the
negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, and signals
activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response
was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before law enforcement
personnel are dispatched to the alarm location. An alarm is false within the
meaning of this section when, upon inspection by the Yuma Police Department,
evidence indicates that no unauthorized entry, robbery, or other such crime
was committed or attempted in or on the premises which would have activated a
properly functioning alarm system. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a FALSE
ALARM shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have
been caused or activated by an electrical storm or Act of God.



      FALSE ALARM AWARENESS CLASS.  A class conducted by law
enforcement or alarm professionals for the purpose of educating alarm users
about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and
the problems created by false alarms.



      LOCAL ALARM.  An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm
site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not
monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm
business or user.



      PERMIT REVOCATION/SUSPENSION OF RESPONSE. The termination of
police response to alarms at a specified alarm site as a result of false
alarms of other violations of this section. Reestablishment of the alarm
permit and police response may occur when the alarm user has provided
sufficient evidence that the cause of excessive false alarms or other
violations of this section has been identified and corrected. Permit
revocation and suspension of response will continue for the remainder of the
permit year or until the corrective process is complete.



      PERMIT YEAR.  A 12-month period beginning on the day and month
on which an alarm permit is issued.



      RUNAWAY ALARM.  An alarm system that produces three or more
alarm signals within one hour that do not appear to be caused by separate
human action. The Yuma Police Department may in its discretion discontinue
police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm.



      SIA CONTROL PANEL STANDARD CP-01.  The American National
Standard Institute (ANSI) approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01
Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details
recommended design features for security system control panels and their
associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control
panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing
organization, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with
SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction".



      VERIFY.  An attempt by the monitoring business, or its
representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone
and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is
made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before
requesting law enforcement dispatch, to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch
request. For the purpose of this section, telephone verification shall
require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the
first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify
themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before
requesting law enforcement dispatch.



   (B)   Alarm permit. 



      (1)   Permit required. No person shall use an alarm system
without obtaining a permit for such alarm system from the City or its
designee. Each alarm permit shall be assigned a unique permit number, and the
user may be required to provide the permit number along with the address to
facilitate law enforcement dispatch.



      (2)   Application. The permit shall be requested on an
application form provided by the City or its designee. An alarm business has
the duty to provide an application to the alarm user.



      (3)   Transfer of possession.  When the possession of the
premises at which an alarm system is maintained is transferred, the person
(user) obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an
alarm permit within 14 days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm
permits are not transferable.



      (4)   Reporting updated information. Whenever the information
provided on the alarm permit application changes, the alarm user shall
provide correct information to the City or its designee within 14 days of the
change. In addition, each year after the issuance of the permit, permit
holders will receive from the City, or its designee, a form requesting
updated information. The permit holder shall complete and return this form
when any of the requested information has changed; failure to comply will
constitute a violation and may result in a civil penalty or suspension of
response.



      (5)   Multiple alarm systems. If an alarm user has one or more
alarm systems protecting two or more separate structures having different
addresses and/or tenants, a separate permit shall be required for each
structure and/or tenant. The single owner of a multi-unit complex with the
same address can obtain one permit.



      (6)   Assessed fines. Failure to make timely payment of
assessed fines or fees may result in revocation of the alarm permit and
suspension of response.



      (7)   Alarm business violation. It shall be a violation of
this section for any person or business to operate an alarm system during the
period in which the alarm users permit is revoked. At no time will an alarm
business attempt to request alarm response services for a specific alarm user
from the police department after notification from the City or its designee
that the specified alarm user's permit is revoked.



   (C)   Duties of the alarm user.



      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method
that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; and



      (2)   Provide the alarm business the permit number, (the
number should be provided to the Emergency Communications Center by the alarm
business to facilitate dispatch);



      (3)   Must respond or cause a representative to respond to the
alarm system's location within 30 minutes when notified by the Yuma Police
Department;



      (4)   Not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than
an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report;



      (5)   An alarm user must obtain a new permit and pay any
associated fees if there is a change in address or ownership of a business or
residence.



   (D)   Duties of the alarm business.



      (1)   Any person engaged in the alarm business in the City,
shall comply with the following:



         (a)   Obtain and maintain the required state, county
and/or City of Yuma license(s).



         (b)   At least monthly, provide a report of all names,
addresses, and telephone numbers of the new users or a designee, who can be
called in an emergency, 24 hours a day; and a local responsible person or
other emergency contact who will respond immediately.



         (c)   Provide the most current contact information for
the alarm user.



         (d)   Alarm business shall supply permit application to
alarm user at time of installation or activation.



      (2)   Ninety days after enactment of this section the alarm
installation businesses shall, on all new and up-graded installations, use
only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01.



      (3)   Prior to activation of the alarm system, the alarm
business must provide oral and written instructions explaining the proper
operation of the alarm system to the alarm user such that the potential for
false alarms is reduced or mitigated.



      (4)   Provide written information of how to obtain service
from the alarm business for the alarm system.



      (5)   An alarm business performing monitoring services shall:



         (a)   Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site
and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid
before requesting dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, as a
minimum that a second call be made to a different number, if the first
attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to
attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, EXCEPT in the case of
a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime-in-progress
has been verified by video and/or audible means.



         (b)   Provide address, and alarm user permit number,
when available, to the Communications Center to facilitate dispatch and/or
cancellations.



         (c)   Communicate any available information about the
zone or sensor activation location of the alarm.



         (d)   Communicate a cancellation to the Law Enforcement
Communications Center as soon as possible following a determination that
response is unnecessary.



   (E)   Prohibited acts.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the
purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other
crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the
premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an
audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes.



      (3)   It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an
automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any
recorded message to the Yuma Police Department.



   (F)   Enforcement of provisions.



      (1)   Excessive false alarms/failure to register.  It is
hereby found and determined that four or more false alarms within a permit
year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful.
Alarm Administrator or representative will notify alarm users, via regular
mail to the mailing address on file or other acceptable means, of excessive
false alarms and/or failure to register. Alarm users are required to keep
mailing addresses and contact information current. Officers may be used to
hand deliver notices if letters are returned or unanswered. Civil penalties
for false alarms within a permit year may be assessed against an alarm user
as follows:



         First and second false alarm   Notification only



         Third false alarm   $100 or False Alarm Awareness Class



         Fourth false alarm   $100



         Fifth false alarm   $125



         Sixth false alarm   $150



         Seventh false alarm   $175



         Eighth false alarm   $200



         Ninth false alarm   $225



         Tenth false alarm   $250



         Additional alarms   Permit revoked



         Failure to register   $50 in addition to other penalties



      (2)   Other civil penalty(ies). Failure to complete mandatory
False Alarm Awareness Classes along with other violations of this section
will be enforced through the assessment of civil penalty(ies) in the amount
of $100 per violation.



      (3)   Payment of civil penalty(ies). Civil penalty(ies) shall
be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice.



      (4)   Civil non- criminal violation. A violation of any of the
provisions of this sectoin shall be a civil violation and shall not
constitute a misdemeanor or infraction.



   (G)   False Alarm Awareness Class.  The Alarm Administrator may
create and implement a False Alarm Awareness Class and may request the
assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and
implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems
created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false
alarms. The City may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying
one assessed fine.



   (H)   Appeals.



      (1)   Appeals process. Assessments of civil penalty(ies) and
other enforcement decisions made under this section  may be appealed by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Yuma Police Department within ten
days after the date of notification of the assessment of civil penalty(ies)
or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within
this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the
assessment of penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be
heard through an administrative process designed and implemented by the City.



      (2)   Appeal standard. The hearing body shall review an appeal
from the assessment of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decisions
using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a
determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment
of civil penalty(ies) or other enforcement decision, the hearing body shall
have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalty(ies) or reverse any
other enforcement decision where warranted. The decision of the hearing body
shall be final and may be appealed to the appropriate judicial jurisdiction
in accordance with the administrative appeal process set forth at A.R.S. §
12-901 et seq.



   (I)   Confidentiality. All information contained in and gathered
through the alarm registration applications, all response records,
applications for appeals and any other alarm records are considered public
record unless otherwise prohibited or restricted by state law. The storage,
processing and transmission of payment cardholder data is PCI Compliant. All
permits are destroyed in accordance with Arizona State Record Retention
Schedules.



   (J)   Government immunity.  Alarm registration is not intended to,
nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or
implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage
resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed
and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an
alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges that the Yuma Police
Department response may be influenced by factors such as: the availability of
police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions,
emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history.



   (K)   Severability.  The provisions of this section are severable.
If a court determines that a word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph,
subsection, section, or other provision is invalid or that the application of
any part of the provision to any person or circumstance is invalid, the
remaining provisions and the application of those provisions to other persons
or circumstances are not affected by that decision.



('80 Code, § 20-23)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-013, passed
5-20-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 111-03  Illegal Alarm Systems.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to install any alarm system which
transmits a signal message or warning to a designated police telephone line.



('80 Code, § 20-24)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 111-04  Obedience to Officers.



   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful
order or direction of a police officer or Fire Department official.



('80 Code, § 20-25)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 111-05  Impersonating Police Officer.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, by wearing or carrying clothing or
insignia resembling the uniforms or any parts thereof worn by the police
officers of the city, or by doing any act, to impersonate a police officer,
marshal, constable or officer in any manner.



('80 Code, § 20-26)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 111-06  Wearing Badges or Insignia of Officials.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear a fire fighter's or police
officer's badge or insignia, or the badge or insignia of any public officer
or inspector of the city when not properly authorized to wear such badge or
insignia.



('80 Code, § 20-27)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 111-07  Obstructing Officers.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder,
delay or otherwise prevent or attempt to do so any officer or employee of
this city in the performance of his duties.



('80 Code, § 20-28)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Chapter 112:  Offenses Against Property



Section



General Provisions



   112-01   Swimming in irrigation ditches and city lakes and ponds
prohibited; parental responsibility



Graffiti



   112-15   Definitions



   112-16   Graffiti prohibited



   112-17   Accessibility to graffiti implements



   112-18   Graffiti as nuisance; graffiti removal



   112-19   Abatement procedures; notice; administrative review



   112-20   Rewards and reimbursements for information



   112-21   Anti-Graffiti Trust Fund



Littering on Public Property



   112-30   Use of receptacles



   112-31   Unauthorized use of commercial trash receptacles



   112-32   Cleanup costs



Littering on Private Property



   112-45   Owner to maintain premises free of litter



   112-46   City may clean premises



   112-47   Notice to remove litter



   112-48   Time for compliance with requirements



   112-49   Enforcement



   112-50   Appeal



   112-51   Removal by city



   112-52   Assessment of costs for removal by city; statements



   112-53   Lien for removal



   112-54   Effect of assessment; lien



   112-55   Payments



Balloons/Inflatable Devices



   112-60   Definitions



   112-61   Balloons and inflatable devices



   112-99   Penalty



General Provisions



§ 112-01  Swimming in Irrigation Ditches and City Lakes and Ponds
Prohibited; Parental Responsibility.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or bathe in any
canal, irrigation ditch or lateral within the city which is designed for the
conveyance of water for the irrigation of farmlands, or in any city lake or
pond. ('80 Code, § 20-49)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of the person
of a minor child to willfully and knowingly permit or encourage such minor
child to swim or bathe in any canal, irrigation ditch or lateral in the city
which is designed for the conveyance of water for the irrigation of
farmlands, or in any city lake or pond. ('80 Code, § 20-50)



(Ord. 852, passed 8-6-62; Ord. O2004-61, passed 10-6-04)  Penalty, see §
112-99



Statutory reference:



   Criminal damage to property, see A.R.S. §§ 13-1601 et seq.



Graffiti



§ 112-15  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER.  Any aerosol container that is adapted or
made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of
defacing property.



   BROAD-TIPPED MARKERS.  Any type of marker or similar instrument with a
flat or angled writing surface of one-fourth-inch or greater which contains
ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble.



   BUSINESS DAYS.  The days Monday through Friday.



   ETCHING EQUIPMENT.  Any tool, device, or substance that can be used to
make permanent marks on the surface of any property.



   GRAFFITI.  Any unauthorized markings, such as initials, symbols,
slogans, emblems, or drawings written, spray-painted, etched, or sketched on
a sidewalk, wall, fence, building, sign or any other structure or surface.



   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT.  Any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker,
etching equipment, brush, paint, epoxy; or other similar substance capable of
being applied to the surface of any structure or property.



   MINORS.  Any person under the age of 18 years.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  Property owner, tenant in possession, or other
persons responsible for the property.



   UNAUTHORIZED.  Without prior written permission of the responsible
party.



('80 Code, § 19-80)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96)



§ 112-16  Graffiti Prohibited.



   (A)   No person may apply graffiti to any natural or manmade surface
on any publicly owned property or any privately owned property without the
prior written consent of the owner or responsible party.  The application of
graffiti is deemed to be an act of malicious or wilful misconduct.



   (B)   No person may possess aerosol paint containers, broad-tipped
markers, etching equipment, or any other graffiti implements on any public
property or private property with the intent to violate or in violation of
division (A) of this section.



   (C)   No minor may possess aerosol paint containers, broad-tipped
markers, etching equipment, or any other graffiti implements on any public
property, structure or facility, any school property, structure or facility,
or any private property without prior written permission of the lawful owner
or responsible party for the property.  The provisions of this section do
not apply to minors possessing such implements for classes or organized
extracurricular activities that require the use of such implements and whose
use is limited to legitimate activities.



('80 Code, § 19-81)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 112-99



§ 112-17  Accessibility to Graffiti Implements.



   (A)   Furnishing to minors prohibited.



      (1)   No person may sell, give, loan, or otherwise make
available any aerosol paint containers, broad-tipped markers, etching
equipment, or any other graffiti implements to a minor unless that minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or
transfer, and the purchase is for legitimate use in classes, organized
extracurricular activities, or other legitimate activities.



      (2)   No minor may furnish fraudulent evidence of majority at
the time of purchase or transfer of any aerosol paint containers,
broad-tipped markers, etching equipment, or any other graffiti implements.



   (B)   Display and storage.  Every person who owns, operates, or
manages a commercial retail establishment that sells aerosol paint
containers, broad-tipped markers, etching equipment, or any other graffiti
implements must store the implements in an area inaccessible to the public
without employee or owner assistance, or that is continuously observable
through direct visual observation or surveillance equipment by the
establishment's owners or employees during the regular course of business.



   (C)   Signs required.  Every person who operates a commercial
retail establishment that sells graffiti implements must:



      (1)   Place a sign at or near the display of such products
stating:  “Graffiti is against the law.  Any person who defaces property
with paint, markers, any other liquid or marking device is guilty of a crime
punishable by imprisonment and/or fines in excess of $750,” or words to
that effect.



      (2)   Place a sign in a prominent and accessible workplace
area frequented by employees that states:  “Selling aerosol paint
containers, broad-tipped markers, etching equipment, or any other graffiti
implements to persons under the age of 18 is against the law and punishable
by a fine of up to $500,” or words to that effect.



('80 Code, § 19-82)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96; Ord. O2010-37, passed
8-18-10)  Penalty, see § 112-99



§ 112-18  Graffiti as Nuisance; Graffiti Removal.



   (A)   Graffiti as nuisance.  The existence of graffiti on public
and private property in violation of this subchapter is expressly declared to
be a public nuisance.



   (B)   Removal of graffiti by perpetrator.  Any person applying
graffiti on public or private property must remove or pay for the removal of
the graffiti in a manner approved by the property owner within 24 hours of
notification.  Failure of any person to remove or pay for removal of
graffiti constitutes an additional violation of this subchapter.  If
graffiti is applied by a minor, the parents or legal guardian are also
responsible for removal or payment for removal of graffiti.



   (C)   Removal of graffiti by city.  The city is authorized, but not
required, to use public funds for graffiti abatement on public or private
property.  The city is not required to paint, remove, or repair an area more
extensive than that covered by graffiti, unless the owner has made prior
arrangements with the city and agreed to pay the costs for more extensive
painting, removal, or repair.



('80 Code, § 19-83)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96)  Penalty, see § 112-99



§ 112-19  Abatement Procedures; Notice; Administrative Review.



   (A)   Permission for entry:



      (1)   Permission from owner.  If the owner or responsible
party signs a permission form, the city may enter the property to abate
graffiti.



      (2)   No permission from owner.  If the property owner or
responsible party refuses to sign a permission form or cannot be located and
the city, at its sole discretion, deems it appropriate to abate graffiti on
the property, the city will issue a notice of graffiti abatement.  The
notice may be served in person, by certified mail, by posting on the subject
property; or publishing in a city newspaper of general circulation.



   (B)   The notice of graffiti abatement will contain the following
information:



      (1)   Identify the property and describe the nature of the
graffiti.



      (2)   A statement declaring that the property is a public
nuisance.



      (3)   A statement declaring that abatement may commence within
three business days from the date of the notice.



   (C)   Designation of enforcement authority and hearing officers:



      (1)   All officers and investigators of the City Police
Department, City Fire Department, the City Building Official, the code
enforcement officer, the building inspectors, sanitation inspector, and the
code enforcement specialist are authorized to issue notices of graffiti
abatement for violations of this code within city jurisdiction.



      (2)   The enforcing authority's department director will act
as the hearing officer in the event of administrative review.



   (D)   Administrative review:



      (1)   Request for review.  An owner or responsible party may
object to the notice of graffiti abatement by filing a written request for
review with the hearing officer no later than three business days after
receiving the notice of graffiti abatement.



      (2)   Review process.  Upon timely receipt of the request for
review, the hearing officer, will notify the enforcement authority to defer
enforcement action until the review is final.  The owner or responsible
party must promptly supply the hearing officer with any additional
information necessary to determine whether or not the property constitutes a
nuisance.  When the review is final, the hearing officer will notify the
owner or responsible party and the enforcement authority of his findings
within five business days.  The owner or responsible party will be notified
by certified mail.



      (3)   Determinations of the hearing officer.  The
determination by the hearing officer is final and not appealable.  If the
hearing officer determines that the property contains graffiti and is a
public nuisance, the hearing officer will issue a written eradication order
stating that the city may enter upon the property within 24 hours and abate
the graffiti.



('80 Code, § 19-84)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96)



§ 112-20  Rewards and Reimbursements for Information.



   (A)   The city may offer a reward in an amount to be established by
the City Council for information leading to the identification and indictment
of any person who violates §§ 112-16 and 132-17(A) of this subchapter. 
The violator must reimburse the city for any reward paid.  If multiple
persons contribute information, the reward will be divided in a manner the
city deems appropriate.



   (B)   Claims for rewards must be submitted to the 78-Crime Board.



   (C)   No reward claim is allowed unless the city has investigated
and verified the accuracy of the claim and determines the requirements of
this section have been met.



('80 Code, § 19-86)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96)



§ 112-21  Anti-Graffiti Trust Fund.



   The City Council hereby creates the City of Yuma Anti-Graffiti Trust
Fund.  The proportion of the penalties assessed against violators of this
subchapter that accrue to the city will be placed in the fund, along with any
monetary donations received from persons wishing to contribute to the fund. 
The Council will direct the expenditures of monies in the fund. 
Expenditures are limited to payment for the cost of graffiti removal, rewards
for information leading to the successful arrest and indictment of violators
of this subchapter, the costs of administering this subchapter, and such
other public purposes that are involved with graffiti abatement.



('80 Code, § 19-87)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96)



Littering on Public Property



§ 112-30  Use of Receptacles.



   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or an authorized private
receptacle shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.



('80 Code, § 14-128)  (Ord. 1362, passed 6-5-74)  Penalty, see § 112-99



Charter reference:



   Power to require removal of rubbish, weeds, debris, see Charter Art.
III, § 6



Statutory reference:



   Prevent throwing of offensive materials on streets, see A.R.S. §
9-276(A)(7)



   Removal of trash, rubbish, weeds, filth, debris, see A.R.S. § 9-499



§ 112-31  Unauthorized Use of Commercial Trash Receptacles.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to place litter in commercial trash
receptacles unless so authorized by the property owner or the person that is
paying for such commercial trash service.



('80 Code, § 14-129)  (Ord. 1362, passed 6-5-74)  Penalty, see § 112-99



§ 112-32  Cleanup Costs.



   Any person violating the provisions of this subchapter, in addition to
any penalty imposed by this code, shall be liable for any costs assessed for
removal of such litter.



('80 Code, § 14-130)  (Ord. 1362, passed 6-5-74)



Littering on Private Property



§ 112-45  Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter.



   The owner, lessee or occupant of any private premises within the city
shall at all times maintain the premises free and clean of all litter,
rubbish, trash, refuse, weeds or other accumulation of filth and debris.



('80 Code, § 14-142)  (Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)  Penalty, see § 112-99



§ 112-46  City May Clean Premises.



   The city may require, in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter, any owner, lessor or occupant of property to remove litter from
the premises.  If such owner shall fail to comply, the city shall remove
such litter in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 14-143)



§ 112-47  Notice to Remove Litter.



   (A)   Required.  Any person owning, leasing or occupying any
property within the city who fails, neglects or refuses to remove or properly
dispose of litter located on the property, shall he given written notice by
the Director of Public Services or the Fire Chief of the city to remove and
clean all litter from such property.  This notice shall specify the date of
compliance within which such litter shall be removed.  The date of
compliance shall not be less than 30 days from the date of said notice. ('80
Code, § 14-144)



   (B)   Contents.  The notice to dispose of litter shall specify the
litter to he removed and disposed of and shall contain an estimate of the
cost of removal of said litter by the city, a statement that unless the
person owning, leasing or occupying such property complies therewith before
the date of compliance as set forth therein, that the city will perform the
necessary work at the expense of such person owning, leasing or occupying the
property, at a cost not to exceed the estimate as given in said notice and
that such person may file an appeal in writing to the Council prior to the
date of compliance. ('80 Code, § 14-145)



   (C)   Service personally or by mail.  Notice to remove litter shall
be either personally served on or mailed to the owner or lessee at his last
known address by certified or registered mail or the address to which the tax
bill for the property was last mailed. ('80 Code, § 14-146)



   (D)   Person to be served.  Notice to dispose of litter shall be
given to the owner, lessee or occupant of the property from which litter is
required to be removed. ('80 Code, § 14-147)



   (E)   Notice to owner.  If the owner does not reside on such
property, a duplicate notice shall also be sent to him by registered or
certified mail at his last known address.  Where notice is given by
certified or registered mail, the date of mailing shall be deemed the date of
service on the addressee. ('80 Code, § 14-148)



(Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69; Ord. 1336, passed 11-7-73)  Penalty, see §
112-99



§ 112-48  Time for Compliance with Requirements.



   Any owner, lessee or occupant of property to whom a notice to remove
litter is served shall have not less than 30 days to correct defects
enumerated in the notice.  If such owner, lessee or occupant shall appeal to
the City Council, the owner, lessee or occupant shall be granted 30 days
after determination of the appeal to comply with the decision of the Council
unless the Council provides for a different date of compliance.



('80 Code, § 14-149)  (Ord. 1336, passed 11-7-73)



§ 112-49  Enforcement.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be enforced by the Fire Chief,
the Director of Public Works and such subordinates as they may from time to
time appoint.



('80 Code, § 14-150)  (Ord. 1336, passed 11-7-73; Ord. 2531, passed 8-21-91)



§ 112-50  Appeal.



   Prior to the date set for compliance as specified in the notice, the
owner, lessee or occupant of such property may file an appeal in writing to
the Council.  The Council shall, at its next regular meeting hear and
determine the appeal.  The decision of the Council shall be final.  The
Council may either affirm, reverse or modify the previous decision.  No
action shall be taken by the city until the Council has heard and determined
all matters contained in the appeal.



('80 Code, § 14-151)  (Ord. 1336, passed 11-7-73)



§ 112-51  Removal by City.



   If any person to whom notice has been given as herein provided shall
fail, neglect or refuse to remove any or all of the litter from such property
within the period of time set forth in said notice or within such further
time as may be granted by the Council upon determination of an appeal, the
Director of Public Services is authorized and directed to remove and dispose
of the litter at the expense of the owner, lessee or occupant of the property.



('80 Code, § 14-152)  (Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)



§ 112-52  Assessment of Costs for Removal by City; Statements.



   (A)   Statement prepared.



      (1)   Upon completion of work done by the city under the
provisions of this subchapter, the Director of Public Works shall prepare a
verified statement of account of which shall contain:



         (a)   The actual costs of the litter removal.



         (b)   The date the work was completed.



         (c)   The street address and legal description of the
property on which work was done.



      (2)   The actual cost of such removal and abatement shall
include five percent additional inspection and other incidental costs in
connection therewith, provided however, the actual cost as contained in said
verified statement shall not exceed the amount of the estimated cost as set
forth in said notice. ('80 Code, § 14-153)  (Ord. 2531, passed 8-21-91)



   (B)   Statement served.  A duplicate copy of the verified statement
of charges prepared in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter
shall be served upon the same person or persons who received notice to remove
litter, and shall be served in the same manner as the notice to remove litter
was served. ('80 Code, § 14-154)



   (C)   Appeal provided.  Any owner, lessee or occupant of property
assessed under the provisions of this subchapter shall have 30 days from the
date of service of the verified statement upon him within which to appeal, in
writing, to the Council from the amount of the assessment as contained in
said verified statement. ('80 Code, § 14-155)



   (D)   Appeal dispositions.  If an appeal is taken the City Council
shall at its next regular meeting hear and determine the appeal and may
either affirm the amount of the assessment, modify the amount or determine
that no assessment shall be made.  The decision of the Council shall be
final and binding upon all persons. ('80 Code, § 14-156)



   (E)   Statement final.  The assessment of costs for removal of
litter by the city shall become final 30 days after service of such
assessment.  If the owner, lessee or occupant shall appeal the assessment,
the assessment shall become final 30 days after determination of the appeal.
('80 Code, § 14-157)



(Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)



§ 112-53  Lien for Removal.



   (A)   Authorized.  If an assessment made in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter is not paid as provided, it shall be recorded
in the office of the City Clerk.  From the date of its recording it shall be
a lien on the private premises assessed hereunder, and the several amounts
assessed against such private premises until paid. ('80 Code, § 14-158)



   (B)   Priority.  A lien for removal of litter shall be subject to
and inferior to a lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages
and encumbrances of record. ('80 Code, § 14-159)



   (C)   Foreclosure.  A sale of property to satisfy a lien obtained
under the provisions of this section shall be made upon judgment of
foreclosure and order of sale.  The city shall have the right to bring an
action to enforce the lien in the county court any time after the recording
of the assessment. ('80 Code, § 14-160)



(Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)



§ 112-54  Effect of Assessment; Lien.



   The recorded assessment shall be prima facie evidence of the truth of
all matters recited therein, and the regularity of all proceedings prior to
the recording thereof.  A prior assessment for the purposes provided in this
subchapter shall not be a bar to a subsequent assessment or assessments for
such purposes, and any number of liens on the same private premises may be
enforced in the same action.  Failure to enforce the lien by foreclosure
shall not affect the validity of the lien.



('80 Code, § 14-161)  (Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)



§ 112-55  Payments.



   All payments made under the provisions of this subchapter shall be made
to the Finance Director.



('80 Code, § 14-162)  (Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)



Balloons/Inflatable Devices



§ 112-60  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BALLOONS/INFLATABLE DEVICES. One or more balloons or inflatable devices
used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a means of directing attention
to: any business or profession; a commodity or service sold, offered, or
manufactured; or to any entertainment.



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. All officers and investigators of the city
police and fire departments, the city Building Official, city code
enforcement officers, building inspectors, and code enforcement specialists
are authorized to issue notices to comply and citations for violations of
this code within city jurisdiction.



(Ord. O-2007-75, passed 12-5-07)



§ 112-61  Balloons and Inflatable Devices.



   The following applies to the use of balloons and other inflatable
devices used as signs:



   (A)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of balloons
shall not be higher than the building located on the site.



   (B)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of balloons
shall be tethered to the ground a distance from the property line equal to
the balloon height. Multiple balloons tied to each other must be secured by
lines of sufficient strength so that the balloons do not become separated
from each other to such an extent that the separated balloons violate height
restrictions, air space restrictions, rights-of-way incursions or cause any
other hazard set forth herein.



   (C)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of balloons
are required to be maintained solely on the property of the business for
which it is advertising.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow individual
balloons/inflatable devices or strings of balloons to cross into the public
right-of-way, whether in the air or on the ground.



   (E)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of balloons
are not allowed to be cut loose or to blow away. Maintenance and disposal is
the responsibility of the business using the balloons or inflatable devices
for advertising. Balloons, inflatable devices and any parts thereof must be
stored, collected, transported and disposed of in a manner consistent with
the discarding of any other garbage, trash and other regulated wastes as
provided by applicable law or regulation.



(Ord. O2007-75, passed 12-5-07)



§ 112-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for
which no penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 10-99.



   (B)   Any person who violates §§ 112-16 and 112-17(A) of this
chapter is guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and will be punished by a fine not
to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or both fine
and imprisonment.



   (C)   Any person who violates § 112-17(B) and (C) of this chapter
is guilty of a civil offense and will be punished by a fine not less than
$250 per offense and not to exceed $500 per offense.



   (D)   Any person that violates any provision of § 112-61 is subject
to the following penalties;



      (1)   A first violation of any section of § 112-61 is
punishable as a class 3 misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than one day of by both such fine or imprisonment.



      (2)   A second offense violation of any section of § 112-61
is punishable as a class 2 misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed $750 or by
imprisonment for not more than five days or by both such fine or imprisonment.



      (3)   Third and subsequent violations for a violation of any
section of § 112-61 is punishable as a class 1 misdemeanor with a fine not
to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or by both
such fine and imprisonment.



('80 Code, § 19-85)  (Ord. O96-36, passed 4-3-96; Ord. O-2007-75, passed
12-5-07; Ord. O2010-37, passed 8-18-10)



Chapter 113:  Offenses Against Public Morals



Section



General Provisions



   113-01   Soliciting sexual intercourse



   113-02   Indecent exposure by entertainers and waitresses prohibited



   113-03   Liability of owner/operator of business



Prostitution



   113-15   Definitions



   113-16   Misdemeanor committed



   113-17   Solicitation



   113-18   Use of taxicabs for immoral purposes



Disorderly Houses



   113-30   Keeping unlawful



   113-31   Inmates



   113-32   Loitering



   113-33   Owner of building permitting prostitution



   113-34   Ejection of inmates



Gambling



   113-45   Confiscation of money



   113-46   Minors forbidden to play games of chance



General Provisions



§ 113-01  Soliciting Sexual Intercourse.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in any place in the city to solicit
a person of the opposite sex, to whom he or she is not married, to have
sexual intercourse with such person so soliciting.



('80 Code, § 20-104)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-02  Indecent Exposure by Entertainers and Waitresses Prohibited.



   Any person entertaining or performing any dance or in any play,
exhibition, show or other entertainment, or any female serving food or
spirituous liquors as defined by Title 4, Chapter 1, Article 1, Arizona
Revised Statutes, 1956, as amended, in a restaurant, nightclub, bar, cabaret,
tavern, tap room, theater or in a private, fraternal, social, golf or country
club, as defined by said statute, or in any public place who appears clothed,
costumed, unclothed or uncostumed in such a manner that the areola (the more
darkly pigmented portion of the breast encircling the nipple) is not covered
by a brassiere consisting of a fully opaque fabric material, or the lower
part of his or her torso, consisting of the private parts or anal cleft or
cleavage of the buttocks, is not covered by a fully opaque fabric material or
is so thinly covered as to appear uncovered, shall be guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-107)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-03  Liability of Owner/Operator of Business.



   Any person who knowingly conducts, maintains, owns, manages, operates
or furnishes any restaurant, nightclub, bar, cabaret, tavern, tap room,
theater or any place serving food or spirituous liquors, as defined by Title
4, Chapter 1, Article 1, Arizona Revised Statutes, 1956, as amended, or a
private, fraternal, social, golf or country club, as defined by said statute,
or in any public place, where a female appears clothed, costumed, unclothed
or uncostumed in such a manner that the areola (the more darkly pigmented
portion of the breast encircling the nipple) is not covered by a brassiere
consisting of a fully opaque fabric material, or any person appears clothed,
costumed, unclothed, or uncostumed in such a manner that the lower part of
his or her torso, consisting of the private parts or anal cleft or cleavage
of the buttocks, is not covered by a fully opaque fabric material or is so
thinly covered as to appear uncovered, shall be guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-108)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Prostitution



§ 113-15  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PROSTITUTION.  The act of performing sexual activity for hire by a
male or female person.



   SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Vaginal or anal intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
anilingus, masturbation, sodomy or bestiality.



('80 Code, § 20-120)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 113-16  Misdemeanor Committed.



   A person is guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor who:



   (A)   Offers to, agrees to or commits an act of prostitution;



   (B)   Solicits or hires another person to commit an act of
prostitution;



   (C)   Is in a public place or place open to public view and
manifests an intent to commit an act of prostitution;



   (D)   Aids or abets the commission of any of the acts prohibited by
this section.



('80 Code, § 20-121)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-17  Solicitation.



   Any prostitute, or other person soliciting for a prostitute or for a
place of prostitution, or any person who is an habitue of a place of
prostitution, or who shall solicit persons to visit or patronize a prostitute
or place of prostitution or make such solicitation upon the streets or in any
public place in the city shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-122)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-18  Use of Taxicabs for Immoral Purposes.



   It shall be unlawful for any person having charge or control of any
taxicab to knowingly use or permit the same to be used for any immoral
purpose, or to solicit or offer to procure any person for an act of
prostitution in such taxicab, or to knowingly convey in such taxicab any
person to any house of prostitution or assignation.



('80 Code, § 20-123)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Disorderly Houses



§ 113-30  Keeping Unlawful.



   Every person who keeps any disorderly house, or any house or place of
general or public resort by which the peace, comfort or decency of the
immediate neighborhood is habitually disturbed, or who keeps an inn, hotel,
rooming or lodginghouse in a disorderly manner, shall be guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-135)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-31  Inmates.



   Any person who is an inmate of any disorderly place or place of ill
fame, for the purpose of prostitution, fornication or adultery, shall be
guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-136)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-32  Loitering.



   Any person frequenting, loitering in or continuing in any place of ill
fame, bawdyhouse or place of prostitution shall be guilty of a class 2
misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-137)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-33  Owner of Building Permitting Prostitution.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having charge or control
of any house, building, apartment, room or premises to rent or lease any such
house, building, apartment, room or premises to any person to be used as a
place of prostitution or to knowingly permit any such house, building,
apartment, room or premises to be used for prostitution or for immoral
purposes or practices.  Any such owner or person violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 20-138)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 113-34  Ejection of Inmates.



   The owner or person having charge or control of any house, building,
apartment, room or premises shall be and is hereby authorized to summarily
remove and eject from such house, building, apartment, room or premises, any
tenant, subtenant, lessee or sublessee or any person who shall commit any act
of prostitution, or any immoral act of prostitution, or any immoral act or
practice or who shall knowingly suffer or permit to be committed any act of
prostitution or any immoral act or practice in or about such house, building,
apartment, room or premises.



('80 Code, § 20-139)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



Gambling



§ 113-45  Confiscation of Money.



   All money or stakes being used in the conduct of any gambling game,
when seized by police officers shall be brought before the city magistrate
and if the magistrate upon hearing the evidence, should find the same to have
been used in conducting a gambling game, such money or stakes shall be
forfeited to the city by the magistrate ordering such money or stakes
deposited with the Finance Director.



('80 Code, § 20-154)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



§ 113-46  Minors Forbidden to Play Games of Chance.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, controlling or in
charge of any game of chance, or any gambling devices or appliances to suffer
or permit any minors to play at or patronize the same.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to pinball
games where value received is a free game.



('80 Code, § 20-155)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Chapter 114:  Weapons



Section



General Provisions



   114-01   Definitions



   114-02   Manufacture, sale and possession of certain weapons
prohibited



   114-03   Exceptions



   114-04   Brass knuckles, and the like



   114-05   Exhibiting a deadly weapon



Firearms



   114-15   Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions



   114-16   Forfeiture



   114-17   Disposition of confiscated weapon



Chemical Weapons; Fire Bombs



   114-30   Definitions



   114-31   Possession, manufacture and disposition prohibited



   114-32   Exceptions



   114-99   Penalty



General Provisions



§ 114-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CANE GUN.  Any firearm mounted or enclosed in a stick, staff, rod,
crutch or similar device, designed to be or capable of being used as an aid
in walking, if such firearm may be fired while mounted or enclosed therein.



   FLECHETTE DART.  A dart, capable of being fired from a firearm, which
measures approximately one inch in length, with tail fins which take up
five-sixteenths inch of the body.



   NUNCHAKU.  An instrument consisting of two or more sticks, clubs, bars
or rods to be used as handles, connected by a rope, cord, wire or chain, in
the design of a weapon used in connection with the practice of a system of
self-defense such as karate.



   SAWED-OFF SHOTGUN.  Any firearm (including any revolver) manufactured,
designed, or converted to fire shotgun ammunition having a barrel or barrels
of less than 18 inches in length, or a rifle having a barrel or barrels of
less than 16 inches in length, or any weapon made from a rifle or shotgun
(whether by manufacture, alteration, modification or otherwise) if such
weapon as modified has an overall length of less than 26 inches.



   WALLET GUN.  Any firearm mounted or enclosed in a case, resembling a
wallet, designed to be or capable of being carried in a pocket or purse, if
such firearm may be fired while mounted or enclosed in such case.



('80 Code, § 32-1)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 114-02  Manufacture, Sale and Possession of Certain Weapons Prohibited.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or cause to
be manufactured, import into the city, keep for sale, or offer or expose for
sale, or give, lend or possess any cane gun or wallet gun, any firearm which
is not immediately recognizable as a firearm, any ammunition which contains
or consists of any flechette dart, or any instrument or weapon of the kind
commonly known as a blackjack, billy, nunchaku, sandclub, sandbag, sawed-off
shotgun or metal knuckles, or have in his  possession any homemade weapon
constructed for the purpose of inflicting serious injury or to carry
concealed upon his person any explosive substance, other than fixed
ammunition or to carry concealed upon his person any dagger or other knife
designed or intended for fighting.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture or cause to
be manufactured, import, keep for sale, or offer or expose for sale, or to
give, lend, or possess any instrument, without handle, consisting of a metal
plate having three or more radiating points with one or more sharp edges and
designed in the shape of a polygon, trefoil, cross, star, diamond or other
geometric shape for use as a weapon for throwing.



('80 Code, § 32-2)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 114-99



§ 114-03  Exceptions.



   (A)   Section 114-02(A) shall not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   The manufacture, possession, transportation or use, with
blank cartridges, of sawed-off shotguns solely as props for motion picture
film or television program production when such is authorized by the
Department of Justice.



      (2)   The possession of a nunchaku on the premises of a school
which holds a regulatory or business license and teaches the arts of
self-defense.



      (3)   The manufacture of a nunchaku for sale to, or the sale
of a nunchaku to, a school which holds a regulatory or business license and
teaches the arts of self-defense.



   (B)   Section 114-02(B) shall not apply to the authorized use of any
of the above weapons by certified law enforcement officers.



('80 Code, § 32-3)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 114-04  Brass Knuckles, and the Like.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or to have in
his possession for the purpose of sale or giving away, or to display for sale
or giving away any brass knuckles or other knuckles of metal, billy or
blackjack, except for resale to a law enforcement officer or a licensed
security guard.



('80 Code, § 32-4)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 114-99



§ 114-05  Exhibiting a Deadly Weapon.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, not in necessary self-defense, in
the presence of another, to draw or exhibit any deadly weapon in a
threatening manner, or to, in any manner, unlawfully use the weapon in a
fight or quarrel.



('80 Code, § 32-6)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 114-99



Firearms



§ 114-15  Discharge of Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions.



   No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, including but not
limited to an air gun, BB gun, pellet gun, dart gun, gas operated gun, sling
shot or other similar gun or instrument; provided, however, this section
shall not apply to the use of any such gun or instrument by:



   (A)   A law enforcement officer or other duly authorized public
official or employee in the performance of any official duty.



   (B)   Licensed shooting galleries.



   (C)   Any person to whom a license, permit or authority is issued by
the Chief of Police for the use of such gun or instrument for a valid and
proper purpose and for use in a manner not likely to harm any person, animal
or property.



   (D)   Any person when used only for the necessary protection of
property, habitation, or person in a manner authorized by the laws of the
state or under or within rights guaranteed by the Constitution of this state
or of the United States.



   (E)   Any person engaged in a shooting event such as target
practice, sighting-in or a shooting competition while at a city designated
shooting facility.



   (F)   Any person to lawfully take wildlife during an open season
established by the Arizona Game and Fish Commission and subject to the
limitations prescribed by A.R.S. Title 17 and Arizona Game and Fish
Commission rules and orders, except that no person shall discharge a firearm
within one-fourth mile of an occupied structure.  For purposes of this
paragraph, "take" has the same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 17-101 or its
successor.



   (G)   Any person to whom a depredation permit has been issued by the
Arizona Game and Fish Department, Department of Agriculture or the United
States Fish and Wildlife Service.  Such person(s) or their agent is
restricted to the limitations of the depredation permit for the period the
permit is valid, and shall coordinate such activities through the Chief of
Police.



('80 Code, § 32-23)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O98-77, passed
9-30-98; Ord. O2011-32, passed 9-7-11)  Penalty, see § 114-99



§ 114-16  Forfeiture.



   (A)   Every person convicted of a violation of § 114-15 is guilty
of a misdemeanor and shall forfeit to the Chief of Police the gun or
instrument so fired or discharged.



   (B)   Any weapon used in the commission of any act prohibited by law
which such act is committed within the city shall be forfeited to the Chief
of Police.



('80 Code, § 32-24)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 114-17  Disposition of Confiscated Weapon.



   Every officer upon making any arrest and taking weapons pursuant to
this chapter shall deliver the same to the city magistrate to be held by him
until the final determination of the prosecution for the offense.  Upon a
finding of guilty, the magistrate shall deliver the weapon forthwith to the
Chief of Police who shall make disposition of the weapon in the manner
prescribed by state law.



('80 Code, § 32-25)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



Chemical Weapons; Fire Bombs



§ 114-30  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DISPOSE OF.  Give, give away, loan, offer, offer for sale, sell,
transfer, hurl, throw or cause to be hurled or thrown.



   FIRE BOMB.  A breakable container containing a flammable liquid with a
flash point of 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65.5 degrees Celsius) or less, having
a wick or similar device capable of being ignited, but no device commercially
manufactured primarily for the purpose of illumination shall be deemed to be
a fire bomb.



('80 Code, § 32-42)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 114-31  Possession, Manufacture and Disposition Prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Possess any of the competent parts of a firebomb with intent
to willfully and maliciously use such material, substance or device to set
fire to or burn any buildings or property.



   (B)   Possess, manufacture or dispose of a fire bomb.



('80 Code, § 32-43)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2010, passed
5-6-81)  Penalty, see § 114-99



§ 114-32  Exceptions.



   The provisions of § 114-31 shall not prohibit:



   (A)   The authorized use or possession of any material, substance or
device described in this subchapter by a member of the armed forces of the
United States or National Guard of the State of Arizona, or by firemen,
police officers or peace officers authorized by the properly constituted
authorities and acting in the course of their official duties;



   (B)   The use or possession of any material, substance or device
described therein when used solely for scientific research or educational
purposes, or for any lawful burning;



   (C)   The manufacture or disposal of a fire bomb for the parties or
purposes described in this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 32-44)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 114-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 32-5)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 115:  Aggressive Solicitation



Section



   115-01   Definitions



   115-02   Prohibited acts



 



   115-99   Penalty



§ 115-01 Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGGRESSIVE MANNER.  Includes either individually or as a group:



      (1)   Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact
with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the
person's consent; or



      (2)   Approaching or following the person being solicited, if
the conduct is:



         (a)   Intended to or is likely to cause a, reasonable
person to fear imminent bodily harm to oneself or another, or damage to or
loss of property, or the commission of a criminal act upon the person or
property in the person's possession; or



         (b)   Intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate
a reasonable person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation; or



         (c)   Continuing to solicit within five feet of the
person being solicited after the person has made a negative response to such
solicitation; or



         (d)   Intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly
obstructing the safe or free passage of the person being solicited, or
requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to
avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts
authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally
protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued by the City of Yuma, shall
not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or



         (e)   Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or
abusive language or gestures:



            1.   Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable
person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon
the person or property in the person's possession; or



            2.   Intended to or is reasonably likely to
intimidate a reasonable person into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE.  A device, linked to a financial
institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions
including, but not limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals,
balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments.



   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY.  The area comprised of one or more
automated teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours. It shall be presumed that any
automobile parking space within 25 feet of an automated teller machine is
part of the automated teller machine facility to provide access to bank
customers.



   BANK. A bank, credit union, or other similar financial institution.



   PUBLIC AREA. An area to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges,
buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks,
and streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to
buildings and dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.



   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE.  Any vehicle used for the
transportation of passengers on scheduled routes on an individual passenger
fare-paying basis.



   SOLICIT.  To request an immediate donation of money or other thing of
value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended
use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without
limitation, by the. spoken, written or printed word, or by other means of
communication.



(Ord. O2015-009, passed 3-4-15)



§ 115-02  Prohibited Acts.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or group to solicit money or other
things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services:



   (A)   In an aggressive manner in a public area; or



   (B)   In any public transportation vehicle or from any persons
within 15 feet of any transit stop, bus stop, taxi stand, train station
platform or the inside of the train station, except that the operator of a
public transportation vehicle may request or accept payment of a fare; or



   (C)   Within 15 feet of any entrance or exit of any bank or
automated teller machine facility, without the consent of the owner or other
person legally in possession of such facility; or



   (D)   Immediately adjacent to the entrance of a business in a manner
that physically interferes with ingress or egress to that business entrance.



(Ord. O2015-009, passed 3-4-15)



§ 115-99  Penalty.



   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a class three misdemeanor and will be punished by a fine not to
exceed $500 or by imprisonment for not more than one day or by both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.



(Ord. O2015-009, passed 3-4-15)



Title 13:  Health and Safety



   Chapter



      130.   Animals and Fowl



      131.   Fire Prevention and Protection



      132.   Hazardous Materials



      133.   Noise Control



      134.   Nuisances



      135.   Smoking



      136.   Cemeteries



      137.   Trees



      138.   Rental Inspection



         Appendix:  Housing Quality Standards (HQS)



      139.   Fireworks



Chapter 130:  Animals and Fowl



Section



General Provisions



   130-001   Definitions



   130-002   Application of state law



   130-003   Animals at-large



   130-004   Warning for offense



   130-005   Animals disturbing the peace



   130-006   Unlawful feeding of dogs or cats



   130-007   Posting of sign warning of dangerous animal



   130-008   Destruction of dangerous animals



   130-009   Poisoning animals



   130-010   Rescue from vehicles



Licensing



   130-020   Required



   130-021   City to charge license fees



   130-022   Exclusions



   130-023   Antirabies vaccination required; clinics



   130-024   Issuance of license; by veterinarians



   130-025   Collar and license tag to be worn



   130-026   Duration



   130-027   Transfer



   130-028   Misuse of license and tag



   130-029   Kennel license



Unlawful Sale of Animals



   130-040   Unlawful sale of animals



   130-041   Exclusions



Keeping Animals



   130-050   Definition



   130-051   Unlawful keeping



   130-052   Inspection



   130-053   State law regulations applicable



   130-054   Sanitary conditions



   130-055   Removal of wastes; prohibited; exceptions



   130-056   Swine prohibited



   130-057   Reptiles or wild animals



   130-058   Area limitations



   130-059   Proximity to dwelling



Keeping Poultry and Rodents



   130-070   Keeping unlawful



   130-071   Proximity to residences



   130-072   Use of front yards



   130-073   Enclosures required



   130-074   Maintenance of enclosures



   130-075   Number and area ratio



   130-076   Male poultry restricted



Impoundment



   130-080   Impoundment authorized



   130-081   Notice



   130-082   When destruction authorized



   130-083   Licensed dogs and cats



   130-084   Stray animals



   130-085   Adoption



   130-086   Assessment of costs



   130-087   Destruction if not claimed



   130-088   Cat impoundment authorized



   130-089   Reclaiming cats



   130-090   Reduction of feral cats



   130-091   Unlawful release of cats



   130-092   Cat - trap, neuter, release (TNR)



Rabies Control



   130-095   Vaccination of impounded dogs and cats



   130-096   Biting dogs or cats confined; licensed and unlicensed



   130-097   Confinement of other animals authorized; caged rodent or
caged rabbit



   130-098   Destruction of wild animals



   130-099   Report of bites



City Enforcement Agent



   130-110   Appointment



   130-111   Duties of City Administrator



   130-112   Enforcement alternatives



   130-113   Right of entry



   130-114   Interference with city enforcement agent



   130-999   Penalty



Statutory reference:




   Power of city to regulate, prohibit dogs, other animals from running at
large, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(16)




General Provisions



§ 130-001  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ANIMAL.  Any living species of mammal, fowl, amphibian, or reptile,
with the exception of man.



   AT-LARGE.  An animal on or off the premises of the owner and not under
the control of the owner, or other persons acting for the owner, or in a
suitable enclosure.



   BREEDER.  Any person or persons who keeps, harbors, or maintains
animals for the purpose of breeding offspring.



   CAT.  A member of the felis catus family.



   CITY ENFORCEMENT AGENT.  Persons designated by the city who are
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.



   COLLAR.  A band, chain, harness or suitable device worn around the
neck of an animal to which a license may be affixed.



   DOG.  A member of the canis familiaris family.



   FERAL.  Existing in a wild or untamed state.



   KENNEL.  An enclosed, controlled area, inaccessible to other animals,
in which a person keeps, harbors or maintains seven or more dogs, cats or any
combination thereof under controlled conditions.



   OWNER.  Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining an animal for more than six consecutive days.



   PET STORE.  A commercial establishment that engages in a for-profit
business of selling at retail cats, dogs or other animals, but does not
include commercial livestock operations and commercial livestock auction
markets. PET STORE does not mean a publicly operated pound or a private,
charitable not-for-profit humane society or any animal adoption activity that
a pound or humane society conducts off site at any pet store or other
commercial enterprise. See A.R.S. § 44-1799.



   POULTRY.  Domestic fowl, including, but not limited to chickens,
turkeys, ducks, or geese.



   POUND.  Any establishment authorized by the city enforcement agent for
the confinement, maintenance, safekeeping and control of animals that come
into the custody of the city enforcement agent in the performance of his/her
official duties.



   RODENT.  Any of various mammals of the order of Rodentia, including a
mouse, rat, squirrel, beaver, gerbil, or hamster.



   SALE.  The same meaning prescribed in A.R.S. § 47-2106 with the
exception that any adoption or gift shall be deemed a sale.



   STRAY.  Any unlicensed animal running at-large.



   VACCINATION.  An antirabies vaccination using a type of vaccine
approved by the state veterinarian.



   VETERINARIAN.  Any veterinarian licensed to practice in the state or
any veterinarian employed in this state by a governmental agency.



   VETERINARY HOSPITAL.  Any establishment operated by a veterinarian
that provides clinical facilities and houses animals or birds for dental,
medical or surgical treatment.  A VETERINARY HOSPITAL may have adjacent to
it, or in conjunction with it, or as an integral part of it, pens, stalls,
cages or kennels for quarantine, observation or boarding.



   WILD ANIMAL.  Animals in a state of nature; any animal living in a
natural, undomesticated state; animals ferae naturae.



('80 Code, § 6-1)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2009-02, passed
1-7-09; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-002  Application of State Law.



   Nothing in this chapter is to be construed as to preempt the
requirements of the rabies control statutes of the State of Arizona as set
forth in A.R.S. §§ 11-1001 et seq.



('80 Code, § 6-2)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-003  Animals At-Large.



   (A)   No person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring or
maintaining an animal shall allow the animal to be at-large.



   (B)   A dog is not deemed to be at-large:



      (1)   If the dog is restrained by a leash, chain, rope or cord
of sufficient strength to control the action of the dog, or if confined, in a
suitable enclosure.



      (2)   While the dog is actively engaged in dog obedience
training, accompanied by and under the control of his owner or trainer,
provided that the person training the dog has in his possession a  leash of
sufficient strength to control the dog, and, further, that the dog is
actually enrolled in or has graduated from an obedience training school which
has been approved by the city enforcement agent.



      (3)   If a dog is:



         (a)   Being used for hunting purposes.



         (b)   Being exhibited at an American Kennel Club
approved show.



         (c)   Engaged in races approved by the Arizona Racing
Commission.



         (d)   Actively engaged in livestock control.



         (e)   In service with a law enforcement agency.



         (f)   In a posted dog park.



('80 Code, § 6-3)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate dogs running at large, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(16)



§ 130-004  Warning for Offense.



   Realizing that there are situations in which dogs or cats run loose
without any fault of their masters, for example when a child opens the door
and a dog inadvertently slips out, and wishing to gain the cooperation of the
public in enforcing the leash law, the city's enforcement agent is hereby
authorized to issue at his discretion a warning for an offense committed
under § 130-003  if circumstances warrant a warning rather than a citation.



('80 Code, § 6-3.1)  (Ord. 1953, passed 8-6-80; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-005  Animals Disturbing the Peace.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the city
any animal which excessively barks, howls, or makes other noises by day or
night and disturbs the peace and quiet of any person or family.



('80 Code, § 6-4)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-006  Unlawful Feeding of Dogs or Cats.



   It shall be unlawful to feed any stray dog or cat, except pending
return to a lawful owner or immediate transfer to the city enforcement agent.
The code enforcement officer, at his/her discretion, may issue a warning for
the first offense. It is not a violation of this section for any person to
feed or shelter feral cats while working with a licensed veterinarian, animal
control agency, or similar group registered with the city to spay or neuter
feral cats, which may be referred to as "fix and feed".



(Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-007  Posting of Sign Warning of Dangerous Animal.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal of dangerous, vicious
or fierce propensities to allow it to run at-large on the premises of the
owner unless a sign is posted in a conspicuous place at the entrance to said
premises advising the public of the nature of the animal maintained therein.



('80 Code, § 6-5)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-008  Destruction of Dangerous Animals.



   If any dangerous, vicious or fierce animal cannot, in the discretion of
a police officer or city enforcement agent, be safely taken up and impounded,
such animal may be disposed of or destroyed immediately, and further
provided, that any police officer may, at his/her discretion, for any humane
reason, immediately dispose of or destroy any animal found at-large within
the city that is in violation of this chapter.



('80 Code, § 6-6)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-009  Poisoning Animals.



   It is unlawful for any person by any means to knowingly and recklessly
make accessible to any animal, with intent to cause harm or death, any
substance which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful
or poisonous substance. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to
prohibit the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin in
furtherance of the public health, when applied in such a manner as to
reasonably prohibit access to other animals.



('80 Code, § 6-8)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-010  Rescue from Vehicles.



   (A)   When authorized.  A police officer or city enforcement agent
who finds an animal under conditions hazardous to the animal's health in a
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of this code or city ordinance
may break and enter the motor vehicle if necessary to remove the animal. ('80
Code, § 6-9)



   (B)   Removal, notice.  The police officer or city enforcement
agent removing an animal from hazardous conditions in a motor vehicle shall
take the animal to an animal shelter or other place of safe keeping and
shall, in the event the person having custody cannot be otherwise contacted,
leave in a prominent place in the motor vehicle a written notice bearing his
name and office and the address where the animal may be claimed by the owner
thereof. ('80 Code, § 6-10)



   (C)   Time limit for claim.  The animal removed from hazardous
conditions in a vehicle will be surrendered to the owner if the owner claims
the animal within five business days from the time the animal was removed
from the motor vehicle and pays all applicable charges, fees and penalties.
('80 Code, § 6-11)



   (D)   Attempt to contact owner.  If the owner fails to claim the
animal within three business days after its removal from a motor vehicle, the
person or animal shelter having custody of the animal will make reasonable
effort to contact the owner and give notice that the animal is in their
custody and may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the reasonable
maintenance charges. ('80 Code, § 6-12)



   (E)   Disposition of animal.  In the event the owner of an animal 
cannot be contacted, or expresses no interest in reclaiming the animal within
five business days after removal from a motor vehicle, the person or animal
shelter having custody of the animal may dispose of the animal in any
reasonable humane manner. ('80 Code, § 6-13)



(Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



Licensing



§ 130-020  Required.



   All dogs and cats three months of age and over kept, harbored or
maintained in the city shall be licensed and registered.



('80 Code, § 6-51)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-021  City to Charge License Fees.



   There shall be a license fee for dogs and cats that reside in the city.



('80 Code, § 6-51.1)  (Ord. 2107, passed 1-19-83; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-022  Exclusions.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to dogs in service
with a law enforcement agency nor to dogs or cats brought into the city for
the purpose of any dog or cat show, nor to dogs in kennels licensed by the
Arizona Department of Racing of the Arizona Racing Commission, nor to seeing
eye dogs (guide dogs) to assist blind persons.  Such guide dogs shall be
vaccinated and licensed pursuant to A.R.S. §§ 11-1008 and 11-1010.



('80 Code, § 6-52)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2572, passed 5-20-92;
Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-023  Antirabies Vaccination Required; Clinics.



   (A)   Required.  Before any dog or cat license shall be issued
under the provisions of this subchapter, the owner of the dog or cat to be
licensed shall present a valid vaccination certificate for such dog or cat.
('80 Code, § 6-53)



   (B)   Clinic.  The city enforcement agent may make provisions for
low cost vaccination clinics.  The vaccinations shall be performed by a
veterinarian. ('80 Code, § 6-54)



(Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-024  Issuance of License; by Veterinarians.



   (A)   Generally.  Upon compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter, a dog or cat license and tag shall be issued to the owner of the
dog or cat. ('80 Code, § 6-55)



   (B)   By veterinarians.  The city enforcement agent may establish
an administrative procedure to permit any licensed veterinarian to issue dog
or cat licenses and tags for dogs or cats that have been vaccinated. ('80
Code, § 6-56)



(Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-025  Collar and License Tag to be Worn.



   Every owner shall provide each dog or cat with a collar or a harness to
which the license tag furnished must be affixed and shall ensure that the
collar or harness and tag are constantly worn except when a dog or cat is
inside a residential dwelling. Cats may be exempted from this provision
provided the cat is implanted with a microchip by a veterinarian, or a person
working under the supervision of a veterinarian.



('80 Code, § 6-57)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-026  Duration.



   Dog or cat licenses shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter for a period of not more than three years and must be renewed for
the life of the dog or cat on or before the expiration date of the current
license.



('80 Code, § 6-58)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-027  Transfer.



   Dog or cat license tags and licenses shall not be transferable  to
another animal.  Whenever the ownership of a dog or cat has been changed,
the new owner shall secure a new license.



('80 Code, § 6-59)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-028  Misuse of License and Tag.



   It shall be unlawful for a person to counterfeit or attempt to
counterfeit a dog or cat tag or vaccination or license certificate, or to
take from a dog or cat a tag legally placed upon it, or place a dog or cat
tag upon a dog or cat unless the tag was specifically issued for the
particular dog or cat.



('80 Code, § 6-60)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-029  Kennel License.



   Any person other than a veterinarian or a breeder operating a kennel in
the city that keeps, harbors, or maintains seven  or more dogs, cats or any
combination thereof will be required to obtain a city kennel license. Each
dog or cat over three months of age kept or maintained in a kennel within the
city shall be required to be licensed and registered.



(Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



Unlawful Sale of Animals



§ 130-040  Unlawful Sale of Animals.



   A person commits the unlawful sale of animals by knowingly selling or
posting a sign for the sale of an animal on:



   (A)   Any public right-of-way, street or park, or any public
property adjacent to a right-of-way, street or park.



   (B)   Any non-residential private property without the express
written consent of the owner or lessee of the property and without a proper
City of Yuma business license.



   (C)   Any residential private property, except the property of the
animal owner, without a proper City of Yuma business license.



(Ord. O2009-02, passed 1-7-09; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-041  Exclusions.



   Section 130-040 does not apply to:



   (A)   Retail sales on the premises of a pet store with proper city
business license.



   (B)   Sales by a publicly operated or private, charitable,
non-profit pound, humane society, animal rescue organization, or educational
or agricultural organization.



   (C)   Any rodeo, auction market, county fair, stock show or other
sanctioned livestock exhibit events.



   (D)   Any dog show.



(Ord. O2009-02, passed 1-7-09; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



Keeping Animals



§ 130-050  Definition.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PREMISES.  The lot or parcel of ground upon which the pen, stable,
yard, cage or other enclosure used for the containment of an animal is
located.



('80 Code, § 6-77)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-051  Unlawful Keeping.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal in
the city in such a manner as to disturb the peace, comfort or health of any
person residing within the city.



('80 Code, § 6-78)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-052  Inspection.



   The premises upon which poultry, rodents, cattle, horses, sheep or
goats are kept within the city shall always be subject to inspection and
regulation by the city enforcement agent.



('80 Code, § 6-79)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-053  State Law Regulations Applicable.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the keeping of all
animals within the city shall be subject to all pertinent regulations of the
state and the County Board of Health.



('80 Code, § 6-80)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-054  Sanitary Conditions.



   The maintaining or keeping of all animals within the city shall be
allowed in a sanitary manner and only so long as they do not cause, create or
contribute to or become a health nuisance due to noise, the presence of
flies, mosquitos, insects, vermin, rodent harborage, odors, dust, ponded
water, accumulation of manure, garbage, refuse or other obnoxious or
putrescible material, or for any other like reason.



('80 Code, § 6-81)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-055  Removal of Wastes; Prohibited; Exceptions.



   (A)   Animal feces shall be removed from pens, stables, yards, cages
and other enclosures at least twice weekly and shall be removed from the
premises at least weekly.



   (B)   An owner or person having custody of any animal, except for a
feral cat, shall not permit said animal to defecate on any school ground,
public street, alley, gutter, sidewalk, right-of-way, public park, or private
property other than the owner’s or custodian’s property unless said feces
are removed immediately.



   (C)   Animal feces which are removed from a private property, school
ground, public street, alley, gutter, sidewalk, right-of-way, or public park
shall not be deposited in a public garbage receptacle unless the feces are
first placed in a plastic bag.



   (D)   Subsections (B) and (C) of this Section do not apply to any
blind or deaf person when accompanied by a service animal as defined in the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended, or to any physically disabled
person who, under the circumstances, is unable to comply with subsection (B)
and (C) of this Section.



('80 Code, § 6-82)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11; Ord. O2016-033, passed 11-16-16)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-056  Swine Prohibited.



   No swine shall be kept within the city limits, except registered
purebred miniature Vietnamese potbellied pigs and other similar registered
purebred miniature pigs.  Miniature pigs shall not exceed 100 pounds.  No
more than three miniature pigs shall be allowed per household.



('80 Code, § 6-84)  (Ord. 2526, passed 7-17-91; Ord. 2571, passed 5-20-92;
Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-057  Reptiles or Wild Animals.



   No person shall keep or maintain any poisonous reptiles or dangerous,
carnivorous wild animals without first having registered such animals or
reptiles with the Chief of Police, who may prescribe regulations to insure
the safe penning or caging of such animals or reptiles.



('80 Code, § 6-85)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-058  Area Limitations.



   (A)   Generally.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person
to keep any animal within the city on any lot or parcel of land consisting of
less than 10,000 square feet in area. ('80 Code, § 6-86)



   (B)   Poultry; consent.  Poultry may be kept on a lot or parcel of
land within the city consisting of an area less than 10,000 square feet if
written permission consenting to the keeping of poultry on such lot or parcel
is first obtained from all of the lawful occupants and the lawful owners of
adjoining lots or parcels of land which are located in the immediate vicinity
of the property whereon the poultry is kept. ('80 Code, § 6-87)



   (C)   Exceptions.  The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) shall
not apply to the keeping of:



      (1)   Six  or fewer small household pets including, but not
limited to, dogs or cats or any combination thereof per household; or



      (2)   Animals for commercial purposes where such use is
established as a lawful use under the zoning ordinance of the city.



('80 Code, § 6-88)



   (D)   Number to area ratio for animals.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to keep more than two large domestic animals, such as a horse,
cow, burro, mule and similar animals or more than four sheep, goats and
similar animals on any lot or parcel of land consisting of less than one
acre. ('80 Code, § 6-89)



   (E)   Premises over one acre.  On a lot or parcel of land greater
than one acre (43,560 square feet) the number of large domestic animals shall
be determined as follows:



      (1)   One horse, cow, or similar animal, or two sheep, goats
or similar animal shall be permitted for each 6,000 square feet of net lot
area after deducting one-half acre for the home site.  Fractions of less
than 6,000 square feet shall be rounded off.  Animals of six months or
younger shall not be counted.



      (2)   No livestock commercial feeding lots, herein defined as
a feeding or handling facility operated for the purpose of accommodating the
needs of others in whole or in part for a fee or fees paid to the operator or
owner for the accommodations, materials and services received, shall be
permitted.



('80 Code, § 6-90)



(Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 1826, passed 4-18-79; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-059  Proximity to Dwelling.



   Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any
person to keep or maintain within 20 feet of the dwelling house of any person
within the city, any corral, barn, shed or other structure for the purpose of
housing, keeping or caring for any animal, except for structures used for
housing small household pets, e.g. doghouses.



('80 Code, § 6-91)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 1826, passed 4-18-79;
Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



Keeping Poultry and Rodents



§ 130-070  Keeping Unlawful.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to keep rodents or
poultry within the city.



('80 Code, § 6-103)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-071  Proximity to Residences.



   No poultry or rodents other than pet rodents such as a gerbil or
hamster kept within a dwelling structure shall be kept in an enclosure within
50 feet of any residence within the city.  Poultry may be kept within 80
feet of a residence if written permission consenting to the keeping of
poultry less than 80 feet from a residence is first obtained from each lawful
occupant and each lawful owner of such residence.



('80 Code, § 6-104)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-072  Use of Front Yards.



   Poultry shall not be kept in the front yard area of any lot or parcel
within the city.



('80 Code, § 6-105)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-073  Enclosures Required.



   Poultry and rodents shall be kept in an enclosure so constructed as to
prevent such poultry and rodents from wandering upon property belonging to
others.



('80 Code, § 6-106)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-074  Maintenance of Enclosures.



   All enclosures required under this subchapter shall be kept in such
condition so no offensive, disagreeable or noxious smell or odor shall arise
from there to the injury, annoyance or inconvenience of any inhabitant of the
neighborhood thereof.



('80 Code, § 6-107)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-075  Number and Area Ratio.



   (A)   No more than 20 head of poultry nor more than 25 head of
rodents nor more than 25 head comprising a combination of rodents and poultry
shall be kept upon the first one-half acre or less.



   (B)   An additional one-half acre shall be required for each
additional 20 head of poultry or for each additional 25 head of rodents or
for each additional 25 head comprising a combination of poultry and rodents.



   (C)   For areas larger than two and one-half acres the number of
poultry or rodents shall not be limited.



('80 Code, § 6-108)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)  Penalty, see § 130-999



§ 130-076  Male Poultry Restricted.



   No male poultry shall be kept within the city limits except such male
poultry as are incapable of making vocal noises which disturb the peace,
comfort or health of any person residing within the city.



('80 Code, § 6-109)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11; Ord. O2012-03, passed 3-7-12)  Penalty, see § 130-999



Impoundment



§ 130-080  Impoundment Authorized.



   It shall be the duty of the city enforcement agent to apprehend and
impound any stray animal found within this city or any dog or cat found
without a current valid license tag.



('80 Code, § 6-126)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



Charter reference:



   City to fix fees, charges for services rendered, see Charter Art. III,
§ 10



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to provide for impoundment, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(16)



§ 130-081  Notice.



   (A)   Upon the impounding of an animal with a collar or
identification the owner shall be immediately notified in person, by mail, or
telephone and may reclaim such animal upon payment of all costs, charges and
fees incurred in the impounding and maintaining of the animal.



   (B)   If the owner of a licensed or unlicensed dog or cat is unknown
or unavailable and, in the discretion of the city enforcement agent, said dog
or cat should not be immediately destroyed, written notice shall be posted
for three business days in two conspicuous places in the city, generally
describing the dog or cat and the place the dog or cat was captured.



('80 Code, § 6-127)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O95-052, passed
9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-082  When Destruction Authorized.



   Any animal impounded under the provisions of this subchapter, which is
apparently suffering from serious injuries and would probably not recover; is
in great pain; or has evidence of any infectious disease which is a danger to
other animals or to humans, may be destroyed by the city enforcement agent or
police officer of the city in as humane a manner as possible after reasonable
efforts to notify the owner have failed.



('80 Code, § 6-128)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O95-052, passed
9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-083  Licensed Dogs and Cats.



   Any impounded licensed dog or cat may be reclaimed provided that a
person reclaiming the dog or cat furnishes proof of right to do so and pays
all applicable costs, charges and fees.  If the dog or cat is not reclaimed
within six days, the city enforcement agent shall take possession and may
place the dog or cat for adoption or may dispose of or destroy the dog or cat
in a humane manner.



('80 Code, § 6-129)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-084  Stray Animals.



   Each stray animal impounded shall be kept and maintained at the pound
for a minimum of three business days unless a person claiming ownership
furnishes proof of rights to the animal and pays all applicable costs,
charges and fees and complies with the licensing and vaccination provisions
of this chapter.



('80 Code, § 6-130)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-085  Adoption.



   (A)   A dog or cat shall not be released for adoption from a pound
or from an animal shelter unless the dog or cat has been first surgically
spayed or neutered.



   (B)   At the expiration of the impoundment period, any person may
claim an impounded animal provided such person pays all applicable costs,
charges and fees and complies with the licensing and vaccination provisions
of this chapter.



('80 Code, § 6-131)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O95-052, passed
9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-086  Assessment of Costs.



   Impoundment costs for animals picked up in the city shall include a
charge for each time the dog or cat is impounded and a fee for board each day
the animal is cared for and fed while impounded.  Costs, charges and fees,
shall be recommended by the City Administrator, approved by the City Council
and posted at the office of the city enforcement agent..



('80 Code, § 6-132)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O95-052, passed
9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-087  Destruction if Not Claimed.



   If no person claims an animal impounded under the provisions of this
subchapter, the city enforcement agent may dispose of or destroy the animal
in a humane manner.



('80 Code, § 6-133)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O95-052, passed
9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-088  Cat Impoundment Authorized.



   Cats running at-large within the city may be impounded by use of live,
humane traps. Live capture traps may be leased through the city enforcement
agent. The captured cat and the trap shall be delivered to the city
enforcement agent within 24 hours of capture. Failure to return the traps
within 15 days will result in a charge on the citizen's monthly utility bill.



('80 Code, § 6-134)  (Ord. O95-052, passed 9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-089  Reclaiming Cats.



   Any impounded cat with a collar or identification of any type may be
reclaimed by the owner after licensing and paying all applicable costs,
charges and fees.  If the cat is not reclaimed within six days, the city
enforcement agent shall take possession and may place the cat up for adoption
or may dispose of or destroy the cat in a humane manner.



('80 Code, § 6-135)  (Ord. O95-052, passed 9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-090  Reduction of Feral Cats.



   In an effort to decrease the feral cat population within the city, the
city may waive or modify costs, charges and fees during a program for
reduction of feral cats during specific months.



(Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-091  Unlawful Release of Cats.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or organization to release cats
into the city except as provided in § 130-092.



(Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-092  Cat - Trap, Neuter, Release (TNR).



   Any organization conducting a program for the reduction of feral cats
through TNR programs within the city may do so with their own funding and
personnel under the following conditions:



   (A)   The organization shall be registered with the city enforcement
agent;



   (B)   The organization shall possess a valid city TNR permit
obtained through the city enforcement agent and a valid City of Yuma business
license.



   (C)   Cats captured or received by the organization must receive
proper care and feeding prior to release.



(Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



Rabies Control



§ 130-095  Vaccination of Impounded Dogs and Cats.



   If a dog or cat is impounded and found to be unvaccinated, the city
enforcement agent is hereby authorized to cause such dog or cat to be
vaccinated at a cost to be borne by the owner.  The vaccination shall be
performed by a veterinarian licensed to practice in the State of Arizona, who
shall issue a certificate of vaccination.



('80 Code, § 6-150)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O95-052, passed
9-5-95; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



Charter reference:



   Power to provide regulations necessary, expedient for the preservation
of health, suppression of disease, see Charter Art. III, § 7



Statutory reference:



   Power to make quarantine laws and enforce them, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(20)(b)



§ 130-096  Biting Dogs or Cats Confined; Licensed and Unlicensed.



   (A)   Licensed.  A dog or cat properly licensed and vaccinated
pursuant to this chapter, that bites any person, may be confined and
quarantined at the home of the owner or wherever the dog is harbored and
maintained with the consent of, and in a manner prescribed by the city
enforcement agent. ('80 Code, § 6-151)



   (B)   Unlicensed.  An unlicensed or unvaccinated dog that bites any
person shall be confined and quarantined in a pound at the owner's expense,
or upon request of and at the expense of the owner, at a veterinary hospital
for a period of not less than ten days. ('80 Code, § 6-152)



   (C)   Exclusions.  The provisions of this subchapter shall not
apply to dogs in service with a law enforcement agency.



(Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-097  Confinement of Other Animals Authorized; Caged Rodent or Caged
Rabbit.



   (A)   Authorized.  Any animal other than a dog, cat or wild animal
that bites any person shall be confined and quarantined in a pound at the
owner's expense, or upon the request of and at the expense of the owner, at a
veterinary hospital for a period of not less than 14 days, provided that
livestock shall be confined and quarantined for a 14-day period in a manner
regulated by the State Livestock Sanitary Board. ('80 Code, § 6-153)



   (B)   Caged rodent or caged rabbit.  If the biting animal is a
caged rodent or caged rabbit, the rodent or rabbit may be confined and
quarantined at the home of the owner or where it is harbored or maintained,
for the required period of time, with the consent of, and in a manner
prescribed by the city enforcement agent. ('80 Code, § 6-154)



(Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed 3-2-11)



§ 130-098  Destruction of Wild Animals.



   Any wild animal which bites any person may be killed and submitted to
the city enforcement agent or his deputies for transmission to an appropriate
diagnostic laboratory.



('80 Code, § 6-155)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-099  Report of Bites.



   Whenever an animal bites any person, the incident shall be reported to
the city enforcement agent immediately by any person having direct knowledge
of the incident.



('80 Code, § 6-156)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



City Enforcement Agent



§ 130-110  Appointment.



   All rights, duties, responsibilities and authorities to enforce this
chapter shall be with the City of Yuma Police Department and to other city
enforcement agents as may be delegated by the City Council by contract, or
appointed by motion or resolution.



('80 Code, § 6-30)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11; Ord. O2011-34, passed 10-5-11)



Charter reference:



   Power of city to create offices, designate duties, see Charter Art. VI,
§ 15



§ 130-111  Duties of City Administrator.



   The City Administrator, with the approval of the Mayor and Council,
shall establish all costs, charges and fees, enter into a contract for the
establishment and operation of a pound, and delegate to the city enforcement
agent, the authority to do all things necessary to insure the enforcement of
this chapter.



('80 Code, § 6-31)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-112  Enforcement Alternatives.



   The city enforcement agent may apprehend and impound any animal running
at-large contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or may, in lieu of
impoundment, cite the owner into any court of competent jurisdiction.



('80 Code, § 6-32)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-113  Right of Entry.



   The city enforcement agent shall have the right to enter upon private
property when it is necessary to do so in order to apprehend any animal in
violation of this chapter.  Such entrance upon private property shall be in
reasonable pursuit of such animal.



('80 Code, § 6-33)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-114  Interference with City Enforcement Agent.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to intervene , impede, prevent or
attempt to intervene , impede, prevent, obstruct or intimidate the city
enforcement agent, or deputies, in the discharge of their duties in taking up
or attempting to take up and impound any and all animals which it is the duty
of the city enforcement agent to impound under the provisions of this
chapter, or to rescue or attempt to rescue any animal so taken up by the city
enforcement agent or deputies or to release any animal so impounded.



('80 Code, § 6-34)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11)



§ 130-999  Penalty.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate, or cause
the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Any person, firm, or
corporation violating any of the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty
of a class 2 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $750 or by imprisonment for not more than five days or by
both such fine or imprisonment. Each separate day or part thereof during
which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable as herein provided. ('80 Code, § 6-14)  (Ord. 2084, passed
9-1-82)



   (B)   Any violation of § 130-003 Animals At-Large or § 130-006
Unlawful Feeding or Dogs or Cats, of this chapter shall be a class 3
misdemeanor; and upon conviction for a first offense, the fine to be imposed
may be up to and including $50.  For each additional offense within a
12-month period, the following fines shall be mandatory:



      (1)   Second offense:  $100.



      (2)   Third offense:  $200.



      (3)   Thereafter:  $300.



   (C)   Any violation of § 130-055(B) or § 130-055(C) shall be a
class 3 misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50.00.



('80 Code, § 6-3.1)  (Ord. 1953, passed 8-6-80; Ord. O2011-03, passed
3-2-11; Ord. O2016-033, passed 11-16-16)



Chapter 131:  Fire Prevention and Protection



Section



General Provisions



   131-01   Fire fighting outside city



Fire Prevention Code



   131-15   Adoption of a model Fire Code, NFPA1, Fire Code, 2018
Edition



   131-16   Amendments



   131-17   Areas where certain materials are prohibited



   131-18   Establishment and duties of the Division of Community Risk
Reduction



   131-19   Appeals



   131-20   Definitions



   131-21   Conflicts



   131-22   (Repealed)



   131-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to provide for general welfare, see Charter Art. III, § 1



   Power to create departments, offices, prescribe duties, see Charter
Art. VI, § 15



Statutory reference:



   Power to regulate, prohibit fire hazards and provide for fire
department, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(7)



   State pension funds, see A.R.S. §§ 9-951 et seq. and §§ 38-841 et
seq.



General Provisions



§ 131-01  Fire Fighting Outside City.



   The Fire Department is hereby authorized to answer fire alarms,
suppress fires, respond to rescue calls, contain hazardous materials
emergencies, as defined in A.R.S. § 49-201, and other extraordinary
emergency service from outside agencies beyond the corporate limits of the
city whenever the Chief of the Fire Department, in his discretion, shall deem
it necessary to protect lives and property.



('80 Code, § 13-1)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94)



Fire Prevention Code



§ 131-15  Adoption of a model Fire Code, NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2018 Edition.



   That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the City Clerk, known as NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2018 Edition, including
Annexes "A", "B", "D", and "G" published by the National Fire Protection
Association, with certain amendments listed herein, which document was made a
public record by Resolution No. R2018-034 of the City, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.



('80 Code, § 13-17)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94; Ord. O98-17, passed 3-
4-98; Ord. O2003-52, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2014-36, passed 12-17-14; Ord.
O2018-055, passed 12-19-18)



§ 131-16  Amendments.



   This Edition of NFPA 1, The Fire Code, adopted by the provision of this
chapter is hereby amended, altered and changed in the following respects:



   NOTE:  The section numbers that follow are the reference sections
found in NFPA-1.



1.1.2  Title. Is hereby amended as follows:



   These regulations shall be known as the 2018 Fire Code with Yuma
Amendments, hereinafter referred to as "this code."



1.3.1  Application. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   All construction and/or alterations of a structure, which require a
building permit, shall comply with the current building code adopted by the
City of Yuma.



1.3.3.1  Conflicts. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of local, state or federal law.



1.3.3.2  Conflicts. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.



1.3.6.3  Buildings. Is hereby amended as follows:



   Repairs, renovations, alterations, reconstruction, change of occupancy,
and additions to buildings shall conform with the adopted building code of
the jurisdiction except for repairs, renovation, alteration and
reconstruction of fire sprinkler and fire alarms. Those activities shall be
regulated by the fire code adopted by this ordinance.



1.7.12  Plans and Specifications. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following sentence:



   All plans, specifications, calculations, and design criteria shall be
stamped by a registrant licensed to practice in the State of Arizona.
Calculation sheets for fire sprinkler systems shall be made a permanent part
of the submitted design drawings.



1.10.1  Fire Code Board of Appeals. Is hereby amended by adding the
following:



   Whenever reference is made to the "Board of Appeals" in the City Fire
Code, it shall mean the City of Yuma "Building Advisory Board."



1.10.  Membership. Is hereby amended by striking the entire paragraph.



1.10.1.1.5.3  Members. Is hereby amended by striking the entire sentence.



1.10.3/1.10.6  Authority of the Board of Appeals/Decisions. Is hereby
amended by striking sections 1.10.3.3 and 1.10.6.2.



1.12  Permits and Approvals. The following shall be added to this section:



1.12.2.5  Fees and Charges.



   All "activity" permits required by the fire code shall be subject to
the table of fees. A fee in accordance with the following schedule shall be
paid to the City of Yuma at the time of application for: (1) an installation
or removal; (2) an activity permit; (3) other service or special inspection.



   Failure to apply for necessary permits or service can result in a
double charge for such. Fees are payable upon permit application.



Table 1.12.2.5  Activity Permit Fee Schedule:



 



Carnivals and Fairs
 
$75.00


Hot Work Operations
 
$75.00


Display Fireworks
 
$100.00


Explosives and Blasting
 
$100.00


Fuel Tank Installation or Removal
 
$100.00


Liquefied Petroleum Gas Installation
 
$100.00


   Installation less than 500 gallons
 
$75.00


Membrane Structures, Tents, and Canopies: Permanent or Temporary
 
$75.00


Open Burning
 
$100.00


Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience
 
$100.00


Fire Inspections Mandated by the State for Licensing
 
$50.00


Fire Sprinkler Alterations
 
$50.00 over the counter permit plus $50.00 an hour inspection fee


Fire Alarm Alterations
 
$50.00 over the counter permit plus $50.00 an hour inspection fee


Sale or Storage of Consumer Fireworks (1.4G)
 
$10.00


Tire Storage (in excess of 500 tires)
 
$100.00


Fire Inspections Needed for Other State or Local Programs
 
$50.00


Permissible Consumer Fireworks Sales Tent
 
$85.00









1.12.2.6  Standard Hourly Fee. This is a special fee should there be a need
for special service and re-inspections. This standard hourly fee is not a fee
in addition to permits fees listed above. The standard hourly fee is fifty
dollars ($50.00) with a 2-hour minimum, unless otherwise noted below:



   a.   After normal working hours: There shall be a standard hourly
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00), with a two-hour minimum, charged for
all special, after-hours, weekend and holiday service, inspections and plan
review work. This is provided to accommodate the developer who may need a
higher level of service and is willing to pay an additional fee for that
service, when available.



   b.   Re-inspections: Another application for the standard hourly fee
is for the commercial fire inspection program. There will be no charge for
the initial annual commercial fire inspection and one follow-up; however,
should the business require more than one follow-up re-inspection that
business shall be charged at the standard hourly fee with a one-hour minimum
charge for each additional re-inspection.



Table 1.12.8(a). Is hereby amended to add the following:



   Consumer fireworks.



   1.   For the sale, on-site handling, and manufacture of consumer
fireworks (1.4G).



   2.   For the storage of consumer fireworks.



1.13.2  Mandatory. Is hereby amended to add the following:



   "Optional." The AHJ may require certificates of fitness and collect
fees for individuals or companies performing any of the following:



      (1)   Use of explosive materials.



      (2)   Fireworks displays involving display fireworks, 1.3G.



1.13.12.1  Revocation or Suspension of Certificates of Fitness. Is hereby
amended to read:



   The AHJ shall be permitted to revoke or suspend a certificate of
fitness issued if any violation of this Code, or of other related City Code,
is found upon inspection where any false statements or misrepresentations are
submitted in the application on which the approval was based.



Chapter 2  Reference Publications



2.2 NFPA  Publications.



   The reference to the 2018 Edition of the NFPA 5000, Building
Construction and Safety Code shall be changed to name the current building
code adopted by the City of Yuma.



Chapter 4 General Requirements.



4.5.7  Changes of Occupancy.  In order to determine when a change of
occupancy will initiate a fire sprinkler retrofit, the following will be
added to sub-section (1):



   (1)   For the purpose of determining if a change of occupancy will
be a more hazardous operation requiring the retrofit of a fire sprinkler
system, the "Means of Egress Hazard Categories Table" (for life safety) in
the edition of the International Existing Building Code currently adopted by
the City of Yuma will be referenced. See section 10.3.4.



Chapter 10  General Fire Safety.



10.1.2  Life Safety Code. Is hereby amended by adding the following section:



   10.1.2.1 When specific conflicts arise between requirements of the NFPA
101 Life Safety Code, and the requirements of the adopted building code of
the City of Yuma for the design and construction of new structures, the
requirements of the adopted building code will be applied.



   Exception: New health care and day care occupancies must comply with
this code, the adopted building code, and NFPA 101, Life Safety Code.



10.1.3  Building Code. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
sentence:



   The design and construction of new structures shall comply with the
current building code adopted by the City of Yuma, and any alterations,
additions, changes in use or changes in structures required by this code,
which are within the scope of the current building code adopted by the City
of Yuma, shall be made in accordance therewith.



10.2.7  Minimum Fire Prevention Inspection Frequencies for Existing
Occupancies. Is hereby amended by deletion. This includes Table 10.2.7.1.



10.3.4  Change of Use or Occupancy Classification. Is hereby amended by the
addition of the following sentence:



   No change shall be made in the use or occupancy of any structure that
would place the structure in a different division of the same group or
occupancy or in a different group of occupancies, unless such structure is
made to comply with the requirements of this code and the current building
code adopted by the City of Yuma. Subject to the approval of the fire code
official, the use or occupancy of an existing structure shall be allowed to
be changed and the structure is allowed to be occupied for the purposes in
other groups without conforming to all the requirements of this code and the
current building code adopted by the City of Yuma for those groups, provided
the new or proposed use is less hazardous, based on life and fire risk, than
the existing use.



10.13.1  Seasonal and Vacant Building and Premises. Is hereby amended by
addition of the following subsection:



   10.13.1.2  The Authority Having Jurisdiction to placard, post signs,
erect barriers or take similar measures as necessary to secure public safety
on any vacant, abandoned, or unoccupied building, structure, premises or
portions thereof.



Chapter 11  Building Services.



11.3.6.1  Requirements for Standardized Fire Service Keys. Is hereby amended
by addition of the following exception:



   Exception: The owner shall be permitted to place the building's
non-standardized fire service elevator keys in a key box installed in
accordance with section 11.3.6.3.1.1-7.



11.12.1  Photovoltaic Systems. Is hereby amended by addition of the
following reference:



   New photovoltaic systems shall be installed in accordance with section
11.12, NFPA 70, and the current building code adopted by the City of Yuma.



Chapter 12  Features of Fire Protection.



12.5  Interior Finish. Is hereby amended by addition of the following
reference:



   Interior finish in buildings and structures shall meet the requirements
of NFPA 101, this code, and the current building code adopted by the City of
Yuma.



Chapter 13  Fire Protection Systems.



13.1.4.1  Fire Department Connection. Is hereby amended by the addition of
the following sentence:



   The Fire Department Connection shall be remotely located from the
building in a location approved by the AHJ.



13.3  Automatic Sprinklers.



13.3.2.1 to 13.3.2.29  Where Required. Is hereby amended to read as follows:



   A.   An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all
levels of all buildings hereafter constructed, except for Group U occupancies
and one/two family dwellings.



      a.   Exception 1: Buildings housing a group A-1, A-2, A-3,
A-4, A-5, E, F-1, F-2, M, S-1 or S-2 occupancy having square footage less
than five hundred (500) square feet.



NOTE: For the purposes of this article, fire resistive fire walls will not be
considered a barrier creating a separate building.



      b.   Exception 2: Buildings housing a group B occupancy,
without cooking equipment or hazardous materials, having square footage less
then two thousand (2,000) square feet.



         i.   NOTE: For the purposes of this article, fire
resistive fire walls will not be considered a barrier creating a separate
building.



      c.   Exception 3: Temporary use of modular or factory built
structures shall not be required to provide an automatic fire sprinkler
system, provided that the use of the structure and the "Certificate of
Occupancy" is limited to one year from the time of set up to removal.



      d.   Exception 4: Free standing open canopy structure. When
automatic fire sprinklers are not required by the current building code
adopted by the City of Yuma, and when the structure meets each of the
following criteria, fire sprinklers will not be required:



         i.   The structure shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.



         ii.   The entire covered area is open on all sides void
of interior walls or partitions.



         iii.   Setbacks from property lines or other structures
are in accordance with the current building code adopted by the City of Yuma.



         iv.   The building/structure use is not classified as
hazardous, assembly or mercantile occupancy.



         v.   Portable fire extinguishers are installed in
accordance with NFPA 10.



         vi.   Open flames and devices emitting flames or
creating a glow capable of igniting combustible materials shall not be used
in or adjacent to the structure.



         vii.   Flammable or combustible materials, LP-Gas, or
hazardous materials shall not be stored in or adjacent to the structure,
except for automobile fueling islands.



         viii.   An approved water supply capable of supplying
the required fire flow shall be provided.



            NOTE: Any changes to the free standing open canopy
structure or its use may result in the loss of this exception and may require
a retrofit of an automatic fire sprinkler system.



   B.   Retrofit of fire sprinklers to existing structures. An existing
building that undergoes a "change of occupancy" as outlined in section 4.5.7,
whereby the new occupancy is deemed a greater hazard than the previous
occupancy, the building will be treated as a new building and will require
the installation of fire sprinklers. The "Means of Egress Hazard Categories
Table" (for life safety) in the edition of the International Existing
Building Code currently adopted by the City of Yuma shall be referenced to
determine occupancy hazard level.



   C.   Any building except Group U occupancies and one/two family
dwellings, which undergoes one or more renovations, that total an excess of
50% of value as assessed by the building code, shall meet the requirements of
this section.



   D.   Any building that increases in size by a total summation of 50%
as a result of one or more expansions will require a retrofit of an automatic
fire sprinkler.



13.3.2.20.1  One and Two-Family Dwellings.  Is hereby amended by deletion.



Chapter 16  Safeguarding During Construction, Alteration, and Demolition
Operations.



16.1.1  General Requirements. Is hereby amended by addition of the following
reference:



   Structures undergoing construction, alteration, or demolition
operations, including those in underground locations, shall comply with NFPA
241, Standard for Safeguarding Construction, Alteration, and Demolition
Operations, this chapter, and the current building code adopted by the City
of Yuma.



Chapter 18  Fire Department Access and Water Supply.



18.2.3.5.2  Surface. Is hereby amended to read:



   Fire department access roads shall be designed and maintained to
support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be provided with a
paved surface, in accordance with the COY engineering standard for a local
road, or another method acceptable to the AHJ.



18.5.2  Detached One-and Two-Family Dwellings. Is hereby amended by
replacing the section with:



   Fire hydrants shall be provided for detached one- and two-family
dwellings in accordance with both of the following:



   (1)   The maximum distance to a fire hydrant from the closest point
on the building shall not exceed 600 ft. (183 m).



   (2)   The maximum distance between fire hydrants shall not exceed
500 ft. (244 m).



      (a)   Exception: for detached one and two-family dwellings
that are protected with a minimum NFPA 13D automatic sprinkler system, the
distance shall not exceed 1,000 feet, as approved by the AHJ.



18.5.3  Buildings Other than Detached One-and Two-Family Dwellings. Is
hereby amended by replacing the section with:



   Fire hydrants shall be provided for buildings other than detached one-
and two-family dwellings in accordance with both of the following:



   (1)   The maximum distance to a fire hydrant from the closest point
on the building shall not exceed 400 ft. (122 m).



   (2)   The maximum distance between fire hydrants shall not exceed
300 ft. (152 m).



      (a)   Exception: The maximum distance between fire hydrants
shall not exceed 500 feet for new construction that is fully protected by an
automatic fire sprinkler system.



31.3.2.4.  Is hereby amended by the addition of the following:



   AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR AND FIREBOX PROCEDURES



OUTDOOR FIRES IN AN AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR: Prior to conducting an outdoor
fire in an air curtain destructor, the owner or operator of the air curtain
destructor shall obtain an applicable permit from ADEQ, and follow all
applicable state requirements in addition to this section.



A.  Air Curtain Destructor Requirements: The following must be complied with
prior to use of an air curtain destructor:



   1.   The length of the firebox must not exceed the length of the
plenum.



   2.   The firebox shall be lined with refractory materials.



   3.   The depth of the firebox shall be of such a distance to allow
all burning material to be below the curtain of air created by the air
curtain destructor.



   4.   The width of the firebox shall not extend beyond the length of
the nozzle action.



   5.   The firebox must have four stable, vertical sides.



   6.   When air curtain destructor locations are established or
changed, an inspection of the newly located air curtain destructor must be
made and approved by the Yuma Fire Department prior to use; and if the new
location deviates from a previously approved location, another inspection and
approval by the Yuma Fire Department must be made.



   7.   Air curtain destructors must be operated in accordance with
their manufacturer's specifications.



B.  Equipment Set-Up:



   1.   An owner or operator of an air curtain destructor shall use a
firebox and not a pit or trench to conduct outdoor burning.



   2.   The equipment must be positioned so as to allow the blower's
airflow to strike at a downward angle no less than 24 inches below the
opposite rim of the firebox.



   3.   There shall be at least 1,000 feet between any two-air curtain
destructors, or per manufacturer's guidelines, whichever is greater.



   4.   An air curtain destructor shall be located at least 500 feet
from any residence or building structure, or per manufacturer's guidelines,
whichever is greater.



   5.   An air curtain destructor shall be located at least 500 feet
from any pipeline or fuel storage area, or per manufacturer's guidelines,
whichever is greater.



   6.   An air curtain destructor shall be located at least 250 feet
from any power lines, or per manufacturer's guidelines, whichever is greater.



   7.   Material that is not being worked or is being stockpiled to be
burned at a later date by using an air curtain destructor shall be kept at
least 75 feet from the air curtain destructor while the burn is taking place,
or per manufacturer's guidelines, whichever is greater.



C.  Operation of Blower:



   1.   The proper blower speed must be maintained according to
manufacturer's specifications.



   2.   The blower must be operating when and as long as any material
in the firebox is burning.



D.  Loading of the Firebox:



   1.   When loading (feeding) the firebox, the material must not
extend above the air curtain (blower airflow).



   2.   The loading of materials into the firebox must be discontinued
at a minimum of 2 hours prior to the end of the designated burning hours. The
blower must continue to operate until the end of the burning hours or until
combustion is completed.



   3.   Adequate measures must be taken to assure that no emissions
emanate from materials left in the firebox (i.e., when combustion is
completed). All materials left in the firebox must be extinguished with water
or covered over with a minimum of 1 foot of mineral soil.



E.  Firebox Clean-Out: All materials removed from the firebox must be
completely extinguished and all reasonable precautions taken to control
emissions and fires.



F.  Burning Hours for Air Curtain Destructors: Burning hours must be
consistent with ADEQ rules and regulations and be conducted during the
following periods, unless otherwise waived or directed by the ADEQ Director
on a specific day basis.



   i.   Year-round: ignite fire no earlier than one hour after sunrise;
and



   ii.   Year-round: extinguish fire no later than two hours before
sunset;



While complying with the above schedule, the owner/operator/occupant must
also ensure it is a burn day locally for each day of burning. Burning using
an air curtain destructor is not authorized on weekends or on holidays.
Prohibited materials shall never be burned in an air curtain destructor.



Definitions.



AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR - A device designed to form a curtain of air over a
firebox in which burning occurs that aids in more complete combustion through
increases in turbulence and combustion time. Above ground air curtain
destructors are the only type of air curtain destructor allowed in the City
of Yuma.



DANGEROUS MATERIAL - Any substance or combination of substances that is
capable of causing bodily harm or property loss unless neutralized, consumed,
or otherwise disposed of in a controlled and safe manner.



FIREBOX - The chamber or compartment inside of an air curtain destructor
where materials are burned.



PROHIBITED MATERIALS - Non-paper garbage from the processing, storage,
service or consumption of food; books, magazines, fiberboard, packaging,
rags, fabrics, office records, chemically treated or soaked wood;
lead-painted wood; linoleum flooring, and composite counter tops; tires;
animal wastes and carcasses, coal, liquid or gelatinous hydrocarbons tar,
explosives or ammunition; oleanders, leaves, grass clippings, refuse; asphalt
shingles or asphalt; tar paper; plastic and rubber products, including
bottles for household chemicals; plastic grocery and retail bags; waste
petroleum products, such as waste crankcase oil, transmission oil, and oil
filters; transformer oils; asbestos; batteries; anti-freeze; aerosol spray
cans; electrical wire insulation; thermal insulation; polyester products;
hazardous waste products such as paints, pesticides, cleaners and solvents,
stains and varnishes, and other flammable liquids; plastic pesticide bags and
containers; and hazardous material containers including those that contained
lead, cadmium, mercury and arsenic compounds.



31.3.6.3.2.  Is hereby amended to read:



   Piles shall not exceed 12.5 ft. (18 m) in height, 75 ft. (90 m) in
width, and 125 ft. (150 m) in length.



31.3.6.4.2. Is hereby amended to read:



   A clear space of not less than 30 ft. (4.6 m) shall be maintained
between piles and exposing structures, yard equipment, or stock, depending on
the degree of exposure hazard.



31.3.7.2. Is hereby amended to read:



   When not protected by a fixed fire-extinguishing system in accordance
with Chapter 13, piles shall not exceed 12.5 ft. (7.6 m) in height, 75 ft.
(45 m) in width, and 125 ft. (76.2 m) in length.



Chapter 66  Flammable and Combustible Liquids.



66.21.3  General Requirements. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following paragraph:



   Any permanent tank installation over 500 gallons will require that the
foundation and anchorage be engineered by a design professional registered in
the State of Arizona.



Chapter 69  Liquefied Petroleum Gases and Liquefied Natural Gases.



69.1  General Provisions. Is hereby amended by the addition of the following
paragraph:



   Any permanent tank installation over 500 gallons will require that the
foundation and anchorage be engineered by a design professional registered in
the State of Arizona.



69.4.2  Operational Safety. Is hereby amended by the addition of the
following paragraph:



   Dispensing, filling, and evacuating of LP gases shall be performed by a
qualified person. In service training for qualified persons shall be
conducted annually and current records of such training shall be maintained
on site.



('80 Code, § 13-18)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94; Ord. O98-17, passed 3-
4-98;  Ord. O2003-52, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2014-36, passed 12-17-14; Ord.
O2016-020, passed 7-20-16; Ord. O2018-055, passed 12-19-18)



§ 131-17  Areas Where Certain Materials Are Prohibited.



   (A)   Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. For volumes exceeding the
maximum allowable quantities (as outlined in the Fire Code) the location in
which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, are hereby
established as follows:



      (1)   In all areas within the corporate limits of the city,
other than those defined and designated as "light industrial" or "heavy
industrial" districts by the zoning ordinance of the city, such storage is
prohibited.



      (2)   Upon presentation of plans conforming to design criteria
as established in the Fire Code and its referenced standards, the Authority
Having Jurisdiction, as defined by the Fire Code, may approve the location of
such storage, in areas where such storage is not prohibited by subdivision
(1) above.



('80 Code, §§ 13-19 - 13-21)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94; Ord. O98-17,
passed 3-4-98; Ord. O2014-36, passed 12-17-14; Ord. O2018-055, passed
12-19-18)  Penalty, see § 131-99



§ 131-18  Establishment and Duties of the Division of Community Risk
Reduction.



   (A)   The City of Yuma Fire Code shall be enforced by the Community
Risk Reduction Division in the Fire Department of the City of Yuma, which is
hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the
Chief of the Fire Department.



   (B)   The Fire Marshal in charge of the Community Risk Reduction
Division shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis
of examination to determine qualifications.



('80 Code, § 13-22)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94; Ord. O98-17, passed 3-
4-98; Ord. O2003-52, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2014-36, passed 12-17-14; Ord.
O2018-055, passed 12-19-18)



§ 131-19  Appeals.



   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an
application or refuses to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it
is claimed that the provisions of the code do not apply or that the true
intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,
the applicant may appeal the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to
the Building Advisory Board, as established and referred to in the current
adopted Fire Code for the City of Yuma, within 30 days from the date of the
decision.



('80 Code, § 13-24)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94;  Ord. O98-17, passed 3-
4-98; Ord. O2003-52, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2014-36, passed 12-17-14; Ord.
O2018-055, passed 12-19-18)



§ 131-20  Definitions.



   (A)   Whenever the word “city,” “municipality,” or
“jurisdiction” is used in the Fire Code, NFPA 1, adopted by the
provisions of this article, it shall be construed to mean the City of Yuma,
Arizona.



   (B)   Whenever the term “corporate counsel” or “city
attorney” is used in NFPA 1, adopted by the provisions of this article, it
shall be construed to mean the attorney of this city.



   (C)   Whenever the initials "AHJ" are used in NFPA 1, adopted by the
provisions of this article, it shall be held to mean the Chief of the Fire
Department or his authorized representative.



('80 Code, § 13-26)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94; Ord. O98-17, passed
3-4-98;  Ord. 2003-52, passed 10-15-03)



§ 131-21  Conflicts.



   In the event of any conflict between the requirements of NFPA 1, this
article, state laws, city ordinances, regulation, or other applicable codes,
the most stringent requirement shall be applicable.



('80 Code, § 13-27)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94;  Ord. O98-17, passed
3-4-98; Ord. O2003-52, passed 10-15-03)



§ 131-22  (Repealed).



§ 131-99  Penalty.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or entity violating any of the
provisions or requirements of §§ 131-15 through 131-22 of this chapter
shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for
not more than ten days or by both such fine and imprisonment.  Each separate
day or part thereof during which any violation of said sections occurs or
continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.



('80 Code, § 13-28)  (Ord. 2657, passed 7-6-94; Ord. O98-17, passed 3-4-98)



Chapter 132:  Hazardous Materials



Section



Recovery Costs of Hazardous Materials or Substances



   132-01   Definitions



   132-02   Liability for remedial actions costs; limitation of
actions; immunity



   132-03   Selection of remedial actions; consideration of factors



   132-04   Appeals



   132-05   Standard rate schedule, procedures and regulations



Facilities Using/Storing Hazardous Materials



   132-15   New facilities



   132-16   Existing facilities



   132-17   Retail sale only



   132-18   Impact review fee schedule



   132-19   Violations



Recovery Costs of Hazardous Materials or Substances



§ 132-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
A.R.S. §§ 49-281, 49-283, and 49-285 are incorporated and adopted as part
of this subchapter as if fully set forth herein, except as noted in this
subchapter.  The Yuma City Fire Chief, or his designate, is denominated
instead of the “director.”



   FACILITY.  Any land, building, installation, structure, equipment,
device, conveyance, area, source, activity, or practice, from which there is,
or with reasonable probability may be, a release.



   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE.  This term has the same meaning as prescribed in
A.R.S. § 49-201, but does not include petroleum as defined in A.R.S. §
49-1001.



   RELEASE.  In accordance with A.R.S. § 49-281, this term means any
spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging,
escaping, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment or placing of
any pollutant into or on any land or water so that the pollutant or any
constituent of the pollutant may enter the environment or be discharged into
any waters, including aquifers.



   REMEDIAL ACTIONS.  Those actions which the Fire Chief determines are
reasonable and necessary in the event of a release or threat of release of
hazardous substances into the environment such that the waters of the state
are or may be affected, such actions as may be necessary to monitor, assess
and evaluate such release, or threat of release, or taking such other actions
as it may be necessary to prevent, minimize, or mitigate damage to the public
health or welfare or to the waters of the state which may otherwise result
from a release or threat of release of a hazardous substance that will or may
affect the waters of the state.  REMEDIAL ACTIONS may include community
information and participation costs, providing alternative drinking water
supply, remediation, or removal or disposal of hazardous substances.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  A person responsible for the release or threat of
release of a hazardous substance if the person:



      (1)   Owned or operated the facility:



         (a)   When the hazardous substance was placed or came to
be located in or on the facility.



         (b)   When the hazardous substance was located in or on
the facility but before the release.



         (c)   During the time of the release or threat of
release.



      (2)   Owned or possessed the hazardous substance and arranged,
by contract, agreement, or otherwise, for the disposal, treatment or
transport for disposal, or treatment of the hazardous substance.



      (3)   Accepted for transport to a disposal or treatment
facility waste that contained a hazardous substance and either selected the
facility to which it was transported or disposed of it in a manner contrary
to law.



      (4)   Or as otherwise described in accordance with A.R.S. §
49-283.



('80 Code, § 11.5-21)  (Ord. 2636, passed 11-17-93)



§ 132-02  Liability for Remedial Actions Costs; Limitation of Actions;
Immunity.



   (A)   A person who is a responsible party shall be strictly,
jointly, and severally liable for such hazardous substance remedial action
costs as are incurred in the manner consistent with § 132-03 of this code
and A.R.S. § 49-285.



   (B)   If any person in an action brought under this subchapter
establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the release or threatened
release is divisible, the person is liable only for his portion of the
release.



   (C)   Any reasonable remedial action costs incurred by the city in
response to a release or a threat of release of a hazardous substance may be
recovered in a civil action brought by the City Attorney against any
responsible party.  This division does not preclude the city from initiating
actions under other provisions of state, federal, or common law.



   (D)   An action brought by the city to recover remedial action costs
from a responsible party shall be brought within three years of the
completion of the remedial action.



   (E)   The city is not liable for costs or damages incurred as a
result of an action taken in response to an emergency created by the release
or threatened release of a hazardous substance that is generated by or from a
facility owned by another person.  This division does not preclude liability
for costs or damages that result from gross negligence or intentional
misconduct by the city.  For purposes of this division, reckless, willful or
wanton misconduct constitutes gross negligence.



('80 Code, § 11.5-22)  (Ord. 2636, passed 11-17-93)



§ 132-03  Selection of Remedial Actions; Consideration of Factors.



   In selecting remedial actions, the Fire Chief shall consider the
following factors:



   (A)   Population, environmental, and welfare concerns at risk.



   (B)   Routes of exposure.



   (C)   Amount, concentration, hazardous properties, environmental
fate, such as the ability to bio-accumulate, persistence and probability of
reaching the waters of the state, and the form of the substance present.



   (D)   Physical factors affecting human exposure, such as
hydrogeology, climate and the extent of previous and expected migration.



   (E)   The extent to which a responsible party can be identified and
the ability of that party to reimburse the city for remedial action costs.



   (F)   The extent to which the amount of water available for
beneficial uses will be preserved by a particular type of remedial action.



   (G)   The technical practicality and cost effectiveness of remedial
actions applicable to a site.



   (H)   The availability and practicality of other appropriate
federal, state, county or other remedial action enforcement mechanisms such
as the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency to respond to the release.



('80 Code, § 11.5-23)  (Ord. 2636, passed 11-17-93)



§ 132-04  Appeals.



   (A)   Whenever it is claimed that the Chief of the Fire Department
improperly charged remedial action costs to a responsible party, the
responsible party may appeal to the Building Advisory Board, as established
and referred to in Chapter 150 of this code.  Such appeals shall be within
30 days from receipt of the charges and be limited to improperly charged
remedial action costs.



   (B)   Notice of and a statement of the charges shall be sent by
“Return Receipt Requested” mail or other service authorized by state
law.  A returned signed receipt shall constitute notice of charges assessed.



('80 Code, § 11.5-24)  (Ord. 2636, passed 11-17-93)



§ 132-05  Standard Rate Schedule, Procedures and Regulations.



   The following provisions are adopted as the standard rate schedule,
procedures and regulations regarding recovering costs incurred in responding
to or recovering from spills or releases of hazardous materials or substances:



   (A)   In establishing costs, the City Council considers as relevant
factors the following:



      (1)   Costs of fuel, equipment, and supplies;



      (2)   Training costs and wages of personnel;



      (3)   Operating and maintenance expenses;



      (4)   Capital expenditures such as the purchase of vehicles
and other equipment; and



      (5)   Deterioration and replacement required of equipment due
to ordinary wear and tear.



   (B)   Standard rate schedule.



 


Standard Rate Schedule (Per Hour)



Vehicle
 
Rate


Haz-mat van
 
$220


Pumper
 
$280


Rescue
 
$130


Command vehicle
 
$70


Total
 
$700



 



   (C)   A two-hour minimum charge will apply to all responses.



   (D)   Mileage, outside the corporate limits of the city, will be
computed at $2 per mile, per vehicle, to and from the point of the remedial
action site.



   (E)   There will be full cost recovery, including overhead and all
materials and equipment.



   (F)   The salary of individuals compensated on an hourly basis shall
include all benefits and overhead costs which are not provided as part of the
rate schedule.



('80 Code, § 11.5-25)  (Ord. 2636, passed 11-17-93)



Facilities Using/Storing Hazardous Materials



§ 132-15  New Facilities.



   All operators and developers of facilities that store or use hazardous
materials in excess of the quantities stipulated by the hazardous materials
inventory, shall provide said inventory and other process, when applying for
a building permit or when applying for a business license.



('80 Code, § 11.5-31)  (Ord. 2655, passed 6-1-94)



§ 132-16  Existing Facilities.



   Owners and operators of existing facilities that use or store such
materials shall provide the above information prior to incorporating those
materials in their operations.



('80 Code, § 11.5-32)  (Ord. 2655, passed 6-1-94)



§ 132-17  Retail Sale Only.



   Those facilities and businesses that engage only in the retail sale to
the public of hazardous materials shall be exempt from the reporting
requirements of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 11.5-33)  (Ord. 2655, passed 6-1-94)



§ 132-18  Impact Review Fee Schedule.



   (A)   An impact review fee schedule is hereby established to defray
the costs of the review process and the additional or unique safety equipment
required by the city emergency response services to deal with emergencies
associated with hazardous materials at those facilities.  Fees are based
upon the characteristics and quantities of hazardous materials on hand.



   (B)   The impact review fee schedule is as follows:



      (1)   Submissions requiring only the identification and
quantities of the materials and a site plan, known as the “short form”
inventory:  $75.



      (2)   Submissions requiring not only the information mentioned
above, but also mitigation actions planned for incident scenarios for not
more than one hazardous material that exceeds the threshold quantity listed
on the “long form” inventory:  $150.



      (3)   Submissions that meet the criteria listed in § 132-16
for more than one hazardous material:  $250.



('80 Code, § 11.5-34)  (Ord. 2655, passed 6-1-94)



§ 132-19  Violations.



   Failure to provide the required inventory and information will result
in the termination of the process for a business license, building permit or
further development review of the proposed project.



('80 Code, § 11.5-35)  (Ord. 2655, passed 6-1-94)



Chapter 133:  Noise Control



Section



   133-01   Definitions



   133-02   Violation criteria



   133-03   Exemptions



 



   133-99   Penalty



§ 133-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. A measure of sound that has been mathematically
adjusted to approximate the sensitivity of human hearing to different
frequencies. A-weighted sound level is measured in A-weighted decibels (dB).



   ELECTRONICALLY AMPLIFIED SOUND. Any sound which has been amplified,
enlarged, extended, manipulated, or produced by any electronic process or
means, e.g., loud speaker, loud speaker system, public address system, sound
amplification equipment, or any such similar device.



   EMERGENCY.  Any occurrence or circumstance involving actual or
potentially imminent physical trauma, significant property damage,
endangerment of the public, or criminal activity which demands immediate
attention.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  Any police, fire, ambulance, or other public
service vehicle.



   EQUIVALENT CONTINUOUS SOUND LEVEL (Leq).  (Sometimes abbreviated as
"equivalent continuous").  The equivalent steady-state A-weighted sound
level that, in a specified period of time, would contain the same acoustic
energy as the time-varying sound level during the same time period.



   EVENING. The period of time:



      (1)   From 1900 hours (7:00 p.m.) until 2200 hours (10:00
p.m.) during a weekend or any day before a legal holiday; and



      (2)   From 1900 hours (7:00 p.m.) until 2100 hours (9:00 p.m.)
during any weekday that is not the day before a legal holiday.



   MAXIMUM SOUND LEVEL (Lmax).  The greatest A-weighted sound level
measured on "slow" response (averaged over one second).



   NIGHTTIME. (Sometimes abbreviated as "night").  The period of time:



      (1)   From 2200 hours (10:00 p.m.) until 0700 hours (7:00
a.m.) during a weekend or any day before a legal holiday; and



      (2)   From 2100 hours (9:00 p.m.) until 0700 hours (7:00 a.m.)
during any weekday that is not the day before a legal holiday.



   PERSON. Any individual, group of individuals, company, association,
society, firm, partnership, or business or governmental entity that, acting
individually or in concert with others:



      (1)   Creates, plays, reproduces, furnishes, or transmits
electronically amplified sound; or



      (2)   Plans, promotes, schedules or hosts any event that
creates, plays, reproduces, furnishes, or transmits electronically amplified
sound.



   RECEIVING PROPERTY. Any property, location or dwelling unit which is
zoned and utilized for residential purposes and is exposed to noise emanating
from another property, location or dwelling unit.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. Ten times the logarithm to the base ten of the
ratio of the time-mean-square pressure of a sound, in a stated frequency
band, to the square of the reference sound pressure in gases of 20
micropascals.



   WEEKDAY.  Any time on or after 1900 hours (7:00 p.m.) Sunday night and
before 1900 hours (7:00 p.m.) Friday night.



   WEEKEND. Any time on or after 1900 hours (7:00 p.m.) Friday night and
before 1900 hours (7:00 p.m.) Sunday night.



(Ord. O2010-47, passed 9-1-10)



§ 133-02  Violation Criteria.



   (A)   No person shall engage in, cause, suffer, allow, facilitate or
permit any activity or use of land involving the creation, playing,
reproduction, or transmittal of electronically amplified sound in such a
manner that, regardless of the intent of the person engaging in, causing,
suffering, allowing, facilitating or permitting that activity or use of land,
the sound pressure level from the electronically amplified sound experienced
at any portion of a receiving property within the City of Yuma corporate
limits equals or exceeds any of the limits set forth in Table 1.



 


TABLE 1



Sound Pressure Levels (db)


Measurement Type
 
Evening
 
Night


Maximum (Lmax)
 
70
 
65


Equivalent Continuous (Leq)
 
55
 
50



 



   (B)   This chapter is violated if either of the following conditions
occur:



      (1)   The maximum sound level equals or exceeds the applicable
Lmax criterion shown in Table 1.



      (2)   The equivalent continuous sound level equals or exceeds
the applicable Leq criterion shown in Table 1, at the conclusion of any
continuous ten-minute period.



   (C)   (Explanatory Note).  Example: A violation would occur on a
weekend evening (7:00 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. on Friday, Saturday, and the day
before a legal holiday) if, at any portion of a residential property in Yuma:



      (1)   The maximum sound level (Lmax) from the electronically
amplified sound is 70 dB or higher at any time (per subsection (B)(1)
hereof); or



      (2)   The equivalent continuous sound level (Leq) from the
electronically amplified sound is 55 dB or higher at the conclusion of any
continuous ten-minute period (per subsection (B)(2) hereof).



(Ord. O2010-47, passed 9-1-10)  Penalty, see § 133-99



§ 133-03  Exemptions.



   (A)   Noise produced by emergency vehicles responding to an
emergency is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Activities sponsored by the City of Yuma, activities
authorized by a permit issued by the City of Yuma, and activities for which
the regulation of noise has been preempted by federal law are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. O2010-47, passed 9-1-10)



§ 133-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Criminal prosecution.



      (1)   A violation of this chapter shall be a class 1
misdemeanor.



   (B)   Civil action.



      (1)   An action for injunctive relief may be brought by the
City of Yuma in a court of competent jurisdiction against any person who has
violated, and is reasonably likely to violate again, any provision of this
chapter. The City may seek injunctive relief forbidding violations of the
decibel limits in this chapter, but shall not seek relief preventing anyone
from creating, playing, reproducing, furnishing, or transmitting
electronically amplified sound, or from planning, promoting, scheduling or
hosting any event that creates, plays, reproduces, furnishes, or transmits
electronically amplified sound.



      (2)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable for the actual attorneys' fees, expenses (including
expert witness fees), and costs of suit incurred in establishing that
violation in a civil action.



   (C)   Other remedies. The rights and remedies provided by this
chapter are in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law.



(Ord. O2010-47, passed 9-1-10)



Chapter 134:  Nuisances



Section



   134-01   Definitions



   134-02   Liability for public nuisances; mitigative actions by
responsible parties



   134-03   Administrative review process



   134-04   Selection of corrective measures



   134-05   Right to enter premises for inspection or abatement



   134-06   Designation of enforcement authorities



   134-07   Abatement costs recovery procedures



   134-08   Lost, abandoned and unclaimed motor vehicles



   134-99   Penalty



§ 134-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CORRECTIVE MEASURES.  Those actions deemed necessary by designated
enforcement authorities or the environmental manager of the city to prevent,
minimize, mitigate or correct the damage to the public health, safety, or
welfare which may have resulted from the creation of any of the above listed
nuisances.



   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITIES.  Those designated city employees who are
authorized by this chapter to issue notices to comply for violations and
ensure appropriate corrective measures are taken by the violator to eliminate
the nuisance and return the property to a state that meets the local
community standards.



   PUBLIC NUISANCES.  The following conditions are public nuisances:



      (1)   Vermin attractions.  Any condition or place in the city
which provides harborage for flies, rodents, mosquitoes and other insects
which are capable of carrying and transmitting disease-causing organisms to
any person or persons.



      (2)   Disease transmission.  All sewage, human excreta,
wastewater, garbage or other organic wastes inappropriately deposited,
stored, discharged or exposed so as to be a potential medium in the
transmission of disease to or between any person or persons and animals.



      (3)   Uncontrolled vegetation.  Noxious weeds and other rank
vegetation not properly controlled.



      (4)   Leaking waste hauling.  Any vehicle or container used
in the transportation of garbage, human excreta or other organic material
which allows leakage or spillage of contents.



      (5)   Waste water maintenance.  The lack of maintenance of
any overflowing septic tank, sewage system, cesspool or other accumulation of
stagnant water, the contents of which may be accessible to flies or other
insects.



      (6)   Water contamination.  The pollution or contamination of
any waters of the state or United States that are potable, used for swimming,
fishing, hunting, irrigation, or supports riparian habitation.



      (7)   Effluent disposal.  The use of the contents of privies,
cesspools, or septic tanks or the use of sewage or sewage plant effluents for
fertilizing or irrigation purposes for crops or gardens except by specific
approval of the Department of Health Services and/or the Department of
Environmental Quality of the State of Arizona.



      (8)   Regulated waste handling.  The storage, collection,
transportation, disposal and reclamation of garbage, trash, rubbish, manure
and other objectionable or regulated wastes other than as provided and
authorized by applicable law or regulation.



      (9)   Illegal dumping.  The accumulation, throwing, dumping,
dropping of any litter, destructive or injurious material on public or
private property which is not immediately removed.



      (10)   Public safety obstructions.  All trees, hedges,
billboards, or other obstructions which prevent people from having a clear
view of all traffic approaching an intersection or constitute a danger to
pedestrians or vehicles.



      (11)   Obstructions to traffic flow.  Obstructions and
excavations affecting the ordinary public use of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
or public grounds except under such conditions as are permitted by this
chapter or other applicable law.



      (12)   Dangerous antennas.  Radio aerials or television
antennae erected or maintained in a dangerous manner.



      (13)   Dangerous signs.  All hanging signs, awnings, banners
and other similar structures over streets and sidewalks, or so situated so as
to endanger public safety, or not constructed and maintained as provided by
ordinance.



      (14)   Dangerous machinery.  All easily accessible,
dangerous, unguarded machinery in any public place, or so situated or
operated on private property as to attract the public.



      (15)   Discarded machinery.  Accumulations of discarded or
dilapidated machinery, household appliances, automobile parts, or other
material in a manner that annoys, injures, or endangers the safety, health,
comfort, or repose of the community from such accumulations.



      (16)   Dangerous excavations.  Any well, hole, or similar
excavation which is left uncovered or in such other condition as to
constitute a hazard to persons coming on the premises where it is located.



      (17)   Obstructions to waterways.  Obstructions to the free
flow of water in a natural waterway or public street drain, gutter or ditch
with trash or other materials.



      (18)   Inoperable motor vehicles.  Any vehicle or motor
vehicle that cannot be legally operated, that is disassembled, dismantled, or
partially dismantled, that is incapable of being propelled under its own
power, or that is not currently licensed or able to be licensed, and is kept
or allowed to remain upon any property in the city in such a manner so as to
be visible from beyond the boundary of the lot.  This provision shall not
apply to any inoperable vehicle stored on private property within the city if
the vehicle:



         (a)   Is lawfully enclosed within a structure;



         (b)   Is completely covered with an opaque car cover
specifically designed and sold for such use;



         (c)   Is a vehicle registered and licensed to a resident
of the property and is undergoing repair, and that the total period during
which the vehicle is inoperable did not exceed 15 days;



         (d)   Is completely enclosed by any fence, wall or
barrier, not less than five feet in height, constructed of opaque materials
without openings, holes or gaps other than gates or doors which shall also be
constructed of opaque material.  If the inoperable vehicle is located in the
rear yard of the property then the fence, wall or barrier need not be
constructed of opaque material as long as said vehicle is completely covered
by an opaque car cover specifically designed and sold for such use; or



         (e)   Is a legally established use on such property.



      (19)   Defective signs.  Any sign that endangers the public
safety, such as materially dangerous, electrically or structurally defective
sign, or an abandoned sign.



      (20)   Construction debris.  Failure to remove and dispose of
construction debris within 30 days of its generation, by means other than
city-owned containers.



      (21)   Air pollution.  Dense smoke, noxious vapors, gas, soot
or cinders in unreasonable quantities.



      (22)   Irrigation overflow.  Irrigation overflow into
rights-of-way that poses a public safety hazard.



      (23)   Other nuisances.  Other acts that interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value
of the property of others.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTIES.  Property owners and other persons responsible
for the actual creation of the public nuisance or by allowing or directing
activities on private or public owned property that lead to one of the above
nuisances.



('80 Code, § 11.5-40)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95; Ord. O96-82, passed
8-28-96)



§ 134-02  Liability for Public Nuisances; Mitigative Actions by Responsible
Parties.



   (A)   When a public nuisance is created, the responsible party (RP)
will be issued a notice to comply and given one week in which to eliminate
the nuisance at their own expense.  If corrective action is not taken within
one week, the responsible party will be prosecuted in accordance with §
134-99 of this chapter.  For nuisances that pose an immediate threat to the
community's health or safety, the RP will be required to correct the nuisance
immediately.  If the city finds it necessary to take steps to correct the
nuisance, it will bill the RP for all costs incurred.



   (B)   If corrective action required is complex or extensive,
additional time may be authorized by the enforcement authority to allow the
responsible party a reasonable opportunity to comply.



   (C)   If a public nuisance is created and the RP cannot be
determined, the owner of the property will be held responsible for corrective
measures and costs.



   (D)   A person who is a responsible party shall be strictly,
jointly, and severally liable for such reasonable abatement costs as may be
incurred if elimination of the nuisance is not completed within the specified
time and the city will take action on its own to eliminate the nuisance.



   (E)   An action brought by the city to recover abatement costs
required by paragraph (D) of this section from a responsible party shall be
initiated within one year of the completion of the compliance activities.



   (F)   All abatement costs shall be paid within 30 days from receipt
of the abatement costs invoice.  The city may extend the time for payment or
provide for installment payments if, based upon the judgement of the city,
payment within 30 days would place an undue economic hardship on the violator.



   (G)   If an assessment made in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter is not paid as provided, it shall be recorded in the office of
the County Recorder.  From the date of its recording, it shall be a lien on
said lot or tract of land assessed hereunder, and the several amounts
assessed against such lot or tract of land until paid.



   (H)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from taking
other enforcement actions as provided in this chapter.



('80 Code, § 11.5-41)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95; Ord. O96-82, passed
8-28-96; Ord. 02001-01, passed 1-3-01)  Penalty, see 134-99



§ 134-03  Administrative Review Process.



   (A)   The enforcing authority's department director will act as the
hearing officer and will be responsible for reviewing all requests from
parties contesting corrective measures.



   (B)   Responsible parties may object to corrective measures intended
by the city by filing written notice to the hearing officer within 72 hours
of receipt of the notice to comply.



   (C)   The hearing officer, upon receipt of the request for review,
shall notify those concerned to defer enforcement action unless there is a
danger to the public's health or safety until the outcome of the review is
determined.  The hearing officer may use any resources available for the
purposes of obtaining information necessary to determine whether appropriate
corrective measures were selected.  The responsible party shall promptly
supply to the hearing officer any additional information necessary to fully
and completely review the issues.  At the conclusion of the review, the
hearing officer shall notify the responsible party and the enforcement
authority of his findings within ten working days.  Corrective measures must
commence within 24 hours of this notification.



('80 Code, § 11.5-42)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95)



§ 134-04  Selection of Corrective Measures.



   (A)   Corrective measures will be selected by the citing official
after considering the following factors:



      (1)   Community, welfare and environmental concerns at risk.



      (2)   Proximity to valuable natural resources such as waters
of the state or the United States.



      (3)   Accessibility to the nuisance site by persons and
equipment.



      (4)   Quantity, concentration and properties of the hazardous
substances present.



      (5)   The practicality and cost-effectiveness of corrective
measures applicable to a site.



      (6)   The ability of the responsible party to pay abatement
costs or reimburse the city if it has to clean up the site.



      (7)   Availability of other federal, state, or county
enforcement authorities such as the Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality or the Environmental Protection Agency to take the necessary action.



   (B)   The citing enforcement authority will consult with other
members listed in § 134-06 and the city's Environmental Program Coordinator
in cases where the materials present might require special handling.



('80 Code, § 11.5-43)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95; Ord. O96-82, passed
8-28-96; Ord. O2013-32, passed 6-19-13)



§ 134-05  Right to Enter Premises for Inspection or Abatement.



   If an enforcement authority or the city's Environmental Program
Coordinator deems it necessary to enter a building or structure within city
jurisdiction for the purpose of examining, removing or preventing a public
nuisance and is refused entrance, any of the enforcement authorities listed
in § 134-06 may make a complaint under oath to a municipal judge.  The
judge shall issue a warrant directing the Police Department accompanied by
and under the direction of at least one designated enforcement authority to
examine, remove or prevent the public nuisance.



('80 Code, § 11.5-44)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95; Ord. O96-82, passed
8-28-96; Ord. O2013-32, passed 6-19-13)



§ 134-06  Designation of Enforcement Authorities.



   All officers and investigators of the city Police and Fire Departments,
the city building official, the code enforcement officer, the building
inspectors, sanitation inspector, pretreatment inspectors and the code
enforcement specialist are authorized to issue notices to comply and
citations for violations of this code within city jurisdiction.



('80 Code, § 11.5-45)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95)



§ 134-07  Abatement Costs Recovery Procedures.



   Whenever the city is required to accomplish the activities associated
with the elimination of a public nuisance, the following procedures will be
used in establishing the reimbursable costs:



   (A)   Contractor costs billed directly to the city.



   (B)   Costs of city employees required to oversee clean up
activities will be compensated on a time and materials basis including all
benefits and overhead costs.



   (C)   Costs associated with accounting and contracting services
necessary to arrange for outside contractor services.



('80 Code, § 11.5-46)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95)



§ 134-08  Lost, Abandoned and Unclaimed Motor Vehicles.



   The city shall comply with A.R.S. §§ 28-4801 - 28-4884, and its
successors, regarding lost, stolen, abandoned or unclaimed vehicles within
city limits.



('80 Code, § 19-48)  (Ord. 1340, passed 12-5-73; Ord. 2448, passed 4-19-89)



§ 134-99  Penalty.



   (A)   A responsible party cited for a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction and shall be fined an
amount not more than $500 per day.



   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (C)   The city shall provide for payment by mail of fines imposed
under this section.



   (D)   The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this
section shall not waive any and all other legal remedies available to the
city.



('80 Code, § 11.5-47)  (Ord. O95-005, passed 3-16-95; Ord. O96-82, passed
8-28-96)



Chapter 135:  Smoking



Section



Smoking in Enclosed Public Places and Places of Employment



   135-01   Definitions



   135-02   Smoking prohibited in certain public areas



   135-03   Regulation of smoking in food establishments



   135-04   Regulation of smoking in workplace



   135-05   Posting requirements



   135-06   Owner reporting requirements



   135-99   Penalty



Smoking in Enclosed Public Places and Places of Employment



§ 135-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE AREA.  The area of an establishment not generally
accessible to the public including, but not limited to, individual offices,
stockrooms, employee lounges or meeting rooms.



   BAR.  An area devoted to alcoholic beverage service to which food
service is only incidental.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person who is employed by any employer for direct or
indirect monetary wages or profit, or is in a position that would lead one to
believe that such person is so employed.



   EMPLOYER.  Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other
entity, that employs one or more persons.



   ENCLOSED.  Closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for
ingress and egress, but does not include areas commonly described as public
lobbies.



   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment that prepares food for
consumption either on- or off-premises.



   HOSPITAL.  Any institution that provides medical, surgical and
overnight facilities for patients.



   MOVIE THEATER.  Any establishment engaged in the business of
exhibiting motion pictures to the public.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any enclosed indoor area that may be used by the
general public, and includes, but is not limited to, stores, offices and
other commercial establishments; restaurants; public and private institutions
of higher education; health care facilities; and any other public places
designated by state law.



   PUBLIC SERVICE AREA.  Any area to which the general public routinely
has access for municipal services or which is designated a public service
area in a written policy.



   RETAIL AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment which offers
goods or services for sale to the general public.



   SERVICE LINE.  Any indoor line at which one or more persons are
waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service
involves the exchange of money.



   SMOKE OR SMOKING.  Includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe,
cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or
device, and the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar
or cigarette of any kind.



   WORKPLACE.  Any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof,
intended for occupancy by employees who provide primarily clerical,
professional, or business services of a business entity, or which provide
primarily clerical, professional, or business services to other business
entities, or to the public, at that location.  The enclosed indoor area
under the control of the employer shall include those areas to which
employees have access during the course of employment including, but not
limited to, work areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, employee
conference rooms and employee cafeterias.  A private residence is not a
place of employment.



('80 Code, § 19-61)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87)



§ 135-02  Smoking Prohibited in Certain Public Areas.



   (A)   A person commits an offense under this section if he smokes in
any of the following indoor or enclosed areas:



      (1)   An elevator used or which may be used by the public.



      (2)   A hospital or nursing home corridor providing direct
access to patients' rooms.



      (3)   Any conference room, meeting room, or public service
area of any facility operated by the city; except those conference rooms and
meeting rooms that are not generally open to the public.



      (4)   Any public restrooms.



      (5)   Any essential services to include grocery stores,
convenience stores, drugstores and financial institutions.



      (6)   Any service line of all retail and service
establishments.



      (7)   An area marked with a “No Smoking” sign by the owner
or person in control of a hospital, nursing home, or retail or service
establishment serving the general public.



      (8)   Any facility of a primary or secondary school; or an
enclosed theater, motion picture theater, library, museum, and transportation
vehicles, such as buses and taxicabs; except on chartered buses for private
hire or in taxicabs clearly designated by the operator to permit smoking.



      (9)   Any facility owned by the City of Yuma, including the
Desert Hills Golf Course Clubhouse (Putter Inn) Bar and Restaurant areas and
the Yuma Civic Center.



   (B)   The owner or person in control of an establishment or area
designated in division (A) of this section shall post a sign, conspicuous to
ordinary public view, at or near each public entrance to the establishment. 
The sign shall contain the words “No Smoking Except in Designated Areas”
and include the city code number, the universal symbol for no smoking, or
other language than clearly prohibits smoking.



   (C)   Every hospital shall:



      (1)   Allow all patients, prior to elective admission, to
choose to be in a no-smoking patient room; and



      (2)   Require that employees or visitors obtain express
approval from all patients in a patient room prior to smoking.



   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the
person was smoking:



      (1)   In a location that is a designated smoking area of a
facility or establishment described in subdivision (A)(5) or (A)(6) of this
section which is posted as a designated smoking area with appropriate signs.



      (2)   In a location that is an administrative area or office
area of an establishment described in subdivisions (A)(5) or (A)(8) of this
section.



      (3)   In a location that is a retail or service establishment
which is primarily engaged in the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or
smoking implements.



      (4)   In a retail or service establishment which is a food
establishment regulated by § 135-03.



      (5)   As a participant in an authorized theatrical performance.



      (6)   In a situation in which the person is present at an
event in which an entire room or hall is used for a social function by a
private entity or individual and seating arrangements are under the control
of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or person in charge
of the place, except in a city-owned facility.  However, the sponsor of the
social function may designate a smoking area or prohibit smoking entirely.



      (7)   In bowling lanes, billiard rooms and bars, except where
located in city-owned facilities.



      (8)   In a hotel, motel and private rooms rented to guests.



('80 Code, § 19-62)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87; Ord. 2475, passed
12-20-89; Ord. O2004-68, passed 11-17-04)  Penalty, see § 135-99



§ 135-03  Regulation of Smoking in Food Establishments.



   (A)   A food establishment which has indoor or enclosed dining areas
shall provide separate indoor or enclosed dining areas for smoking and
nonsmoking patrons.



   (B)   A nonsmoking area must:



      (1)   Be separated from the smoking areas by a minimum of four
feet of contiguous floor space, a partition, or a wall;



      (2)   Be ventilated and situated so that air from the smoking
area is not drawn into or across the nonsmoking area, or the smoking area
shall be separately ventilated;



      (3)   Be clearly designated by appropriate signs visible to
patrons within the dining area indicating that the area is designated
nonsmoking; and



      (4)   Have ashtrays or other suitable containers for
extinguishing smoking materials at the perimeter of the nonsmoking area.



   (C)   Each food establishment which has a dining area shall have
signs, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at each public entrance to the
establishment indicating that nonsmoking seating is available.



   (D)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
food establishment is:



      (1)   An establishment which has indoor seating arrangements
for less than 100 patrons;



      (2)   A physically separated bar area of a food products
establishment otherwise regulated;



   (E)   The establishments covered above in subdivision (D)(1) shall
post a sign, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at each public entrance to
the establishment which shall contain the words “This Establishment Does
Not Provide for a Nonsmoking Section.”



   (F)   A person commits an offense under this section if he smokes in
an area of a food establishment designated as nonsmoking.



('80 Code, § 19-63)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87)  Penalty, see § 135-99



§ 135-04  Regulation of Smoking in Workplace.



   (A)   An employer shall, upon the request of an employee, designate
a workplace, or portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area.  Any employer with a
nonsmoking area shall:



      (1)   Have and implement a written policy on smoking which
conforms to this subchapter;



      (2)   Make the policy available for inspection by employees;



      (3)   Prominently display reasonably sized signs conspicuous
to ordinary public view, indicating that smoking is prohibited; and



      (4)   Provide facilities in sufficient numbers and at such
locations to be readily accessible for the extinguishment of smoking
materials (i.e., ashtrays).



   (B)   No employee shall be terminated or subject to disciplinary
action solely as a result of his or her complaint about smoking or nonsmoking
in the workplace.



('80 Code, § 19-64)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87)  Penalty, see § 135-99



§ 135-05  Posting Requirements.



   “Smoking” or “nonsmoking” signs, or the international symbols
shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager,
employer or other person in control of every place where smoking is regulated
by this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 19-65)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87)  Penalty, see § 135-99



§ 135-06  Owner Reporting Requirements.



   The owner, operator, employer, manager or any employee of an
establishment is required to report a violation to the Police Department or
to take action to bring into conformance any individual or business violating
this subchapter, as amended, when an objection is made known by a customer or
employee.



('80 Code, § 19-67)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87)  Penalty, see § 135-99



§ 135-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who
violates any of the provisions of §§ 135-01 through 135-06 of this chapter
is guilty of a civil offense and shall be fined an amount not less than $25
nor more than $200; provided, however, when a person is convicted of a second
or subsequent violation, he shall be fined an amount not less than $50 nor
more than $300.



   (B)   The city shall provide for payment by mail of fines imposed
pursuant to § 135-99(A).



   (C)   The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this
chapter shall not waive any and all other legal remedies available to the
city.



('80 Code, § 19-66)  (Ord. 2368, passed 8-19-87)



Chapter 136:  Cemeteries



Section



   136-01   Burial restricted



   136-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power to acquire, use property outside city limits, see Charter Art.
III, § 2



Statutory reference:



   Power to establish, maintain burial places for city beyond city limits,
see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(11)(a)



   Regulate burial of the dead, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(11)(b)



   Registration of deaths, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(11)(c)



§ 136-01  Burial Restricted.



   It shall be unlawful to bury any person within the city limits other
than in a designated cemetery.



('80 Code, § 8-1)  (Ord. 18, passed 8-4-03)  Penalty, see § 136-99



§ 136-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 8-4)  (Ord. 18, passed 8-4-03)



Chapter 137:  Trees



Section



   137-01   Maintenance



   137-02   (Repealed)



§ 137-01  Maintenance.



   (A)   This chapter is applicable to all trees, vines and woody
plants either owned or maintained by the City of Yuma.



   (B)   The Director of Parks and Recreation or designee is
responsible for the care and management of all trees.



   (C)   All trees, vines and woody plants shall be planted, managed,
and cared for through adherence to the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), ANSI A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub, and Other
Woody Plant Management (most current revisions).



   (D)   No person shall damage, cut, carve, attach any rope, wire,
nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any tree; allow any
gaseous, liquid, chemical, or solid substance that is harmful to trees to
come in contact with them; or set fire or permit fire to burn when such fire
or the heat will injure any portion of any tree.



   (E)   Tree-topping shall not be allowed on any tree.



(Ord. O2007-69, passed 11-20-07)



§ 137-02  (Repealed).



Chapter 138: Residential Rental Inspection



Section



   138-01   Purpose



   138-02   Definitions



   138-02.1   Enforcement; rules



   138-03   Registration



   138-04   Certificate of Compliance



   138-05   Housing Code



   138-06   Inspections; consent; election of non-inspection



   138-07   [Repealed]



   138-08   Notices



   138-09   Renewal of Certificate of Compliance



   138-10   Administrative review



   138-11   Declaration of a residential rental property unfit for
habitation



   138-12   Notice to vacate



   138-13   Posting of building unfit for human habitation



   138-14   Occupancy prohibited



   138-15   Reliance on Certificate of Compliance; liability



   138-98   Severability



   138-99   Penalty



§ 138-01  Purpose.



   The purpose of the Rental Inspection program is to protect the health,
safety and welfare of persons residing in residential rental properties
located in a Neighborhood Revitalization Area.  Additionally, the Rental
Inspection program will improve and preserve  the quality of rental dwelling
unit(s), and the character and stability in such neighborhoods will be
greatly enhanced. To accomplish this, every residential rental property in a
Neighborhood Revitalization Area is subject to the requirements of this
chapter.  This chapter shall not apply to any residential rental property
located outside a Neighborhood Revitalization Area.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-02  Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW .  An appeal procedure, requested by the owner
or managing agent to the Director of the Department of Community Development.



   BUILDING AND HOUSING CODES .  Any law, ordinance or governmental
regulation concerning fitness for habitation, or the construction,
maintenance, operation, occupancy, use or appearance of any premises,
dwelling unit(s), or residential rental property.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE .  A certificate issued by the Department
that the owner of a residential rental property has complied with this
chapter.



   COMMON AREAS .  That portion of the premises where one or more tenants
and the owner have a common right of access.



   DEPARTMENT .  The Department of Community Development.



   DIRECTOR .  The Director of the Department of Community Development or
the Director's designee.



   DWELLING UNIT(S) .  A structure, a part of a structure, a mobile home
or a recreational vehicle suect to a rental agreement or used as a home,
residence, or sleeping quarters by any person.



   HOUSING CODE.  The current property maintenance code as adopted by the
City of Yuma at § 150-090.



   MANAGING AGENT .  A person, corporation, partnership, LLC, association
or any other entity authorized to manage the residential rental property.



   MULTIPLE-FAMILY RENTAL COMMUNITY .  Residential  dwelling units
consisting of no less than 20 units on a single lot or adjacent lots under
common ownership.



   NEIGHBORHOOD REVITALIZATION AREA .  A defined neighborhood where the
City Council has approved a comprehensive revitalization strategy.



   OWNER .  One or more persons, jointly or severally, vested with all or
part of the legal title to the residential rental property.



   RENTAL AGREEMENT .  Any agreement, whether written, oral or implied by
law, together with any valid rules and regulations of the owner, embodying
the terms and conditions concerning the use and occupancy of a dwelling unit.



   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY .  A property that is used, in whole or in
part, as leased or rented for residential purposes and occupied by anyone,
including family members.  If only a portion of a property is so leased or
rented, only that portion and the premises and common areas associated
therewith shall be RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY .  If the property is a space
rental, RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY includes the rental space but does not
include a mobile home or recreational vehicle that is owned and occupied by
the tenant of the rental space and not by the owner of the rental space.



   TENANT .  A person entitled under a rental agreement to occupy a
dwelling unit to the exclusion of others.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03; Ord. O2015-058,
passed 11-18-15)



§ 138-02.1 Enforcement; Rules.



   (A)   The Director shall exercise the power granted by this chapter.



   (B)   The Director is authorized to adopt such rules as are
necessary to implement the requirements of this chapter and to carry out the
duties hereunder.



(Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-03  Registration.




   (A)   The owner or managing agent of any residential rental property
located in a  Neighborhood Revitalization Area shall register each dwelling
unit on a form designated by the Director.





   (B)   The owner may designate a managing agent.  If the owner is
domiciled outside the State of Arizona, the owner shall designate a managing
agent that is domiciled within the State of Arizona.  The owner shall
provide to the city in writing the name, street address, and telephone number
of the managing agent.  The owner shall keep such information current and
notify the city within ten days of any change in such information.  When
designated, the managing agent shall:





      (1)   Have the authority to grant the owner's consent to
inspections in accordance with  § 138-06(A), but only where the owner may
grant such consent;





      (2)   Have the authority to take such actions as are necessary
to ensure compliance with this chapter and all other applicable statutes,
regulations, codes and ordinances adopted by the city;





      (3)   Be authorized to accept service on behalf of the owner.





Designation of a managing agent does not relieve the owner of the
responsibility for compliance with this chapter.





   (C)   No owner or managing agent shall lease, rent or cause any
dwelling unit(s) to be occupied in a Neighborhood Revitalization Area unless
the property is registered in accordance with this section.





(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. 2003-06, passed 2-19-03)




§ 138-04  Certificate of Compliance required.



   (A)   A Certificate of Compliance shall not be issued unless the
owner registers the dwelling unit in accordance with § 138-03.



   (B)   Subject to §§ 138-04(B)(5) and 138-04B)(6), the Department
shall issue a Certificate of Compliance or a Waiver to the Certificate of
Compliance to an owner upon the occurrence of one of the following:



      (1)   Upon completion of an inspection in accordance with §
138-06(A) and certification by the Department that the residential rental
property, including all dwelling unit(s) thereon, meets all applicable
Housing Codes; or



      (2)   In the case of residential rental property that is newly
constructed or substantially rehabilitated after the effective date of this
chapter, upon the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the city,
provided that:



         (a)   The city inspected and approved the construction
or substantial rehabilitation pursuant to lawfully authorized building
permits;



         (b)   A legible photocopy of the Certificate of
Occupancy is attached to the application for registration; or



      (3)   In the case of a Multiple-Family Rental Community, upon
completion of an inspection in accordance with § 138-06(A) on random
samples, of no less than 25% of the total dwelling unit(s), and certification
by the Department that all dwelling unit(s) inspected, together with all
common areas inspected, meet the Housing Code.  In this case a Certificate
of Compliance may be issued for the entire Multiple-Family Rental Community;
or



      (4)   Upon acceptance by the Department that a dwelling
unit(s) has been inspected by an approved regulatory agency and the dwelling
unit(s) meets or exceeds the Housing Code; or



      (5)   Upon the refusal of a judge or magistrate to issue a
search warrant for an inspection sought in accordance with § 138-06(A), in
which a Waiver to the Certificate of Compliance shall be issued for the
dwelling unit(s) for which a warrant was refused; provided, however, if a
warrant is subsequently issued and the property inspected pursuant thereto,
the Waiver to the Certificate of Compliance shall expire; or



      (6)   Upon receipt by the Department of written notice of a
tenant's election to not have their dwelling unit inspected in accordance
with § 138-06(F), in which case a Waiver to the Certificate of Compliance
may be issued to the owner.  The Waiver to the Certificate of Compliance
shall expire in the event such tenant vacates the dwelling unit.



   (C)   The duration of the Certificate of Compliance or the Waiver to
the Certificate of Compliance issued in accordance with § 138-04(B) shall be
determined by the Director, but shall not exceed three years.



   (D)   The Department shall deny a Certificate of Compliance or
Waiver to the Certificate of Compliance to any owner of residential rental
property which fails to meet one of the criteria of § 138-04(B) within 60
days of registration of such property or such longer period as is approved by
the Director, not to exceed 120 days from registration.  In the case of a
Correction Notice issued pursuant to § 138-06(C), the Director shall
exercise discretion to permit reasonable time for correction and reinspection.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03; Ord. O2015-058,
passed 11-18-15)



§ 138-05  Housing Code.



   The City of Yuma, for purposes of the Residential Rental Programs,
utilizes standards of the International Property Maintenance Code or
prevailing Code as adopted at § 150-090.  The Housing Code shall not be
construed to relieve the owner from compliance with any federal, state or
other city requirements.




(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03; Ord. O2015-058,
passed 11-18-15)




§ 138-06  Inspections; Consent; Election of Non-Inspection.



   Subject to § 138-06(D), the Director or the Director's designated
inspector may, with the consent of the tenant or the consent of the owner in
the case of an unoccupied dwelling unit, or pursuant to a lawfully issued
warrant, enter any dwelling unit(s), building, structure or premises to
perform any duty imposed by this chapter.  Unless a tenant elects not to
have their dwelling unit inspected pursuant to § 138-06(F), upon obtaining a
lawful right of entry, the Director shall seek to inspect all residential
rental property in accordance with this section and § 138-08.  The tenant
or owner in the case of an unoccupied dwelling unit may contact the
Department to schedule an inspection.



   (B)   The Director shall use reasonable efforts to accommodate the
schedule of the owner or the tenant, as the case may be, in scheduling and
conducting inspections.  In no event, however, shall the city be required to
conduct inspections on weekends, holidays, or outside of normal business
hours.  Once scheduled, for good cause, the Director may reschedule the
inspection at the request of the owner, managing agent or tenant provided the
rescheduled appointment can occur within 30 days.



   (C)   During an inspection, the inspector shall note any violations
of the Housing Code and, if any violations are found, serve a Correction
Notice to the owner or managing agent.  The Correction Notice shall direct
the owner or managing agent to correct any violation(s) within a time set
forth in the notice.  A reasonable time for correcting violation(s) shall be
determined by the inspector depending on the nature of the violation(s), but
shall not exceed 60 days.  Upon request by the owner or managing agent, the
Director may extend the time for correcting violation(s) not to exceed an
additional 60 days.



   (D)   When the Director or the Director's designated inspector seeks
to enter any property through consent, such consent shall be obtained from
the appropriate person in accordance with the following:



      (1)    The Director shall seek the consent of any tenant
residing within the particular dwelling unit(s) subject to this chapter prior
to inspecting such dwelling unit(s).



      (2)   The Director shall seek the consent of the owner or
managing agent of residential rental property to inspect that portion of the
residential rental property which no tenant or other occupant residing within
any dwelling unit(s) has access, including any vacant dwelling unit(s).



      (3)   The Director shall seek the consent of the owner or any
tenant to inspect any common areas.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or managing agent to
threaten or coerce any tenant of any dwelling unit(s) to deny consent to the
Director or the Director's designated inspector to conduct an inspection
pursuant to this chapter.



   (F)   Any tenant may elect to not have their dwelling unit(s)
inspected by notifying the Department in writing of such decision.  Such
notice shall identify the dwelling unit by street address, shall state that
the party executing the notice is the tenant of the dwelling unit, the date
on which the tenant shall vacate the premises (if known), shall state that
the tenant does not want their premises inspected by the city pursuant to
this chapter, and shall be signed by the tenant.  The Director may designate
a form for use of such tenant elections.  The Director or the Director's
designated inspector will not seek a warrant to inspect dwellings of tenants
who, pursuant to this subsection, have elected not to have their dwelling
unit(s) inspected unless there is probable cause to believe that a violation
of the Housing Code exists in the dwelling(s) sought to be inspected.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03; Ord. O2015-058,
passed 11-18-15)



§ 138-07  [Repealed].



§ 138-08  Notices.



   (A)   Notice of Violation/Correction Notice.  Whenever the city
determines that there has been violation(s) of any provisions of this
chapter, the inspector shall serve a notice of such violation(s) and orders
for the abatement of such violation(s). Such notice and order shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   State the address and legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the dwelling unit(s) is located;



      (3)   Include a statement of the conditions that constitutes
violation(s) of this chapter;



      (4)   Include the name, business telephone number and
signature of the inspector;



      (5)   State that each violation is a separate, punishable
offense;



      (6)   State the date of the inspection, the name of the
inspector, the address of the dwelling, and the date set for reinspection;



      (7)   Specify a time limit for the performance of any act it
requires;



      (8)   Be served upon the owner or managing agent.



   (B)   Service of Notice.  Notice shall be deemed properly served if
a copy is:



      (1)   Served personally, or



      (2)   Sent by certified mail to last known address, or



      (3)   Returned showing that the letter was not delivered, in
which case, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure affected by such notice.



   (C)   Only the Director may remove or order the removal of any
notice, complaint or order posted in accordance with this chapter prior to
issuance of a Certificate of Compliance by the Director.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-09  Renewal of Certificate of Compliance.



   Certificates of Compliance shall be renewed in  the same manner as the
issuance of the original Certificate of Compliance, except that all time
periods based on the date of registration shall run from the date of the
expiration of the Certificate of Compliance.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-10  Administrative review process.



   (A)   An owner or managing agent may contest a Notice of Violation
or Correction Notice issued pursuant to § 138-08, by filing a written
request for an administrative review with the Department.  A request for
administrative review shall be made within five days of receipt of a notice,
shall include a copy of the notice, and shall state, with particularity, the
reasons why the party believes that any violation identified in the notice is
not correct.



   (B)   The Director or the Director's designee will act as the
reviewing officer and shall be responsible for reviewing and deciding all
written requests for administrative review.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a written request, the reviewing officer shall
conduct an administrative review and issue a written decision within 14 days.
Unless there is a danger to the public's health or safety, the reviewing
officer shall defer enforcement action until the decision is issued. The
reviewing officer may use all available resources to obtain information
necessary to determine whether appropriate orders of compliance were issued.
The owner or managing agent shall promptly provide to the reviewing officer
any additional information necessary to fully and completely review the
issues.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-11  Declaration of a residential rental property unfit for habitation.



   The inspector may declare a residential rental property to be unfit for
human habitation if:



   (A)   A condition exists that constitutes an immediate threat to
life or an immediate threat of serious injury to the person or any occupant
as determined by the inspector.



   (B)   An emergency or hazardous condition has not been corrected as
ordered.



   (C)   Any other hazardous or dangerous condition exists as defined
in any other ordinance adopted by the city.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-12  Notice to vacate.



   Upon declaring a residential rental property to be unfit for human
habitation, the city shall give notice pursuant to § 138-08 and order the
property owner or managing agent and tenant(s) to vacate any affected
dwelling unit(s) no later than 72 hours after service of notice.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-13  Posting of building unfit for human habitation.



   Upon giving notice to vacate any dwelling unit(s), the city shall post
the notice upon or near the entryways to any dwelling unit(s) cited in the
notice. The sign shall state the address number of the dwelling unit(s) and
the name of the owner. The notice shall inform the public that the dwelling
unit(s) have been declared unfit for human habitation and is a violation of
this code to enter the dwelling unit(s) unless authorized in writing by the
city.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-14  Occupancy prohibited.



   No person shall occupy, permit or allow another person to occupy any
residential rental property which has been declared to be unfit for human
habitation or entry.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-15  Reliance on Certificate of Compliance; Liability.



   (A)   Issuance of a Certificate of Compliance shall not constitute a
guarantee or warranty of the habitability or complete compliance of the
building or housing code requirements.  No occupant of any dwelling unit(s)
shall rely on the Certificate of Compliance as such a guaranty or warranty.
The Certificate of Compliance shall contain a notice to this effect.



   (B)   This chapter is not intended and shall not be construed to
create or form the basis for any liability on the part of the city, or the
city's officers, employees or agents, for any injury or damage resulting from
the failure of an owner of property or land to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, or by reason or in consequence of any inspection, notice,
order, certificate, permission or approval authorized or issued or done in
connection with the implementation or enforcement of this chapter, or by
reason of any action or inaction on the part of the city related in any
manner to the enforcement of or failure to enforce this chapter by the city's
officers, employees or agents.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-98  Severability.



   Should any part, section, clause, or paragraph of this chapter be
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction such action shall not
affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any other part.



(Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)



§ 138-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Any person(s) cited for a violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a civil sanction and shall be fined an amount not
more than $500 per day or, in the case of a violation of § 138-06(E), not
more than $500 per violation.



   (B)   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.



   (C)   The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this
section shall not waive any other legal remedies available to the city.



(Ord. O2002-15, passed 3-6-02; Ord. O2003-06, passed 2-19-03)








Chapter 139:  Fireworks



Section



   139-001   Definitions



   139-002   Fireworks prohibited; exceptions



   139-003   Limited use of permissible consumer fireworks



   139-004   Sale of fireworks



   139-005   Posting of signs by persons engaged in the sale of
fireworks; penalty



   139-006   Authority to enforce violations of this chapter; means of
enforcement



   139-007   Liability for emergency responses related to use of
fireworks; definitions



   139-008   Providing for repeal of conflicting ordinances



   139-009   Severability



 



   139-099   Penalty



§ 139-001  Definitions.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONSUMER FIREWORK.  Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL SALES FACILITY. A permanent or temporary
building or structure, consumer fireworks retail sales stand, tent, canopy,
or membrane structure that is used primarily for the display or sale of
consumer fireworks to the public as defined by A.R.S. § 36- 1601.



   DISPLAY FIREWORK.  Those fireworks defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration
or detonation, that is a consumer firework, display firework or permissible
consumer firework as defined by A.R.S § 36-1601.



   NFPA 1124. The National Fire Protection Association code for the
manufacture, transportation, storage, and retail sales of fireworks and
pyrotechnic articles as defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   NOVELTY ITEMS. Federally deregulated novelty items that are known as
snappers, snap caps, party poppers, glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices,
sparklers, and certain toys as defined in A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   PERMISSIBLE CONSUMER FIREWORKS. Those fireworks as defined by A.R.S. §
36-1601 that may be sold within the city even where the use of those items
has been prohibited.



   PERSON. Includes an individual, partnership, firm, or corporation as
defined by A.R.S. § 36-1601.



   STORE. A building, that is classified as a mercantile occupancy that
contains a variety of merchandise and that is not used primarily for the
retail sales of consumer fireworks, as defined by A.R.S. § 36- 1601.



   SUPERVISED PUBLIC DISPLAY. A monitored performance of display fireworks
open to the public and authorized by permit by the Fire Chief or his designee.



(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-002  Fireworks Prohibited; Exceptions.



   (A)   The use, discharge, or ignition of fireworks is prohibited on
all public property including, but not limited to, public buildings, parking
lots, public parks, sidewalks, streets, public schools, and public
rights-of-way at all times, except as otherwise provided for herein or by
permit for supervised public displays only.



   (B)   Nothing in this section or chapter shall be construed to
prohibit the use, discharge or ignition of federally deregulated novelty
items on private property or the occurrence of a permitted supervised public
display of fireworks.



   (C)   The Fire Chief or designee is authorized to grant permits for
conducting a properly supervised public display of fireworks. Every
supervised public display of fireworks shall have a permit and shall be
inspected by the Fire Chief or designee prior to such event. Every supervised
public display of fireworks shall be of such character and so located,
discharged, or ignited in a manner that does not endanger persons, animals,
or property. A permit shall not be issued, or may be revoked, during time
periods of High Fire Danger warnings. The Fire Chief has authority to impose
conditions on any permits granted.



   (D)   Failure to comply with any permit requirements issued by the
Fire Chief or designee is a civil offense punishable by a civil fine not to
exceed $500 for each violation or schedule of progressive fines for multiple
violations.



(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-003  Limited Use of Permissible Consumer Fireworks.



   The use, discharge, or ignition of permissible consumer fireworks
within the city may only be used from June 24 through July 6 and December 24
through January 3 of each year.



(Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-004  Sale of Fireworks.



   (A)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks or federally deregulated novelty items to a
person who is under 16 years of age.



   (B)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks or federally deregulated novelty items in
conflict with state law, this code, or NFPA 1124.



   (C)   No person shall sell or permit or authorize the sale of
permissible consumer fireworks, except from May 20 through July 6 and
December 10 through January 3 of each year. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the sale of permissible consumer fireworks shall be prohibited at any time a
federal or state agency implements a stage one or higher fire restriction.



(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-005  Posting of Signs by Persons Engaged in the Sale of Fireworks;
Penalty.



   (A)   Prior to the sale of permissible consumer fireworks, every
person engaged in such sales shall prominently display signs in accordance
with A.R.S. § 36-1611, indicating the following:




State of Arizona





Consumer Fireworks Regulations





A.R.S. § 36-1601, et al.





The use of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is
allowed:





June 24 - July 6 and December 24 - January 3





The sale of permissible consumer fireworks as defined under state law is
allowed:





May 20 - July 6 and December 10 - January 3





All other fireworks are prohibited, except as authorized by local fire
department permit.





The sale and use of novelties known as snappers (pop-its), party poppers,
glow worms, snakes, toy smoke devices, and sparklers are permitted at all
times.





Permissible consumer fireworks may not be sold to persons under 16 years of
age.





Check with your local fire department for additional regulations and dates
before using.




   (B)   Signs required under this section shall be placed at all
retail sales displays of permissible consumer fireworks and at each cash
register or point of sale.



   (C)   Signs shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(8½” x 11") in size, on cardstock paper, in landscape orientation, and
displayed on a contrasting background. A model sign shall be posted on the
city’s website and filed with the Clerk’s office.



   (D)   Failure to comply with this section shall be a civil offense
and shall be punishable by a civil fine not to exceed $500.



(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-006  Authority to Enforce Violations of this Chapter; Means of
Enforcement.



   (A)   The Fire Chief, or designee, a city police officer, or City
Attorney may issue civil complaints to enforce violations of this Chapter
designated as civil offenses.



   (B)   Any person authorized pursuant to this Section to issue a
civil compliant may also issue a notice of violation specifying actions to be
taken and the time in which they are to be taken to avoid the issuance of a
civil complaint.



   (C)   A city law enforcement officer or City Attorney may issue a
criminal complaint to enforce violations of this chapter.



(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-007  Liability for Emergency Responses Related to Use of Fireworks;
Definitions.



   (A)   A person who uses, discharges, or ignites permissible consumer
fireworks, fireworks or anything that is designed or intended to rise into
the air and explode or to detonate in the air or to fly above the ground, is
liable for the expenses of an emergency response that is required by such
use, discharge, or ignition. The fact that a person is convicted or found
responsible for a violation(s) of this chapter is prima facie evidence of
liability under this section.



   (B)   The expenses of an emergency response are a charge against the
person liable for those expenses pursuant to division (A) of this section.
The charge constitutes a debt of that person and may be collected
proportionately by the public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit
entities that incurred the expenses. The person's liability for the expense
of an emergency response shall be the actual expenses of the incident. The
liability imposed under this section is in addition to and not in limitation
of any other liability that may be imposed.



   (C)   For the purposes of this section:



      (1)   EXPENSES OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE means reasonable costs
directly incurred by public agencies, for-profit entities or not-for-profit
entities that make an appropriate emergency response to an incident.



      (2)   REASONABLE COSTS includes the costs of providing police,
fire fighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of an
incident and the salaries of the persons who respond to the incident.



(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-008  Providing For Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances.



   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter or any part of the code adopted herein by reference are
hereby repealed.



(Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-009  Severability.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of
this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining potions thereof.



(Ord. O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)



§ 139-099  Penalty.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided for herein, it shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to violate, or cause the violation of, any
provision of this chapter. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of
the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty of a class three misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
by imprisonment for not more than one day or both fine and imprisonment.



   (B)   Each separate day or part thereof during which any violation
of this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the unauthorized use of permissible consumer
fireworks only shall be deemed a petty offense and punishable by a fine not
to exceed $500.




(Ord. O2013-26, passed 5-1-13; Ord. O2013-53, passed 10-16-13; Ord.
O2018-015, passed 5-2-18)




Title 15:  Land Usage



   Chapter



      150.   Building Regulations



      151.   Floodplain Management



      152.   [Repealed]



      153.   Subdivisions



      154.   Zoning



      155.   [Repealed]



      156.   Erosion and Sediment Control



      157.   City of Yuma Development Fees



Chapter 150:  Building Regulations



Section



General Provisions



   150-001   Distribution of copies of building permits



   150-002   Housing Authority



Building Advisory Board



   150-008   Building Advisory Board



Building Code



   150-015   Adoption of the 2018 International Building Code



   150-016   Amendments



International Swimming Pool and Spa Code



   150-018   Adoption of the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa
Code



   150-019   Amendments



International Energy Conservation Code



   150-020   Adoption of 2009 International Energy Conservation Code



   150-021   Amendments



Adobe Building Code



   150-030   Purpose



   150-031   Scope



   150-032   General construction techniques and standards



   150-033   Burnt adobe masonry units



   150-034   Electrical requirements



   150-035   Plumbing



Mechanical Code



   150-045   Adoption of the 2012 International Mechanical Code



   150-046   Amendments



Plumbing Code



   150-060   Adoption of the 2012 International Plumbing Code



   150-061   Amendments



   150-062   [Repealed]



   150-063   Conflicts



International Fuel Gas Code



   150-065   Adoption of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code



   150-066   [Repealed]



   150-067   Amendments



Electrical Code



   150-075   [Repealed]



   150-076   Adoption of NFPA 70 National Electrical Code 2014 Edition
and 2006 International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions



   150-077   Amendments



   150-078   [Repealed]



Housing Code



   150-090   Adoption of the 2018 International Property Maintenance
Code



   150-091   Amendments



Sound Control Construction



   150-120   Construction and application



   150-121   Purpose



   150-122   Limitation of applicability



   150-123   Scope



   150-124   Definitions



   150-125   Exterior noise isolation standards



   150-126   Airport noise and accident potential zones



   150-127   Expansion of nonconforming use



   150-128   Sound isolation construction



   150-129   Field inspection of the completed building



   150-130   Complaint alleging noncompliance



   150-131   Field test procedures



Contractor's Deposit Account



   150-155   Purpose



   150-156   Scope



   150-157   How account operates



   150-158   Deposit of monies



Building Conservation



   150-170   Adoption of the 2018 International Existing Building Code



   150-171   Amendments



Residential Advisory Board



   150-175   Residential Advisory Board



Residential Construction Code



   150-180   Adoption of the 2018 International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings



   150-181   Amendments



   150-182   Conflicts



 



   150-999   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to regulate land use, see Charter Art. III, § 12



General Provisions



§ 150-001  Distribution of Copies of Building Permits.



   Upon the issuance of a building permit, one copy thereof shall be
transmitted to the County Assessor and one copy to the Director of the
Department of Property Valuation.



('80 Code, § 7-1)



Statutory reference:



   Building permits; distribution of copies, etc., see A.R.S. § 9-467



§ 150-002  Housing Authority.



   (A)   The city authorizes the Housing Authority of the City of Yuma
(HACY) to:



      (1)   Act as agent for the City to construct, maintain,
operate and manage housing projects of the City, and the City delegates to
HACY all powers, authority and responsibilities authorized by law, including
any or all of the powers authorized by A.R.S. Title 36 except the power to
borrow money, issue bonds, and acquire, own and dispose of real property.
However HACY may acquire, own, and dispose of the assets and real property of
the Arizona Housing Development Corporation, and the real property located at
433 S. 1st Avenue, Yuma, Arizona.



      (2)   Employ a secretary, who shall also be executive
director, and technical experts and such other officers, attorneys, agents
and employees, permanent and temporary, as HACY requires, to determine their
qualifications, duties and compensation, and to delegate to one or more of
them such powers or duties as HACY deems proper.



   (B)   The HACY shall make available its books and records for
examination by the city and shall provide a financial audit on an annual
basis.



   (C)   The HACY shall provide to or give notice to the city of:



      (1)   Quarterly reports on all projects both under management
and in the planning stages.



      (2)   Intent to enter into any partnerships or create any
ownership interest in a business entity.



      (3)   Intent to form a corporation or subsidiary of HACY.



   (D)   The City Administrator shall determine within 30 days of
notification of any action performed in accordance with division (C) above
any requirement to obtain City Council approval.  Should the City
Administrator determine that City Council approval is required, the City
Administrator shall schedule said City Council action. The City Council shall
have final authority to decide any matter under divisions (C)(2) or (3) above.



(Res. R2009-89, passed 12-2-09; Ord. O2016-018, passed 7-20-16)



Building Advisory Board



§ 150-008 Building Advisory Board.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Building Advisory Board
(hereinafter referred to as "the Board") for the purpose of advising the
building official in matters pertaining to the development and enforcement of
the commercial building, plumbing, fuel gas, electrical, mechanical, energy
efficiency, and property maintenance codes.



   (B)   Composition of the Board. The Board shall consist of nine
members to be appointed by the City Council. The Fire Chief, or designee,
shall be a non-voting member. The Director of Community Development, or
designee, shall be a non-voting member and shall serve as secretary to the
Board.



      (1)   Board members shall serve a term of five years.



      (2)   Board members shall serve without compensation; however,
the City Council may allow such expenditures as are necessary for the
performance of the Board's duties.



      (3)   Appointed Board members shall meet the following
qualifications:



         (a)   All must meet the requirements of Article IX of
the Charter of the City of Yuma;



         (b)   At least three shall be licensed Arizona General
Contractors;



         (c)   At least one shall be a licensed Arizona Plumbing
Contractor;



         (d)   At least one shall be a licensed Arizona
Electrical Contractor;



         (e)   At least one shall be a licensed Arizona
Mechanical Contractor;



         (f)   At least two shall be an Arizona Registered
Engineer or Architect;



         (g)   At least one member shall be a citizen at large
who shall be indirectly associated with the construction industry, such as an
insurance agent, realtor, or appraiser.



         (h)   Should no professionals be available for
appointment that meet the criteria listed in this division (B)(3), the City
Council may select a person whose background approximates the knowledge and
expertise being sought.



      (4)   Any Board member whose term expires shall be eligible
for reappointment to another five-year term.



      (5)   Members of the Board may be removed by the City Council
for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, after a public
hearing. A member missing three consecutively scheduled meetings without just
cause shall be grounds for replacement by the City Council.



      (6)   If a vacancy on the Board occurs other than by an
expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
Such appointment shall be made by the City Council.



      (7)   Each January the Board shall elect a chairman and vice
chairman from among the appointive members. The Board shall adopt rules and
regulations as it sees fit for the proper and efficient discharge of their
official duties. The Board may, in such rules and regulations, delegate
certain responsibilities tasks to be performed by a sub-board or sub-boards
of the Building Advisory Board.



      (8)   Five members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for
transacting business.



      (9)   A majority vote of the Board members present and voting
shall be required to take official action including, but not limited to, the
adopting of policy, deciding of appeals, or submitting recommendations. No
Board member shall be excused from voting except on matters involving the
consideration of his own official conduct. In all other cases a failure to
vote shall be entered in the minutes as an affirmative vote.



   (C)   Duties of the Building Advisory Board. The Board shall be
responsible for:



      (1)   Recommending to City Council desirable building,
plumbing, fuel gas, electrical, mechanical, energy efficiency, and property
maintenance code standards for commercial buildings and structures, and
amendments thereto. For purposes of this section, the term COMMERCIAL
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES means all buildings or structures except those used
exclusively for one- or two- family dwellings.



      (2)   Soliciting or receiving input from members of the design
and construction industry, and the general public, concerning commercial
construction code issues, concerns, or trends, and providing appropriate
direction to the Director of Community Development or designee, as required.



      (3)   Recommending commercial construction code-related
education and training programs, activities, or events for members of the
design and construction industry and the public, and providing appropriate
direction to the Director of Community Development or designee, for the
purposes of implementation of same.



      (4)   Serving as an appeals board for the purpose of hearing
and deciding appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the
Community Development Department, Building Safety Division staff relative to
the application and implementation of the commercial construction codes.



   (D)   Limitations of authority. The Board shall have no authority
relative to the implementation of the adopted administrative provisions of
the commercial construction codes, nor shall the Board be empowered to waive
requirements of these codes.



   (E)   Appeals procedure. The Building Advisory Board shall serve as
the board of appeals in deciding appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Community Development Department, Building Safety
Division staff relative to the application and implementation of the
commercial construction codes. Any person may appeal the interpretation of
the commercial construction codes in accordance with the following:



      (1)   The appeal shall be in writing to the Director of
Community Development or designee, upon such forms as provided by the
Director of Community Development or designee. The appellant shall set forth
the code section in dispute and explain the reasons upon which the appellant
believes the Community Development Department, Building Safety Division staff
has incorrectly interpreted the code.



      (2)   The Director of Community Development or designee shall
promptly review the appeal and prepare a written report and recommendation,
which shall be provided to the board of appeals.



      (3)   The Board, upon receipt of the appeal from the Director
of Community Development or designee, shall conduct a hearing to review the
appeal and the staff report at the Board's convenience, but not later than 20
days after the receipt of the appeal and staff report. The Director of
Community Development or designee shall, at least 48 hours prior to the
hearing, notify each member of the Board, and the appellant, of the date,
time and place of hearing.



      (4)   At the hearing, the Board shall receive testimony
concerning the appeal from City staff, the appellant, and from the public.
The appellant shall appear in person before the Board or may be represented
by legal counsel and may introduce evidence to support his or her claim. The
appellant shall conduct, at his or her own expense, any tests or research
required by the Board to substantiate his or claim.



      (5)   Following the hearing, the Board shall vote to reverse
or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement or decision
of the Community Development Department, Building Safety Division staff, and
make such order, requirement or determination as necessary, with or without
conditions or alterations. The Board shall keep an accurate record of all its
official transactions and render all such decisions and findings in writing
to the appellant and to other person or persons the Director of Community
Development or designee may require and direct.



      (6)   The decision of the Board shall be deemed final unless
overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. O2015-033, passed 7-1-15)



Building Code



§ 150-015  Adoption of the 2018 International Building Code.



   (A)   That certain documents, three copies of which are on file as
public record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being
marked and titled as the 2018 International Building Code which was made
public record by Resolution R2018-029, including Appendices C, I, and J of
said building code, as amended herein, are hereby adopted by reference and
made a part hereof as if fully set out herein.



   (B)   Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8
(A.R.S. § 41-1492 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in
full in this section.



(Ord. O98-24, passed 4-15-98; Ord. O2003-49, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2013-14,
passed 4-3-13; Ord. O2013-49, passed 9-18-13; Ord. O2018-050, passed 12-5-18)



§ 150-016  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2018 International Building Code, as adopted by this subchapter.
Paragraph, section numbers refer to the International Building Code, 2018
edition numbering system. Code references not amended in this section shall
be enforced as published in the reference document.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. "These regulations shall be known as
the Building Code of the City of Yuma, hereinafter referred to as 'this
code.'"



   (B)   Section [A] 101.4.5 Fire prevention. "The provisions of the
current adopted fire code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to
structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion
arising from the storage, handling, or use of structures, materials or
devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension,
repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression, automatic sprinkler
systems and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises
from occupancy or operation."



   (C)   Section [A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. "The
Department of Community Development, Building Safety Division is hereby
created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building
official."



   (D)   Section [A] 104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. Delete section in its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (E)   Section [A] 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Add the following
additional item under the heading, "Building:"



      14.   "Window replacements of like size where framing is not
altered and any required emergency egress dimensions are not diminished from
existing, in Group R-3 one-and two-family dwellings and installed by either a
licensed contractor or owner-occupant of the residence."



   (F)   Section [A] 105.3.2 Time limitation of application. "An
application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been
abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been
pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building
official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional
periods not exceeding 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in
writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated."



   (G)   Section 105.8 Construction Debris.  Construction sites shall
be kept reasonably clean of construction debris during the course of
construction. Construction debris shall be removed or retained on the lot and
not be at risk to be displaced from the lot by wind. Debris shall not be
allowed to transfer to adjacent lots or City rights-of- way.



If the Building Official determines that the construction site is not in
compliance with this section or the debris presents a safety hazard for
inspection personnel, inspections shall not be performed until the
construction site is cleaned.



   (H)   Section [A] 107.2.2 Fire protection system shop drawings.
"Plan submittal documents shall include either a statement of the design
criteria for the fire protection system(s) to also include a current fire
flow test within the past 12 months, or the complete design, plans,
calculations and data for the fire protection system(s). If only the design
criteria is initially submitted, the complete design, plans, calculations and
data for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate
conformance to this code and the construction documents and shall be approved
prior to the start of system installation. In addition, where applicable,
shop drawings, calculations and data shall be submitted and shall contain all
information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter
9."



   (I)   Section [A] 107.2.6.1 Design flood elevations. Delete section
in its entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (J)   Section [A] 109.2 Schedule of permit fees.



Table 1-A: BUILDING PERMIT FEES



 




Schedule of  Building Permit Fees




Total Valuation

 

Fee




$1 to $500

 

$50.00




$501 to $2,000

 

$50.00 for the first $500 plus $4 for each additional $100, or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000




$2,001 to $25,000

 

$110.00 for the first $2,000 plus $16 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000




$25,001 to $50,000

 

$478.00 for the first $25,000 plus $12 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000




$50,001 to $100,000

 

$780.00 for the first $50,000 plus $8 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000




$100,001 to $500,000

 

$1,180.00 for the first $100,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000




$500,001 to $1,000,000

 

$3,580.00 for the first $500,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000




$1,000,001 and up

 

$6,580.00 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof




Other Inspections and Fees:



1.  Permit fees for mechanical, plumbing and electrical shall be as
indicated per applicable fee tables of the respective ordinances.



2.  Inspections outside of normal business hours, $50 per hour* (minimum
charge - 2 hours)



3.  Reinspection fees of $50 per hour*, for work not ready for inspection.



4.  Inspections on weekends and holidays, $100 per hour* (minimum charge - 2
hours).



5.  Inspection fees for which no fee is specifically indicated, $50 per
hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



6.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans, $50 per hour*
    (minimum charge - one-half hour)



7.  For use of outside consultant. For plan checking and inspections, or
both Actual Costs**




*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly wages and fringe benefits of
the employee involved.



**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.





 



   (K)   "Section [A] 109.2.1 Plan review fees. When submittal
documents are required by Section [A] 107.1, a plan review fee shall be paid
at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan
review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown in Table
1-A.



The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in Section [A] 109.2 and are in addition to the permit
fees.



When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the
rate shown in Table 1-A."



   (L)   Section [A] 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Add
to end of section, "An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued.
The investigation fee shall be determined by the building official, based on
the circumstances, nature, and severity of the infraction. The minimum
investigation fee shall be $50.00 and the maximum shall be an amount up to
the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (M)   Section [A] 109.6 Refunds."The building official shall
authorize the refunding of fees as follows:



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.



The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment."



   (N)   Section [A] 110.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Delete
exception to section.



   (O)   Section [A] 110.3.10.1 Flood hazard documentation. "If located
in a flood hazard area, documentation of the elevation of the lowest floor as
required in adopted City floodplain ordinances shall be submitted to the
building official and the City floodplain administrator prior to the final
inspection."



   (P)   Section [A] 113.1 General. Add to end of section, "The
membership of the Building Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-008
of the Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals."



   (Q)   Section [A] 113.3 Qualifications. Delete section in its
entirety.



   (R)   Section [A] 114.4 Violation penalties."Any person who violates
a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the
building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code, shall be subject to the penalty and fine described iri this
ordinance."



   (S)   Section [A] 115.3 Unlawful continuance.  Amend to read, "Any
person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalty and fine
described in this ordinance."



   (T)   CHAPTER 11 ACCESSIBILITY. Delete entire text of Chapter 11 and
amend to read, "Buildings and facilities shall be designed and constructed to
be accessible in accordance with Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 41, Chapter
9, Article 8, Public Accommodations and Services, The Arizonans with
Disabilities Act, R10-3-401 through R10-3-404, which includes - 28 CFR 35 and
28 CFR 36 and Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for
Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG)."



   (U)   Section 1609.3 Basic design wind speed. Add to end of Section,
"The basic design wind speed, V for all locations in City of Yuma shall be as
follows:



      Risk Category I:   93 mph



      Risk Category II:   99 mph



      Risk Category III:   106 mph



      Risk Category IV:   110 mph



   (V)   SECTION 1612 FLOOD LOADS. Delete section in its entirety in
favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances."



   (W)   Section 1613.2.5 Determination of seismic design category. 
Add to end of section, "Regardless of design methodology utilized, all
locations in City of Yuma shall be classified as Seismic Design Category D."



   (X)   Section 1611.1 Design rain loads. Add to end of section,
"Design hourly rainfall for all locations in City of Yuma shall be taken as
2.25 inches (56 mm)."



   (Y)   Section 1705.6 Soils. Amend exception to read:



      "Exception: Where Section 1803 does not require reporting of
materials and procedures for fill placement, the special inspector shall
verify that the in-place dry density of the compacted fill is not less than
90 percent of the maximum dry density at optimum moisture content determined
in accordance with ASTM D 1557, or not less than 95 percent of the maximum
dry density at optimum moisture content determined in accordance with ASTM D
698 where approved by the building official."



   (Z)   Section 1804.6 Compacted fill material.  Amend exception to
read:



      "Exception: Compacted fill material 12 inches (305 mm) in depth
or less need not comply with an approved report, provided the in-place dry
density is not less than 90 percent of the maximum dry density at optimum
moisture content determined in accordance with ASTM D 1557, or not less than
95 percent of the maximum dry density at optimum moisture content determined
in accordance with ASTM D 698 where approved by the building official. The
compaction shall be verified by special inspection in accordance with Section
1705.6"



   (AA)   Section 2304.10.5.1 Fasteners and connectors for
preservative-treated wood. Add second exception to section and renumber
accordingly:



      "2.   Fasteners for preservative-treated wood sill plates to
studs in areas not normally subjected to high moisture."



   (BB)   Section 2512.1.2 Weep screeds. Amend second sentence to read,
"The weep screed shall be placed a minimum of 4 inches above the earth (102
mm) or ¾" (19 mm) above paved areas and be of a type that will allow trapped
water to drain to the exterior of the building."



   (CC)   Section 2902.6 Small Occupancies. Add to end of section, "In
other than Assembly uses and Educational facilities, drinking fountains are
not required for an occupant load of 25 or fewer."



   (DD)   [P] Table 2902.1 Minimum Number of Required Plumbing
Fixtures. Add second sentence to footnote "f" of table, "In other than Group
A and E Occupancies, drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load
of 25 or fewer."



   (EE)   Section 3304.2 Dust Control. Prior to construction, a plan
shall be submitted to the building official outlining the steps that will be
taken throughout construction to minimize and control dust associated with
the project."



   (FF)   Section J101.1 Scope. Add to end of section, "The provisions
of this chapter are intended to be used in conjunction with the provisions
set forth in City Ordinance No. 1670; and 1836; and O2004-72; and O2005-15;
and O2006-38; and O2007-78."



   (GG)   Section J103.1 Permits required. Amend by adding Grading
Permit Fee Table J-l, in accordance with fee provisions of Section [A] 109
Fees:



TABLE J-1 - GRADING PERMIT FEES



 




Schedule of Grading Permit Fees




Cubic Yards

 

Fee




1 to 50

 

$23.50




51 to 100

 

$37.00




101 to 1,000

 

$37.00 for the first 100 plus $17.50 for each additional 100 cubic yards,
over 100 cubic yards, or fraction thereof




1,001 to 10,000

 

$194.50 for the first 1,000 plus $14.50 for each additional 1,000 cubic
yards, over 1,00 cubic yards, or fraction thereof




10,001 to 100,000

 

$325.00 for the first 10,000 plus $66.00 for each additional 10,000 cubic
yards, over 10,000 cubic yards, or fraction thereof




100,001 or more

 

$919.00 for the first 100,000 plus $36.50 for each additional 100,000 cubic
yards, over 100,000 cubic yards, or fraction thereof



Other Inspections and Fees:

1.  Inspections outside of normal business hours, $50 per hour* (minimum
charge - 2 hours)

2.  Reinspection fees of $50 per hour*, for work not ready for inspection.

3.  Inspection fees for which no fee is specifically indicated, $50 per
hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)

4.  Inspections on weekends and holidays, $100 per hour* (minimum charge - 2
hours).

5. For use of outside consultant. For inspections, Actual Costs**


*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly wages and fringe benefits of
the employee involved.

**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.




 



   (HH)   "Section J104.5 Plan review fees. When submittal documents
are required by Section J104.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time
of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee
shall be in accordance with Table J-2 Grading Plan Review Fees.



The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in Section J103.1 and are in addition to the permit
fees.



When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the
rate shown in Table J-2"



TABLE J-2 - GRADING PLAN REVIEW FEES



 


Schedule of Grading Permit Fees




Cubic Yards

 

Fee






1 to 50

 

No fee




51 to 100

 

$23.50




101 to 1,000

 

$37.00




1,001 to 10,000

 

$49.25




10,001 to 100,000

 

$49.25 for the first 10,000 plus $24.50 for each additional 10,000 cubic
yards, over 10,000 cubic yards, or fraction thereof




100,001 to 200,000

 

$269.75 for the first 100,000 plus $13.25 for each additional 100,000 cubic
yards, over 100,000 cubic yards, or fraction thereof




200,001 or more

 

$402.25 for the first 200,000 plus $7.25 for each additional 100,000 cubic
yards, over 200,000 cubic yards, or fraction thereof



Schedule of Grading Permit Fees


Other Fees:

1.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans, $50 per hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)

2.  For use of outside consultant. For plan checking, Actual Costs**


*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly wages and fringe benefits of
the employee involved.

**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.




 



   (II)   Section J107.5 Compaction."All fill material shall be
compacted to 90 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D 1557,
Modified Proctor, or 95 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM D
698, Standard Proctor where approved by the building official, in lifts not
exceeding 12 inches (305 mm) in depth, or as recommended in the certified
geotechnical report."



(Ord. O98-24, passed 4-15-98; Ord. O2003-49, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2004-35,
passed 6-16-04; Ord. O2006-22, passed 3-22-06; Ord. O2010-66, passed 1-5-11;
Ord. O2013-14, passed 4-3-13; Ord. O2018-050, passed 12- 5-18)



International Swimming Pool and Spa Code



§ 150-018  Adoption of the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.



   That certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public
record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being marked and
titled as the 2108 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, which was made
public record by Resolution R2018-033, as amended herein, are hereby adopted
by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in the entirety
herein.



(Ord. O2018-054, passed 12-5-18)



§ 150-019 Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, as adopted by this
subchapter. Paragraph, section numbers refer to the 2018 International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code edition number system. Code reference not amended
in this section shall be enforced as published in the reference document.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These regulations
shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Yuma,
hereinafter referred to as 'this code.'"



   (B)   Section [A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency.  Amend to
read, "The Department of Community Development, Building Safety Division is
hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
building official. Amend all sections of this code that reference the code
official by replacing to read the 'building official'"



   (C)   Create new section, "Section 105.1.1 Work exempt from permit.
Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant
authorization for any work to be done in a manner in violation of the
provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
Permits shall not be required for the following:



      1.   Replacement of existing pool pumps and filters.



      2.   Re-plaster of existing pools.



      3.   Replacement of existing pool decks."



   (D)   Section [A] 105.6.2 Fee schedule. Amend by adding Building
Permit Fee Table 1-A.



Table 1-A: BUILDING PERMIT FEES



 


Schedule of  Building Permit Fees




Total Valuation

 

Fee






$1 to $500

 

$50.00




$501 to $2,000

 

$50.00 for the first $500 plus $4 for each additional $100, or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000




$2,001 to $25,000

 

$110.00 for the first $2,000 plus $16 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000




$25,001 to $50,000

 

$478.00 for the first $25,000 plus $12 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000




$50,001 to $100,000

 

$780.00 for the first $50,000 plus $8 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000




$100,001 to $500,000

 

$1,180.00 for the first $100,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000




$500,001 to $1,000,000

 

$3,580.00 for the first $500,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000




$1,000,001 and up

 

$6,580.00 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof




Other Inspections and Fees:



1.  Permit fees for mechanical, plumbing and electrical shall be as
indicated per applicable fee tables of the respective ordinances.



2.  Inspections outside of normal business hours, $50 per hour* (minimum
charge - 2 hours)



3.  Inspections on weekends and holidays, $100 per hour* (minimum charge - 2
hours).



4.  Re-inspection fees of $50 per hour*, when work is not ready for
inspection.



5.  Inspection fees for which no fee is specifically indicated, $50 per
hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



6.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans, $50 per hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



7.  For use of outside consultant. For plan checking and inspections, or
both Actual Costs**




*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly wages and fringe benefits of
the employee involved.



**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.





 



   (E)   Create new section.  "Section 105.6.2.1 Plan review fees.
When submittal documents are required by Section [A] 104.2, a plan review fee
shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan
review. Said plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee
as shown in Table 1-A.



The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in Section [A] 105.6 and are in addition to the permit
fees.



When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the
rate shown in Table 1-A."



   (F)   Section [A] 105.6.3 Fee refunds. Amend to read, "The building
official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.



The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee or applicant
not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment."



   (G)   Create new section, "Section 105.6.4 Work commencing before
permit issuance. "Any person who commences work requiring a permit on a pool
or spa before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee
established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition
to the required permit fees. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit
fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently
issued. The investigation fee shall be determined by the building official,
based on the circumstances, nature, and severity of the infraction. The
minimum investigation fee shall be $50.00 and the maximum shall be an amount
up to the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (H)   Create new section, "Section 106.20 Construction Debris.
Construction sites shall be kept reasonably clean of construction debris
during the course of construction. Construction debris shall be removed or
retained on the lot and not be at risk to be displaced from the lot by wind.
Debris shall not be allowed to transfer to adjacent lots or City
rights-of-way.



If the building official determines that the construction site is not in
compliance with this section or the debris presents a safety hazard for
inspection personnel, inspections shall not be performed until the
construction site is cleaned."



   (I)   Section [A] 107.4 Violation penalties. Amend to read, "Any
person who violates a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any
of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair a
pool or spa in violation of the approved construction documents or directive
of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to the penalty and fine described
in this ordinance."



   (J)   Section [A] 107.5 Stop work orders. Amend last sentence to
read, "Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalty and fine described in this ordinance."



   (K)   Section [A] 108.2 Membership of the board. Amend to read, "The
membership of the Residential Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section
150-175 of the Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals for Residential
appeals (one-and two-family dwellings). The membership of the Building
Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section (150-008) of the Yuma City Code,
will be the Board of Appeals for Commercial appeals."



   (L)   Delete the following sections in their entirety:



      Section [A] 108.2.1   Qualifications



      Section [A] 108.2.2   Alternate members



      Section [A] 108.2.3   Chairman



      Section [A] 108.2.4   Disqualification of member



      Section [A] 111.2.5   Secretary



      Section [A] 111.2.6   Compensation of members



      Section [A] 108.3   Notice of meeting



      Section [A] 108.4   Open hearing



      Section [A] 108.4.1   Procedure



      Section [A] 108.5   Postponed hearing



      Section [A] 108.6   Board decision



      Section [A] 108.6.1   Resolution



      Section [A] 108.6.2   Administration



   (M)   Section 303.1.3 Covers. Add 2nd exception to section:



      "2.   Where multi-speed or variable speed pumps are installed,
covers or other vapor-retardant means shall not be required."



   (N)   Section [BS] 304.2 Determination of impacts based on location.
Delete section in its entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (O)   Section 305.2.1 Barrier height and clearances. Amend items 1
and 2 and add exception as follows:



      "1.   The top of the barrier shall be not less than 60 inches
(1524 mm) above grade for Residential Pools and Type C Semi-Public Pools, and
shall be 72 inches (1829 mm) above grade for all other pools. Heights shall
be measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa.
Such heights shall exist around the entire perimeter of the barrier and for a
distance of 3 feet (914 mm) measured horizontally from the outside of the
required barrier.



   Exception: Barriers used between a pool and the primary dwelling or
structure shall be not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) above grade.



      2.   The barrier shall include a concrete ribbon curb or other
approved material around the entire perimeter."



   (P)   Section 305.4 Structure wall as barrier. Add item 4 to section
as follows:



      "4.   In one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses,
openable windows shall have a latch at minimum 54 inch (1372 mm) height above
the finished floor."



   (Q)   Section 410.1 Toilet facilities. Amend to read, "Class A and B
and C pools shall be provided with toilet facilities having the number of
plumbing fixtures in accordance with the International Building Code or the
International Plumbing Code or Arizona Department of Environmental Quality
Statutes and Rules."



   (R)   Section 811 Safety features. Delete section in its entirety.



(Ord. O2018-054, passed 12-5-18)



International Energy Conservation Code



§ 150-020 Adoption of 2009 International Energy Conservation Code.



   That certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public
record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being marked and
titled as the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code, which was made
public record by Resolution R2013-09, as amended herein, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out in the entirety herein.



(Ord. O2013-15, passed 4-3-13)



§ 150-021 Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted by this
subchapter. Paragraph, section numbers refer to the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2009 edition numbering system. Code references not amended
in this section shall be enforced as published in the reference document.



   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. Amend first sentence to read, "This code
shall be known as the 2009 International Energy Conservation Code of the City
of Yuma, and shall be cited as such"



   (B)   Section 101.5.2 Low energy buildings. Add third exception to
section, as follows:



      "3.   Warehouse and storage portions of buildings in Groups
S-l, S-2, and U Occupancies that are not designed as fully conditioned space."



   (C)   Create new section, "102.1.2. Amend all sections of this code
to substitute 'building official' for the term 'code official.'"



   (D)   Section 107.2 Schedule of permit fees. Amend by adding
Building Permit Fee Table 1-A:



TABLE 1-A: BUILDING PERMIT FEES



 




Schedule of  Building Permit Fees




Total Valuation

 

Fee




$1 to $500

 

$50.00




$501 to $2,000

 

$50.00 for the first $500 plus $4 for each additional $100, or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000




$2,001 to $25,000

 

$110.00 for the first $2,000 plus $16 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000




$25,001 to $50,000

 

$478.00 for the first $25,000 plus $12 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000




$50,001 to $100,000

 

$780.00 for the first $50,000 plus $8 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000




$100,001 to $500,000

 

$1,180.00 for the first $100,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000




$500,001 to $1,000,000

 

$3,580.00 for the first $500,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000




$1,000,001 and up

 

$6,580.00 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof




Other Inspections and Fees:



1.  Permit fees for mechanical, plumbing and electrical shall be as
indicated per applicable fee tables of the



    respective ordinances.



2.  Inspections outside of normal business hours, $50 per hour* (minimum
charge - 2 hours)



3.  Reinspection fees of $50 per hour*, for work not ready for inspection.



4.  Inspection fees for which no fee is specifically indicated, $50 per
hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



5.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans, $50 per hour*



    (minimum charge - one-half hour)



6.  For use of outside consultant. For plan checking and inspections, or
both Actual Costs**




*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly



      wages and fringe benefits of the employee involved.



**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.





 



   (E)   Add new section, "107.2.1 Plan review fees. When submittal
documents are required by Section 103.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at
the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan
review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown in Table
1-A.



The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees and are in
addition to the permit fees.



When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the
rate shown in Table 1-A."



   (F)   Section 107.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Add to
end of section, "An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall
be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The
investigation fee shall be determined by the building official, based on the
circumstances, nature, and severity of the infraction. The minimum
investigation fee shall be $50.00 and the maximum shall be an amount up to
the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (G)   Section 107.5 Refunds. Amend to read, "The building official
shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.



The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment."



   (H)   Section 108.4 Failure to comply.  Amend to read, "Any person
who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation
or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalty and fine described in
this ordinance."



   (I)   Create new section, "[A] 108.5 Violation penalties. Any person
who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building
or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive
of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to the penalty and fine described
in this ordinance."



   (J)   Section 109.1 General. Add to end of section, "The membership
of the Building Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-016 of the Yuma
City Code, will be the board of appeals."



   (K)   Section 109.3 Qualifications. Delete section in its entirety.



   (L)   Section 401.1 Scope. Amend to read, "This chapter applies to
residential buildings as defined in Section 202. Energy efficiency provisions
for Group R-3 One- and Two-Family Dwellings are contained in the
International Residential Code."



   (M)   Section 504.7.3 Pool Covers. Add second exception to section,
as follows:



      "2.   Pools utilizing variable speed pump motors."



(Ord. O2013-15, passed 4-3-13)



Adobe Building Code



§ 150-030  Purpose.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish an “Adobe Building
Code” for the use in construction with unburned or burnt clay masonry
(adobe) within the city limits, recognizing the average rainfall and low
humidity.



('80 Code, § 7-56)  (Ord. 2021, passed 7-1-81)



§ 150-031  Scope.



   (A)   This subchapter is applicable to:



      (1)   All new construction.



      (2)   Remodeling and damage repairs to existing buildings as
follows:



         (a)   Fifty percent:  Entire building shall comply.



         (b)   Twenty-five percent:  Only portion remodeled or
repaired.



         (c)   Less than 25%:  May use the existing method of
construction, providing there are no life safety hazards in the method of
construction.



   (B)   This subchapter is not applicable to
architect/engineer-designed buildings but shall serve as a design guide equal
or exceed the safety limits.



('80 Code, § 7-57)  (Ord. 2021, passed 7-1-81)



§ 150-032  General Construction Techniques and Standards.



   (A)   Wall height and length.



      (1)   Adobe masonry of unburned clay units shall be classified
as natural (raw) adobe or stabilized adobe and shall not be used in any
building more than one story in height.  The unsupported height or length of
every wall of these units shall be not more than ten times the thickness of
such walls; provided, however, when the wall is laterally supported at the
ceiling line by means of ceiling joists or rafters, the length may be
increased to 24 times the thickness of such walls.



      (2)   Exterior walls shall in no case be less than 14 inches
thick and interior adobe walls shall not be less than ten inches thick. 
Foundation (stem) walls which support masonry of unburned clay units shall
extend to an elevation of not less than six inches above the adjacent ground
at all points and shall be of the same thickness as the wall they support. 
Frame interior walls shall be of standard construction and anchored to the
exterior walls by use of “gringo” blocks or other approved methods.



      (3)   Adobe shall not be used for foundation (stem) or
basement walls.  Footing shall be of a continuous concrete design.  The
footing width and depth shall be governed by the allowable bearing pressure
of the soil and allowable concrete' stresses.



   (B)   Classes of adobe.



      (1)   The term STABILIZED ADOBE UNIT(S) is defined as adobes
made of soil to which certain admixtures, emulsified asphalt, or other
approved material is added in the manufacturing process in order to limit the
adobe's water absorption capacity to comply with the Uniform Building
Standard.



      (2)   Natural (raw) or untreated adobes are adobes which do
not meet the water absorption specifications.  This shall hold even if some
water absorption protective agent has been added.



   (C)   Material.



      (1)   Adobe is defined as clay masonry units made from a
suitable mixture of soil, day and stabilizing agent.  The soil used shall
contain not more than ten-hundredths percent of soluble salts and shall
contain not less than 25% and not more than 45% of material passing a No. 200
mesh sieve and 100% shall pass through a one-fourth-inch mesh sieve and be
free from deleterious matter.  The soil shall contain sufficient clay to
bind the particles together and be mixed with clean potable water to the
proper working consistency.



      (2)   Units shall be protected from moisture while curing, be
sun-baked for at least one week and stacked for another two weeks before
being laid in the wall.  Weather conditions may require a longer curing
period.



   (D)   Testing.



      (1)   All units shall be tested in accordance with Uniform
Building Code Standard 24-14.



         (a)   Compressive strength.  The units shall have an
average compressive strength of 300 pounds per square inch.  One sample out
of five may have a compressive strength of not less than 200 pounds per
square inch.



         (b)   Modulus of rupture.  The unit shall average 50
pounds per square inch.



         (c)   Moisture content.  The moisture content of each
unit shall be not more than four percent by weight.



         (d)   Absorption.  A dried four-inch cube cut from a
sample of a stabilized adobe unit shall absorb not more than two and one-half
percent moisture by weight.  If the sample absorbs more than two and
one-half percent moisture by weight, the material shall be classified as
natural (raw) adobe.



         (e)   Shrinkage cracks.  No unit shall contain more
than three shrinkage cracks, and no shrinkage crack shall exceed three inches
in length or one-eighth inch in width.



      (2)   Sample testing shall be made daily by the
manufacturer.  A minimum of monthly random tests shall be made for the
manufacturer by an independent testing laboratory.  Test reports shall be
maintained a minimum of three years.



   (E)   Construction.  At the time of laying, all units shall be
clean and damp at the surface.  All joints shall be solidly filled with
mortar.  Units may be laid with adobe mortar made of the same materials as
the units or with Type M or S mortar.  In all cases bond must be achieved
between the mortar and the adobe units.  No more than seven courses per day
shall be laid when using adobe mortar.  Units shall be laid in a running
bond with a 50% lap.  Use of natural (raw) adobes is prohibited within four
inches above the finish floor grade.



   (F)   Plastering.



      (1)   Natural (raw) adobe shall have all exterior walls
plastered on the outside with Portland cement plaster, minimum thickness
three-fourths inch in accordance with Chapter 47, Uniform Building Code,
current edition.  Protective coatings other than plaster are allowed,
provided such coating is equivalent to Portland cement plaster in protecting
the untreated adobes against deterioration and/or loss of strength due to
water.  Plaster screens shall be used around the bottom row of adobe to
prevent water wicking.



      (2)   Natural (raw) adobes may be left exposed on the exterior
walls if the following protection or other approved methods are provided
against any flow of water on, or upon those walls, other than falling rain:



         (a)   A cap or cornice of brick or concrete units, or
equal, or parapet walls, laid to drain water onto the roof.



         (b)   Canals or scruppers, properly flashed, of
sufficient length to drain water from the roof so that it will not fall
against the wall.



         (c)   Window sills of brick or concrete units, or equal,
sloped and with sufficient lip, to drain water so that it will not fall
against the wall.



   (G)   Lintels.  Members supporting unburned clay masonry units
shall be reinforced concrete, masonry, steel or pressure treated heavy
timber.  The adobe units may overhang the lintel a maximum of two inches on
each face.  Heavy timber lintels shall be limited to eight-foot openings.



   (H)   Bond beams and anchorage.  Bond beams shall be provided to
support and anchor all roof construction.  Bond beams utilizing adobe shall
have continuous rows of joint reinforcing between the required member of
courses to resist uplift forces.  Ledger and partition bolts shall extend
through exterior and interior adobe walls and the attaching member.  It
shall be required to provide plate washers on the exterior face of the adobe
wall.  Plate washers shall be a minimum of one-eighth inch thick by four
inches by four inches in size or equivalent anchorage.  Top wall plates and
anchor bolts shall be designed to resist the uplift forces (minimum one-half
inch in diameter and 20 inches embedment, 24 inches on center spacing) and
provided with washers at least one-eighth inch by four inches by six inches
in size embedded in the adobe.  Oversize washers, minimum two inches in
diameter, shall be used on the wood top plate.



   (I)   Stresses.  Unburned clay masonry (adobe) units shall conform
to the stresses set forth in Table I (§ 150-033).



   (J)   Joint control.  Joint control shall be maintained as follows:



      (1)   Raw adobe:  All joints shall be struck smooth or
concave to allow stucco.



      (2)   Stabilized adobe:  All style joints are permitted.



   (K)   Wood appendage.  Wood appendage, including vigas, latillas
and corbels, shall be permitted.



('80 Code, § 7-59)  (Ord. 2021, passed 7-1-81)  Penalty, see § 150-999



§ 150-033  Burnt Adobe Masonry Units.



   (A)   Compressive strength standard.  Burnt adobe units shall have
an average ultimate compressive strength of not less than 600 pounds per
square inch.  One unit out of five may have a compressive strength of not
less than 500 pounds per square inch.  Tests in accordance with ASTM C-67
for an approved testing agency shall be applied to five sample units selected
at random for each 5,000 units used.



   (B)   Construction.  All units shall be laid in running bond with
full head and bed joints and a 50% lap.  Walls shall be supported on
foundation (stems) to maintain a minimum of six inches above adjacent ground
at all points.  Burnt adobe units shall not be used in any building more
than one story in height.  The unsupported height of every wall shall not be
more than 15 times the thickness of such walls except that when gable
construction is used, an additional four feet is permitted to the peak of the
gable.  Walls shall in no case be less than eight inches in thickness.



   (C)   Sealing.  The surface of exposed walls shall be protected
from water absorption by either exterior plastering or a chemical
water-repellent sealer compound.



   (D)   Bond beams and anchorage.  Bond beams shall be provided in
support and anchor all roof construction.  Bond beams shall have a minimum
of three continuous rows of joint reinforcing between the required number of
courses to resist uplift forces.  Top plate anchor bolts shall be designed
to resist the uplift forces (minimum one-half inch diameter and 20 inches
embedment, 24-inch-on-center spacing) and provided with washers at least
one-eighth inch thick by four inches by four inches welded to bolt.  Top
plate washer shall be a minimum two inches in diameter.



   (E)   Stresses.  Burnt adobe masonry shall conform to the stresses
set forth in Table 1.



 


Table 1





 

Type M

 

Type S

 

Type M or Type S Mortar

 

Type N




Material

 

Compression1

 

Compression1

 

Shear or Tension in Flexure2,3

 

Tension in Flexure4

 

Compression

 

Shear or Tension in Flexure



Unburned clay (adobe) masonry
 
30
 
30
 
8
 
4
 
­
 
­
 
­


   Burnt adobe
 
85
 
85
 
8
 
­
 
­
 
60
 
­



1  Allowable axial or flexural compressive stresses in pounds per square
feet in gross cross-sectional area (except at notes). The allowable working
stresses in bearing directly on the concentrated loads may be 50% greater
than these values.



2  This value of tension is based on tension across a bed joint, i.e.,
vertically in the normal masonry work.



3  No tension allowed in stack bond across heat joints.



4  The value shown here are for tension in masonry in the direction of
running bond, i.e., horizontally between supports.



5  Mortar in masonry shall not be considered to resist axial tension.









('80 Code, § 7-60)  (Ord. 2021, passed 7-1-81)  Penalty, see § 150-999



§ 150-034  Electrical Requirements.



   (A)   Electrical wiring shall be run in channels in the adobe. 
Channels shall be not less than three inches deep.



   (B)   Electrical wiring may be type UF cable or other type cable
assemblies approved for direct burial.  Conduit shall be used for all other
type wiring conductors.  Minimum wire size shall be No. 12 copper; a ground
wire shall be provided for all runs except metal conduit.



   (C)   Channels shall be filled flush to the wall with adobe mud or
approved mortar.



   (D)   Electrical J-boxes shall be recessed flush and grouted in
place with mud or approved mortar.



('80 Code, § 7-61)  (Ord. 2021, passed 7-1-81)  Penalty, see § 150-999



§ 150-035  Plumbing.



   Vertical plumbing line shall be recessed in channels of sufficient size
and depth to prevent nail holes in lines.  Channels shall be filled flush to
the wall with adobe mud or approved mortar.



('80 Code, § 7-62)  (Ord. 2021, passed 7-1-81)  Penalty, see § 150-999



Mechanical Code



§ 150-045  Adoption of the 2012 International Mechanical Code.



   Certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public record
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, known as the 2012
International Mechanical Code, which was made public record by Resolution
R2015-028, with certain amendments listed herein, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein.



(Ord. O98-26, passed 4-15-98; Ord. O2007-05, passed 1-17-07; O2015-037,
passed 7-15-15)



Charter reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see Charter Art. VII, § 6(g)(6)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801 et seq.



§ 150-046  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions and deletions are hereby made to
the 2012 International Mechanical Code, as adopted by this subchapter. 
Paragraph, section numbers refer to the 2012 International Mechanical Code
numbering system.  Code references not amended in this section shall be
enforced as published in the 2012 International Mechanical Code.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These regulations
shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Yuma, hereinafter
referred to as 'this code'."



   (B)   Create a new sub-section, "[A] 101.2.2 Fire Code. Where a
section references the International Fire Code, amend to read the 'current
adopted fire code'."



   (C)   Section [A] 103.1 General. Amend to read, "The Department of
Community Development, Building Safety Division is hereby created and the
official in charge thereof shall be known as the 'building official'." Amend
all sections of this code that reference the code official by replacing to
read the "building official."



   (D)   Section [A] 106.4.4 Extensions. Delete last two sentences of
this section.



   (E)   Section [A] 106.5.1 Work commencing before permit issuance.
Amend to read, "Any person who commences work on a mechanical system before
obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the usual permit fee and
an additional investigative fee. An investigative fee, in addition to the
permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. The investigative fee shall be determined by the
building official, based on the circumstances, nature and severity of the
infraction. The minimum investigative fee shall be $50 and the maximum shall
be an amount up to the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (F)   Section [A] 106.5.2 Fee Schedule. Amend by adding Mechanical
Permit Fee Table 1-A:



TABLE 1-A: MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES



   Permit issuance and heaters



   1.   For the issuance of each mechanical permit   $50.00



   2.   For issuing each supplemental permit for which the original
permit has not expired, been canceled or finaled   $7.00



   Unit Fee Schedule



   (Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)



   1.   Furnaces



   For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type
furnace or burner including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, up to
and including 100,000 Btu/h (29.3 kW)   $15.00



   For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type
furnace or burner including ducts and vents attached to such appliance over
100,000 Btu/h (29.3 kW)   $18.00



   For the installation or relocation of each floor furnace, including
vent   $15.00



   For the installation or relocation of each suspended heater, recessed
wall heater or floor-mounted unit heater   $15.00



   2.   Appliance Vents



   For the installation, relocation or replacement of each appliance vent
installed and not included in an appliance permit   $7.00



   3.   Alterations or Additions



   For the alteration of, or addition to, each heating appliance,
refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling,
absorption or evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls
regulated by the Mechanical Code   $14.00



   4.   Boilers, Compressors and Absorption Systems



   For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor to and
including 3 horsepower (10.6 kW), or each absorption system to and including
100,000 Btu/h (29.3kW)   $15.00



   For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 3
horsepower (10.6 kW) to and including 15 horsepower (52.7 kW), or each
absorption system over 100,000 Btu/h (29.3 kW) to and including 500,000 Btu/h
(146.6 kW)   $28.00



   For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 15
horsepower (52.7 kW) to and including 30 horsepower (105.5 kW) or each or
each absorption system over 500,000 Btu/h (146.6 kW) to and including
1,000,000 Btu/h (293.1 kW)   $37.00



   For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 30
horsepower (105.5 kW) to and including 50 horsepower (176 kW), or each
absorption system over 1,000,000 Btu/h (293.1 kW) to and including 1,750,000
Btu/h (512.9 kW)   $55.00



   For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor over 50
horsepower (176 kW), or each absorption system over 1,750,000 Btu/h (512.9
kW)   $93.00



   5.   Air Handlers



   For each air-handling unit to and including 10,000 cubic feet per
minute (cfm) (4719 L/s), including ducts attached thereto   $11.00



   Note: This fee does not apply to an air-handling unit which is a
portion of a factory-assembled appliance, cooling unit, evaporative cooler or
absorption unit for which a permit is required elsewhere in the Mechanical
Code.



   For each air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm (4719 L/s)   $18.00



   6.   Evaporative Coolers



   For each evaporative cooler other than portable type   $11.00



   7.   Ventilation and Exhaust



   For each ventilation fan connected to a single duct   $11.00



   8.   Incinerators



   For the installation or relocation of each domestic-type
incinerator   $18.00



   For the installation or relocation of each commercial or
industrial-type incinerator   $15.00



   9.   Miscellaneous



   For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the Mechanical
Code but not classed in other appliance categories, or for which no fee is
listed in the table   $11.00



   Other Inspections and Fees:



   1.   Inspections outside of normal business hours,   $50.00 per
hour*



   (minimum charge two hours)



   2.   Reinspection fees assessed of    $50.00 per hour*, for work
not ready for inspection.



   3.   Inspections for which no fee is specifically
indicated,   $50.00 per hour*



   (minimum charge one-half hour)



   4.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions or
revisions to plans   $50.00 per hour*



   (minimum charge one-half hour)



   * Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greater. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly
wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.



   (G)   Section [A] 106.5.3 Fee Refunds. Amend to read, "The building
official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows.



   1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.



   2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



   3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended."



   (H)   Create a new section "[A] 106.6 Emergency repairs. Where
equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency
situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working
business day to the building official."



   (I)   Section [A] 108.4 Violation penalties. Amend first sentence to
read, "Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install,
alter, or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be subject to the
penalty and fine described in this ordinance."



   (J)   Section [A] 108.5 Stop work orders. Amend last sentence to
read, "Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been
served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the
penalty and fine described in this ordinance."



   (K)   Section [A] 109.2 Membership of board. Amend to read, "The
membership of the Building Advisory Board as prescribed in Section 150-008 of
the Yuma City Code will be the Board of Appeals."



   (L)   Sections [A] 109.2.1 through [A] 109.3. Delete sections in
their entirety.



   (M)   Section [A] 109.5 Postponed hearing. Amend to read, "When nine
members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the
appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of
the hearing."



   (N)   Section [B] 301.16 Flood hazard. Amend to read, "For
structures located in flood hazard areas, mechanical systems, equipment and
appliances shall be located at or above the elevation required in the adopted
city floodplain ordinances for utilities and attendant equipment.



   Exception:Mechanical systems, equipment and appliances are permitted to
be below the elevation required by the adopted city floodplain ordinances for
utilities and attendant equipment provided that they are designed and
installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components and to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and stresses,
including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of flooding up to
such elevation."



   (O)   Section 303.3 Prohibited locations. Amend Exception #2 to
read, "Solid fuel-fired appliances, provided that the room is not a confined
space and as long as outdoor combustion air is provided."



   (P)   Section 304.11 Guards. Add exception to section to read,
"Where due to roof size or other constraints the building official may
approve alternate means to achieve compliance."



   (Q)   Section 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Amend first sentence to read,
"Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service
are installed on a roof having a slope of greater than 4 units vertical in 12
units horizontal (33-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than
30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a level platform shall be
provided on each side of the appliance or equipment to which access is
required for service, repair, or maintenance."



   (R)   Section 307.2.1 Condensate disposal. Amend first sentence to
read, "Condensate from all cooling and evaporators shall be conveyed from the
drain pan outlet to an approved sanitary sewer connection, or other approved
method of condensate disposal designed by a registered design professional."



   Add exceptions to section:



      "Exceptions:



      1.   Condensate from cooling coils and evaporators up to and
including (4) ton units may drain into an approved bottom disposal pit. The
approved bottom disposal pit shall consist of a pit excavated in the earth
not less than 24 inches (61 mm) in any dimension completely filled with
coarse gravel. The drainpipe shall extend into the pit not less than 6 inches
(15 mm) below grade and shall be securely anchored in place. The drain shall
not be covered with sod or earth until it has been inspected.



      2.   Equipment provided with a factory, or other approved,
condensate evaporation device."



   (S)   Section 401.2 Ventilation required. Delete second sentence of
this section.



   (T)   Section 1101.6 General. Add to end of section, "Wind socks
shall be installed on all industrial facilities utilizing ammonia refrigerant
as required by the building official."



(Ord. O98-26, passed 4-15-98; Ord. O2004-35, passed 6-16-04; Ord. O2007-05,
passed 1-17-07; Ord. O2015-037, passed 7-15-15)



Plumbing Code



§ 150-060  Adoption of the 2012 International Plumbing Code.



   Certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public record
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, known as the 2012
International Plumbing Code, including Appendices C, E, and F of said
Plumbing Code, which was made a public record by Resolution R2015-028, with
certain amendments listed herein, is hereby adopted by reference and made a
part hereof as if fully set out herein.



('80 Code, § 24-11)  (Ord. 2679, passed 12-21-94; Ord. O2002-11, passed
3-20-02; Ord. 2007-55, passed 11-7-07; Ord. 2015-038, passed 7-15-15)



Charter reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see Charter Art. VII, § 6(g)(6)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801 et seq.



§ 150-061  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2012 International Plumbing Code, as adopted by this subchapter.
Paragraphs and section numbers refer to the 2012 International Plumbing Code
numbering system. Code references not amended in this section shall be
enforced as published in the 2012 International Plumbing Code.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These regulations
shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Yuma,
hereinafter referred to as 'this code'."



   (B)   Create a new sub-section, "Section [A] 101.2.1 Fire Code.
Where a section references the International Fire Code, amend to read
'current adopted fire code'."



   (C)   Section [A] 103.1 General.  Amend to read, "The Department of
Community Development, Building Safety Division is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
Amend all sections of this code that reference the "code official" by
replacing to read the 'building official'."



   (D)   Section [A] 106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance.
Amend to read, "Any person who commences work on a plumbing system before
obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the usual permit fee and
an additional investigative fee. An investigative fee, in addition to the
permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. The investigative fee shall be determined by the
building official, based on the circumstances, nature and severity of the
infraction. The minimum investigative fee shall be $50 and the maximum shall
be an amount up to the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (E)   Section [A] 106.6.2 Fee schedule. Amend by adding Plumbing
Permit Fee Table 1-A:



TABLE 1-A: PLUMBING PERMIT FEES



Permit Issuance



1.   For issuing each plumbing permit   $20.00



2.   For issuing each supplemental permit for which the original permit
has not expired, been canceled or finaled   $ 7.00



Unit Fee Schedule



1.   For each plumbing fixture or trap or set of fixtures on one trap
(including water, drainage piping and backflow protection thereof   $ 7.00



2.   For each building sewer and each trailer park sewer   $15.00



3.   Rainwater systems - per drain (inside building)   $ 7.00



4.   For each private sewage disposal system   $40.00



5.   For each water heater and/or vent   $ 7.00



6.   For each industrial waste pretreatment interceptor including its trap
and vent, excepting kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture
traps   $ 7.00



7.   For installation, alternation or repair of water-piping and/or
water-treating equipment, each   $ 7.00



8.   For repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each
fixture   $7.00



9.   For each lawn sprinkler system on any one meter including backflow
protection devices therefor   $ 7.00



10.   For atmospheric-type vacuum breakers not included in Item 2:



   1 to 5   $5.00



   Over 5, each    $1.00



11.   For each backflow protective device other than atmospheric-type
vacuum breakers:



   2 inches (51 mm) and smaller   $ 7.00



   Over 2 inches (51 mm)    $ 15.00



12.   Plumbing sewer tap, each   $20.00



13.   Plumbing sewer connection, each   $20.00



14.   Gas piping systems:



   1 to 5 outlets    $ 5.00



   Over 5 outlets, each    $ 1.00



Other Inspections and Fees



1.   Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge two
hours)   $50.00 per hour*



2.   Reinspection fee assessed for work not ready for
inspection   $50.00 per hour*



   Inspection for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge
one-half hour)   $50.00 per hour*



3.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
approved plans (minimum charge on-half hour)   $50.00 per hour*



   * Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. 
This cost shall include, supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and
fringe benefits of the employees involved.



   (F)   Section [A] 106.6.3 Fee refunds. Amend to read, "The building
official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows.



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended."



   (G)   Create a new section "[A] 106.7 Emergency repairs. Where
equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency
situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working
business day to the building official."



   (H)   Section [A] 108.4 Violation penalties. Amend to read, "Any
person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or
repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or
directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provision of this code, shall be subject to the penalty and fine
described in this ordinance."



   (I)   Section [A] 108.5 Stop work orders. Amend to read, "Upon
notice from the building official, work on any plumbing system that is being
done contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe
manner shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person
doing the work. The notice shall state the conditions under which work is
authorized to resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall
not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any
person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after having
been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalty and fine described in this ordinance."



   (J)   Section [A] 109.2 Membership of the board. Amend to read, "The
membership of the Building Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-008
of the Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals."



   (K)   Sections [A] 109.2.1 through [A] 109.3. Delete sections in
their entirety.



   (L)   Section [A] 109.5 Postponed hearing. Amend to read, "When nine
members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the
appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of
the hearing."



   (M)   Section 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Amend to read,
"Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the
International Building Code, current adopted Fire Code, ICC Electrical Code,
International Fuel Gas Code or the International Mechanical Code, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes."



   (N)   Section 305.4.1 Sewer depth. Amend to read, "Building sewers
that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12
inches (305 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection.
Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) below grade."



   (O)   Create a new section "305.8 Tracer wire. Per ARS §40-360, all
buried non-metallic piping shall be identified with a minimum #12 gauge solid
copper insulated tracer wire securely attached to pipe or wrapped around the
pipe. Attachments shall be provided at maximum 20 foot intervals and at each
change in direction"



   (P)   Section [B] 309.2 Flood hazard. Amend to read, "For structures
located in flood hazard areas, systems and equipment shall be located and
installed as required by the adopted city floodplain ordinances.



   Exception: The following systems are permitted to be located below the
elevation required by the city adopted floodplain ordinances for utilities
and attendant equipment provided that the systems are designed and installed
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within their components and
the systems are constructed to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the occurrence of
flooding up to such elevation.



   1.   All water service pipes.



   2.   Pump seals in individual water supply systems where the pump is
located below the design flood elevation.



   3.   Covers on potable water wells shall be sealed, except where the
top of the casing well or pipe sleeve is elevated to not less than 1 foot
(305 mm) above the design flood elevation.



   4.   All sanitary drainage piping.



   5.    All storm drainage piping.



   6.   Manhole covers shall be sealed, except where designed to or
above the design flood elevation.



   7.   All other plumbing fixtures, faucets, fixture fittings, piping
systems and equipment.



   8.   Water heaters.



   9.   Vents and vent systems."



   (Q)   [M] Section 314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Amend first sentence
to read, "Condensate from all cooling and evaporators shall be conveyed from
the drain pan outlet to an approved sanitary sewer connection, or other
approved method of condensate disposal designed by a registered design
professional."



   Add exceptions to section:



   "Exceptions:



   1.   Condensate from cooling coils and evaporators up to and
including (4) ton units may drain into an approved bottom disposal pit. The
approved bottom disposal pit shall consist of a pit excavated in the earth
not less than 24 inches (61 mm) in any dimension completely filled with
coarse gravel. The drainpipe shall extend into the pit not less than 6 inches
(15 mm) below grade and shall be securely anchored in place. The drain shall
not be covered with sod or earth until it has been inspected.



   2.   Equipment provided with a factory, or other approved,
condensate evaporation device."



   (R)   Section 403.1 Minimum number of fixtures. Create a new
footnote to Table 403.1, "c. In other than Group A and E occupancies,
drinking fountains are not required for an occupant load of 25 or fewer."



   (S)   Section 605.4 Water Distribution Pipe. Create a new footnote
and exception to Table 605.4, "a. Copper and copper alloy piping and tubing
are prohibited for installation in or on the ground under buildings.
Exception: Copper and copper alloy piping and tubing installed in a
continuous sleeve consisting of a minimum Schedule 40 ABS or PVC piping."



   (T)   Section 608.1 General. Add sentence to end of section, "Where
required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ), backflow prevention
shall comply with utility provider requirements."



   (U)   Section 701.2 Sewer required. Amend to read, "Buildings in
which plumbing fixtures are installed and premises having drainage piping
shall be connected to a public sewer, where available, or an approved private
sewage disposal system in accordance with Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality, Aquifer Permit Protection Program, R-18-9."



   (V)   Section 712.3.1 Sump pump. Amend to read, "The sump pump
capacity and head shall be appropriate to the anticipated use requirements,
and for any 'public' or 'public utilization' occupancies, as defined in this
code, dual pumps or ejectors shall be provided.



   Exception: Dual pumps are not required in small, single-tenant
buildings where the use of fixtures can be readily restricted or controlled,
as determined by the building official."



   (W)   Section 903.1 Roof extension. Amend to read, "All open vent
pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated not less than 6 inches
(153 mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any
purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall terminate
not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof."



   (X)   Section 1003.2 Approval. Amend first sentence to read, "The
size, type, and location of each interceptor and of each separator shall be
designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and
the requirements of this section based on the anticipated conditions of use,
and when located in the City of Yuma jurisdiction, shall also comply with the
policies of the Wastewater Utilities Manager or designee."



   (Y)   Section 1003.3.1 Grease interceptors and automatic grease
removal devices required. Amend to read, "A grease interceptor or automatic
grease removal device shall be required to receive the drainage from fixtures
and equipment with grease-laden waste located in food preparation areas, such
as in restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory
cafeterias and clubs. Fixtures and equipment shall include, but not be
limited to three-compartment sinks (all three compartments), pot sinks,
prerinse sinks; soup kettles or similar devices; wok stations; floor drains
or sinks into which kettles are drained; automatic hood wash units and
dishwashers without prerinse sinks. Grease interceptors and automatic grease
removal devices shall receive waste only from fixtures and equipment that
allow fats, oils or grease to be discharged. If a food preparation sink is
required by the establishment, a separate sink for this purpose shall be
provided, and shall be connected indirectly and shall be connected to the
sanitary sewer. Where lack of space or other constraints prevent the
installation or replacement of a grease interceptor, one or more grease
interceptors shall be permitted to be installed on or above the floor and
upstream of an existing grease interceptor."



   (Z)   1003.3.4 Hydromechanical grease interceptors and automatic
grease removal devices. Amend first sentence to read, "Hydromechanical grease
interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall conform to ASME
A112.14.3 Appendix A, ASME A112.14.4, CSA B481.3 or PDI G101, and when
located in the City of Yuma jurisdiction shall also meet the City of Yuma
Standards. All new Food Service Establishments shall be required to install
at least a 500-gallon outdoor grease interceptor, unless granted a variance
by the City of Yuma Utilities Division."



   (AA)   Section 1003.3.4.1 Grease interceptor capacity. Amend to
read, "Grease interceptors shall have the volume indicated in Table
1003.3.4.2 for the flow through rates indicated. Where required by the AHJ,
grease interceptors shall have the volume indicated in Table 1003.3.4.2 for
the drainage fixture units indicated."



Insert Table 1003.3.4.1:



 


Table 1003.3.4.1
Capacity of Grease Interceptors(a)




Total Flow-Through Rating (gpm)

 

Grease Retention Capacity (pounds)





   4
 
   8


   6
 
   12


   7
 
   14


   9
 
   18


   10
 
   20


   12
 
   24


   14
 
   28


   15
 
   30


   18
 
   36


   20
 
   40


   25
 
   50


   35
 
   70


   50
 
   100


   75
 
   150


   100
 
   200


For SI:1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/m, 1 pound = 0.454 kg.

(a)    For total flow-through ratings greater than 100 (gpm), double the
flow-through rating to determine the grease retention capacity (pounds).




 



   (BB)   Create new sub-section, "1003.3.4.3 Grease Interceptor
Variances. Any establishment wishing to seek a variance from the 500-gallon
minimum grease interceptor requirement may submit a Variance for Cause
Request to the Utilities Pretreatment Division Coordinator. Facilities who
qualify for a variance may use Table 1003.3.4.1 for sizing of grease
interceptors smaller than 500-gallons."



Insert Table 1003.3.4.2:



 


Table 1003.3.4.2
Grease Interceptor Sizing




Drainage Fixture Unit (DFU)(1)

 

Interceptor Volume(2)





   8
 
   500 gallons


   21(3)
 
   750 gallons


   35
 
   1,000 gallons


   90(3)
 
   1,250 gallons


   172
 
   1,500 gallons


   216
 
   2,000 gallons


   307(3)
 
   2,500 gallons


   342
 
   3,000 gallons


   428
 
   4,000 gallons(4)


   576
 
   5,000 gallons(4)


   720
 
   7,500 gallons(4)


   2112
 
   10,000 gallons(4)


   2640
 
   15,000 gallons(4)


Notes:

(1)   The maximum allowable DFU's plumbed to the kitchen drain lines that
will be connected to the grease interceptor.

(2)   This size is based on: the DFU's, the pipe size; Useful Tables for
flow in half-full pipes (ref: Mohinder Nayyar Piping Handbook, 3rd Edition,
1992).

(3)   Based on 30-minute retention time (ref.) Metcalf & Eddy, Inc. 3rd
Ed. Small and Decentralized Wastewater Management Systems, 1998). Rounded up
to nominal interceptor volume.

(4)   No food service establishment will be permitted to install a grease
interceptor in excess of 3,000 gallons. Applications where sizing calculation
dictate the installation of a grease interceptor larger than 3,000 gallons
multiple interceptors shall be installed, in series, of sufficient size, to
meet the requirement of the calculated retention volume.




 



   (CC)   Section 1101.2 Where required. Amend first sentence to read,
"All roofs, paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards shall drain into a
separate storm sewer system or to an approved place of disposal."



   (DD)   Section 1104.2 Combining storm with sanitary drainage. Amend
to read, "The sanitary and storm drainage systems of a building or structure
shall be entirely separate."



   (EE)   Section 1108.3 Secondary (emergency overflow) drains or
scuppers. Add sentence to end of section, "The secondary drain or overflow
drain inlet shall be 2" (51 mm) above the primary drain inlet."



   (FF)   Section 1109 Combined Sanitary and Storm System. Delete
section in its entirety.



(Ord. O2002-11, passed 3-20-02; Ord. 2007-55, passed 11-7-07; Ord. O2015-038,
passed 7-15-15)



§ 150-062  [Repealed].



§ 150-063  Conflicts.




   When ordinances or parts of ordinances are in conflict, or are
inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.




('80 Code, § 24-13)  (Ord. 2679, passed 12-21-94; Ord. O2002-11, passed
3-20-02)



International Fuel Gas Code



§ 150-065  Adoption of the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code.



   Certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public record
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, known as the 2012
International Fuel Gas Code, which was made public record by Resolution
R2015-028, with certain amendments listed herein, is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out herein.



(Ord. O2007-06, passed 1-17-07; Ord. 2015-039, passed 7-15-15)



§ 150-066  [Repealed].



§ 150-067  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted by this subchapter. 
Paragraph, section numbers refer to the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code
numbering system. Code references not amended in this section shall be
enforced as published in the 2012 International Fuel Gas Code.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These regulations
shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Yuma, hereinafter referred
to as 'this code'."



   (B)   Create a new sub-section, "Section [A] 101.2.6 Fire Code.
Where a section references the International Fire Code, amend to read
'current adopted fire code'."



   (C)   Section [A] 103.1 General. Amend to read, "The Department of
Community Development, Building Safety Division is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official.
Amend all sections of this code that reference the 'code official' by
replacing to read the 'building official'."



   (D)   Section [A] 106.6.1 Work commencing before permit issuance.
Amend to read, "Any person who commences work on an installation before
obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the usual permit fee and
an additional investigative fee. An investigative fee, in addition to the
permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or
subsequently issued. The investigative fee shall be determined by the
building official, based on the circumstances, nature and severity of the
infraction. The minimum investigative fee shall be $50 and the maximum shall
be an amount up to the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (E)   Section [A] 106.6.2 Fee schedule. Amend by adding Plumbing
Permit Fee Table 1-A:



TABLE 1-A: FUEL GAS PERMIT FEES



Permit Issuance



1.   For issuing each permit   $50.00



2.   For issuing each supplemental permit for which the original permit
has not expired,



   been canceled or finaled   $7.00



Unit Fee Schedule



(Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)



1.   Fuel-Gas Piping



For each gas-piping system of one to five outlets   $7.00



For each additional gas-piping system outlet, per outlet   $1.00



2.   Furnaces



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas forced-air or
gravity-type furnace or burner including ducts and vents attached to such
appliance, up to and including 100,000 Btu/h (29.3 kW)   $15.00



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas forced-air or
gravity-type furnace or burner including ducts and vents attached to such
appliance over 100,000 Btu/h (29.3 kW)   $18.00



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas floor furnace, including
vent   $15.00



For the installation or relocation of each suspended fuel-gas heater,
recessed wall heater or floor-monument unit heater   $15.00



3.   Appliance Vents



For the installation, relocation or replacement of each fuel-gas appliance
vent installed and not included in an appliance permit   $7.00



4.   Alterations or Additions



For the alteration of, or addition to, each fuel-gas heating appliance,
refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling,
absorption or evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls
regulated by the Fuel Gas Code   $14.00



5.   Boilers, Compressors and Absorption Systems



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas boiler or compressor to
and including 3 horsepower (10.6 kW), or each absorption system to and
including 100,000 Btu/h (29.3kW)   $15.00



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas boiler or compressor over
3 horsepower (10.6 kW) to and including 15 horsepower (52.7 kW), or each
absorption system over 100,000 Btu/h (29.3 kW) to and including 500,000 Btu/h
(146.6 kW)   $28.00



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas boiler or compressor over
15 horsepower (52.7 kW) to and including 30 horsepower (105.5 kW) or each or
each absorption system over 500,000 Btu/h (146.6 kW) to and including
1,000,000 Btu/h (293.1 kW)   $37.00



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas boiler or compressor over
30 horsepower (105.5 kW) to and including 50 horsepower (176 kW), or each
absorption system over 1,000,000 Btu/h (293.1 kW) to and including 1,750,000
Btu/h (512.9 kW)   $55.00



For the installation or relocation of each fuel-gas boiler or compressor over
50 horsepower (176 kW), or each absorption system over 1,750,000 Btu/h (512.9
kW)   $93.00



6.   Air Handlers



Note: This fee does not apply to an air-handling unit which is a portion of a
factory-assembled appliance, cooling unit, evaporative cooler or absorption
unit for which a permit is required elsewhere in this code.



For each fuel-gas air-handling unit to and including 10,000 cubic feet per
minute (cfm) (4719 L/s), including ducts attached hereto   $11.00



For each fuel-gas air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm (4719 L/s)   $18.00



7.   Incinerators



For the installation or relocation of each domestic-type fuel-gas
incinerator   $18.00



For the installation or relocation of each commercial or industrial-type
fuel-gas incinerator   $15.00



8.   Miscellaneous



For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the Fuel Gas Code but
not classed in other appliance categories, or for which no fee is listed in
the table   $11.00



Other Inspections and Fees:



1.   Inspections outside of normal business hours,   $50.00 per hour*



   (minimum charge two hours)



2.   Reinspection fees assessed for work not ready for
inspection,   $50.00 per hour*



3.   Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated,   $50.00
per hour*



   (minimum charge one-half hour)



4.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans,   $50.00 per hour*



   (minimum charge one-half hour)



   * Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greater. This cost shall include supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly
wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.



   (F)   Section [A] 106.6.3 Fee refunds. Amend to read, "The building
official shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows.



   1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was erroneously
paid or collected.



   2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work
has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



   3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an
application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended."



   (G)   Section [A] 108.4 Violation penalties. Amend to read, "Persons
who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or repair work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or
of a permit or certificate issued under the provision of this code, shall be
subject to the penalty and fine described in this ordinance."



   (H)   Section [A] 108.5 Stop work orders. Amend to read, "Upon
notice from the building official that work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall
immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner of the property, the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work.
The notice shall state the conditions under which work is authorized to
resume. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be
required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. Any person who
shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop
work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalty and fine
described in this ordinance."



   (I)   Section [A] 109.2 Membership of the board. Amend to read, "The
membership of the Building Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-008
of the Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals."



   (J)   Sections [A] 109.2.1 through [A] 109.3. Delete sections in
their entirety.



   (K)   Section [A] 109.5 Postponed hearing. Amend to read, "When nine
members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the
appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of
the hearing."



   (L)   Section [B] 301.11 Flood hazard. Amend to read, "For
structures located in flood hazard areas, the appliance, equipment and system
installations regulated by this code shall be located and installed as
required by the adopted city floodplain ordinances for utilities and
attendant equipment.



   Exception: The appliance, equipment and system installations regulated
by this code are permitted to be located below the elevation required by the
city adopted floodplain ordinances for utilities and attendant equipment
provided that they are designed and installed to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components and to resist hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during
the occurrence of flooding to such elevation."



   (M)   Section [M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Amend first sentence to
read, "Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require
service are installed on a roof having a slope of greater than 4 units
vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope) or greater and having an
edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a level platform
shall be provided on each side of the appliance or equipment to which access
is required for service, repair, or maintenance."



   (N)   Section 307.1 Evaporators and cooling coils. Amend to read,
"Condensate drainage systems shall be provided for equipment and appliances
containing evaporators and cooling coils in accordance with the International
Mechanical Code and its amendments."



   (O)   Section 403.4.3 Copper and brass. Delete section in its
entirety.



   (P)   Section 403.5.2 Copper and brass tubing. Delete section in its
entirety.



(Ord. O2007-06, passed 1-17-07; Ord. 2015-039, passed 7-15-15)



Electrical Code



§ 150-075  [Repealed].



§ 150-076  Adoption of NFPA 70 National Electrical Code 2014 Edition and
2006 International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions.



   Certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public record
in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, marked and titled, "NFPA
70 National Electrical Code 2014 Edition" and "2006 International Code
Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions," and Amendments dated
March 11, 2015, were declared a public record by Resolution R2015-028, and
are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully set out
herein.



(Ord. O98-25, passed 4-15-98; Ord. O2003-51, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2009-22,
passed 4-1-09; Ord. 2015-040, passed 7-15-15)



Charter reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see Charter Art. VII, § 6(g)(6)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801 et seq.



§ 150-077  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions and deletions are hereby made to
the National Electrical Code 2014 Edition and 2006 International Code Council
Electrical Code Administrative Provisions, as adopted by this subchapter. 
Paragraphs and section numbers refer to the National Electrical Code and
International Code Council Electrical Code Administrative Provisions
numbering systems. Code references not appearing in this section, as amended,
shall be enforced as published in the reference document.



   (A)   The requirements of the most current Arizona Public Service
(APS) Electric Service Manual shall supersede the requirements of the NEC
when the APS requirements are more restrictive.



   (B)   When reference is made to the Fire Code it shall mean the
current adopted Fire Code.



   (C)   Article 310.106(A) Minimum Size of Conductors. Amend to read,
"The minimum size of conductors shall be as shown in Table 310.106(A).
Whether solid or stranded, conductors, other than signal or control wiring,
shall not be smaller than #12 Copper or #1 Aluminum or Copper-Clad Aluminum
for current carrying conductors."



   (D)   Amend Table 310.106(A) as follows:



 


   Table 310.106(A) Minimum Size of Conductors



Conductor Voltage Rating (Volts)
 
Minimum Conductor Size (AWG)


Copper
 
Aluminum or Copper-Clad Aluminum




0 - 2000
 
12
 
1


2001 - 8000
 
8
 
1


8001 - 15,000
 
2
 

1



15,001 - 28,000
 
1
 
1


28,001 - 35,000
 
1/0
 
1/0




 



   (E)   Article 334.10 Uses Permitted. Amend to read, "Type NM, Type
NMC, and Type NMS cables shall be permitted to be used in Residential Group
R-3 and their related U structures. Type NM, Type NMC, and Type NMS cables
shall be permitted to be used in Residential Group R-1, Residential Group
R-2, and Residential Group R-4 and their related U structures, for branch
circuits only. The branch circuits shall serve only one residential unit and
shall originate in a panel or junction box located on or within the unit
served."



   (F)   Article 394.10 Uses Permitted. Amend to read, "Use of
Concealed knob-and-tube wiring shall be limited to the maintenance and repair
of existing installations. No knob-and-tube wiring shall be extended or
otherwise altered to provide additional points of utilization or used to
establish new circuits."



   (G)   Article 338.10 Uses Permitted.  (A) Service-Entrance
conductors. Amend to read, "Type SE and USE cable shall not be used as
service-entrance conductors."



   (H)   Article 690.56 Identification of Power Sources. Subpart (C)
Facilities with Rapid Shutdown. Add to end of section. "The required plaque
or directory shall be located on or adjacent to the utility service entrance
section."



   (I)   Chapter 1. ICCEC Administrative Provisions. Section 101.1
Title. Amend to read, "These regulations shall be known as the Electrical
Code - Administrative Provisions of City of Yuma, Department of Community
Development, Building Safety Division and shall be cited as such and will be
referred to herein as 'this code'."



   (J)   Section 102.6 Referenced codes and standards. Amend first
sentence to read, "The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
those that are listed in Chapter 13 and such codes and standards shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of
each such reference, except that where duplications of reference standards
are included in the building and fire codes, the reference standard numbers
of the current adopted building and fire codes shall govern."



   (K)   Chapter 3. Section 301.1 Creation of enforcement agency.
Delete all reference to Department of Electrical Inspection, and amend first
sentence to read, "The Department of Community Development, Building Safety
Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known
as the code official."



   (L)   Chapter 4. Section 404.2 Schedule of permit fees. Insert
Electrical Permit Fee Schedule Table 1-A, as follows:



   Table 1-A



   ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE



A.   Fee Schedule for New Construction. By Occupancy Classification.
Electrical Permit Fee amount is calculated using the listed unit rate per
square foot times the gross building area in square feet.  For occupancies
not listed use the System Fee Schedule or Unit Fee Schedule.



Group "A-1" Assembly w/ Fixed Seating (Theater, Concert Hall, etc.)   $0.07



Group "A-2" Assembly w/ Food & Drink Consumption (Restaurant, Tavern, Night
Club, etc.)   0.11



Group "A-2" Assembly w/ Food & Drink Consumption (Restaurant - Fast
Food)   0.20



Group "A-3" Assembly for Worship, Recreation, Amusement (Church, Museum,
Dance Hall, etc.)   0.06



Group "B" Business (Offices, Professional Services, etc.)   0.09



Group "E" Educational (Schools Below 12th Grade, Day Care, etc.)   0.04



Group "F-1" Factory (Moderate Hazard)   Use Unit Schedule



Group "F-2" Factory (Low Hazard)   Use Unit Schedule



Group "I-2" Institutional (Hospital, Nursing Home, etc.)   0.09



Group "I-3" Institutional (Jail, etc.)   0.04



Group "I-4" Institutional (Day Care 24 hour, Day Care under 2 1/2 years of
Age, etc.)   0.04



Group "M" Mercantile (Retail or Wholesale Store, Market, Department Store,
etc.)   0.04



Group "R-1" Residential (Hotel, Motel, etc.: Transient)   0.09



Group "R-2" Residential (Hotel, Motel, etc.: Non-Transient)   0.09



Group "S-1" Moderate-Hazard Storage (Combustible Storage)   Use Unit
Schedule



Group "S-2" Low-Hazard Storage (Noncombustible Storage)   Use Unit Schedule



B.   Fee Schedule – Other



Permit Issuance



1. For issuing each electrical permit   $50.00



2. For issuing each supplemental permit for which the original permit has not
expired, been canceled or finaled   7.00



System Fee Schedule



   (Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)



1.   New Residential Buildings



The following fees shall include all wiring and electrical equipment in or on
each building, or other electrical equipment on the same premises constructed
at the same time.



Multifamily. For new multifamily buildings (apartments and condominiums)
having three or more dwelling units constructed at the same time, not
including the area of garages, carports, and accessory buildings, per square
foot (0.09 m2)   $0.05   



Single- and two-family.  For new single- and two-family residential
buildings constructed at the same time and not including the area of garages,
carports, and accessory buildings, per square foot (0.09 m2)   0.08



For other types of residential occupancies use the Fee Schedule for New
Construction. For alterations, additions, and modifications to existing
residential buildings, use the Unit Fee Schedule.



2.   Private Swimming Pools



For new private, in-ground swimming pools for single-family and multifamily
occupancies including a complete system of necessary branch circuit wiring,
bonding, grounding, underwater lighting, water pumping, and other similar
electrical equipment directly related to the operation of a swimming pool,
each pool   52.00



3.   Carnivals and Circuses



Carnivals, circuses, or other types of traveling shows or exhibitions
utilizing transportable rides, booths, displays, and attractions.



For electrical generators and electrically driven rides, each   22.00



For mechanically driven rides and walk through attractions or displays having
electric lighting, each   7.00



For a system of area and booth lighting, each   7.00



For permanently installed rides, booths, displays, and attractions use the
Unit Fee Schedule.



4.   Temporary Power Service



For a temporary service pole or pedestal including all pole or pedestal
mounted receptacle outlets or appurtenances, each   25.00



For a temporary distribution system and temporary lighting and receptacle
outlets for construction sites, decorative lights, Christmas tree sales lots,
fire works stands, etc., each   15.00



Unit Fee Schedule



   (Note: The following do not include permit-issuing fee.)



1.   Receptacle, Switch and Light Outlets



For receptacle, switch, light or other outlets at which current is used or
controlled, except services, feeders and meters:



   First 20 fixtures, each   1.50



   Additional fixtures, each   1.00



Note: For multioutlet assemblies, each 5 feet (1524 mm) or fraction thereof
may be considered as one outlet.   



2.   Lighting Fixtures



For lighting fixtures, sockets or other lamp holding devices:



   First 20 fixtures, each   $1.50



   Additional fixtures, each   1.00



For pole or platform-mounted lighting fixtures, each   1.50



For theatrical-type lighting fixtures or assemblies, each   1.50



3.   Residential Appliances



For fixed residential appliances or receptacle outlets for same, including
wall-mounted electric ovens; counter-mounted cooking tops; electric ranges;
self-contained room, console, or through-wall air conditioners; space
heaters; food waste grinders; dishwashers; washing machines; water heaters;
clothes dryers; or other motor-operated appliances not exceeding 1 horsepower
(HP)(746W,) in rating, each   5.00



Note: For other types of air conditioners and other motor-driven appliances
having larger electrical ratings, see Power Apparatus.



4.   Nonresidential Appliances



For nonresidential appliances and self-contained factory-wired,
nonresidential appliances not exceeding 1 horsepower (HP), kilowatt (kW), or
kilovolt-ampere (kVA), in rating, including medical and dental devices; food,
beverage and ice cream cabinets; illuminated show cases; drinking fountains;
vending machines; laundry machines; or other similar types of equipment,
each   5.00



Note: For other types of air conditioners and other motor-driven appliances
having larger electrical ratings, see Power Apparatus.



5.   Power Apparatus



For motors, generators, transformers, rectifiers, synchronous converters,
capacitors, industrial heating, air conditioners and heat pumps, cooking or
baking equipment and other apparatus, as follows:



Rating in horsepower (HP), kilowatts (kW), kilovolt-amperes (kVA) or
kilovolt-amperes-reactive (kVAR):



   Up to and including 1, each   5.00



   Over 1 and not over 10, each   13.00



   Over 10 and not over 50, each   25.00



   Over 50 and not over 100, each   50.00



   Over 100, each   67.00



Notes:



   1.   For equipment or appliances having more than one motor,
transformer, heater, etc., the sum of the combined ratings may be used.



   2.   These fees include all switches, circuit breakers, contactors,
thermostats, relays and other directly related control equipment.



6.   Busways



For trolley and plug-in-type busways, each 100 feet (30 480 mm) or fraction
thereof   $8.00



Note: An additional fee is required for lighting fixtures, motors and other
appliances that are connected to trolley and plug-in-type busways. A fee is
not required for portable tools.



7.   Signs, Outline Lighting and Marquees



For signs, outline lighting and marquees supplied from one branch circuit,
each   25.00



For additional branch circuits within the same sign, outline lighting system
or marquee, each   5.00



8.   Services



For services of 600 volts or less and not over 200 amperes in rating,
each   50.00



For services of 600 volts or less and over 200 amperes to 1,000 amperes,
each   75.00



For services over 600 volts or 1,000 amperes in rating, each   125.00



9.   Miscellaneous Apparatus, Conduits and Conductors



For electrical apparatus, conduits and conductors for which a permit is
required but for which no fee is herein set forth   25.00



Note: This fee is not applicable when a fee is paid for one or more services,
outlets, fixtures, appliances, power apparatus, signs or other equipment.



   Other Inspections and Fees



1.   Inspections outside of normal business hours (minimum charge two
hours)   $50 per hour*



2.   Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of Section
107.3.3   $50 per hour*



   Inspection for which no fee is specifically indicated (minimum charge
one-half hour)   $50 per hour*



3.   Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
approved plans (minimum charge one-half hour)    $50 per hour*



* Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is greater. This
cost shall include, supervision, overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe
benefits of the employees involved.



   (M)   Section 404.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Amend to
read, "Any person who commences work before obtaining the necessary permits
shall be subject to the usual fee and an additional investigation fee. An
investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether
or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall
be determined by the code official, based on the circumstances, nature and
severity of the infraction. The minimum investigation fee shall be$50 and the
maximum shall be an amount up to the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (N)   Amend section 404.5 Refunds. "The code official shall
authorize the refunding of fees as follows.



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended."



   (O)   Section 1003.1 Penalties. Amend sentence to read, "Any person
who fails to comply with the provisions of this code or who fails to carry
out an order made pursuant of this code or violates any condition attached to
a permit, approval or certificate shall be subject to the penalty and fine
described in Section 5 of this ordinance".



   (P)    Section 1004.3 Unlawful continuance. Amend sentence to read,
"Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalty and fine described in Section 5 of this ordinance". 
Penalty, see § 150-999



   (Q)   Chapter 11. ICCEC Administrative Provisions. Section 1102.1
Membership of board. Amend to read, "The membership of the Building Advisory
Board, as prescribed in Section 150-008 of the Yuma City Code, will be the
Board of Appeals."



   (R)   Delete Sections 1102.2 through 1102.4.



   (S)   Section 1103.5 Postponed hearing. Amend to read, "When nine
members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the
appellant's representative shall have the right to request a postponement of
the hearing."



   (T)   Chapter 12. Delete Section 1202.2 Nonmetallic-sheathed cable.



   (U)   Chapter 13. Under heading "NFPA" revise standard reference
number from "70-08" to "70-14."



(Ord. O98-25, passed 4-15-98; Ord. O2003-51, passed 10-15-03; Ord. O2004-35,
passed 6-16-04; Ord. O2009-22, passed 4-1-09; Ord. 2015-040, passed 7-15-15)



§ 150-078  [Repealed].



Housing Code



§ 150-090  Adoption of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code.



   That certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public
record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being marked and
titled as the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, which was made
public record by Resolution R2018-032, including Appendix A, of said Property
Maintenance Code, as amended herein, are hereby adopted by reference and made
a part hereof as if fully set out in the entirety herein.



('80 Code, § 15-16)  (Ord. 1874, passed 11-7-79; Ord. 2098, passed
11-17-82; Ord. 2388, passed 2-3-88; Ord. 2549, passed 12-18-91; Ord.
O2006-25, passed 4-19-06; Ord. O2013-13, passed 4-3-13; Ord. O2018-053,
passed 12-5-18)



Charter reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see Charter Art. VII, § 6(g)(6)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801 et seq.



§ 150-091  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted by this
subchapter. Paragraph, section numbers refer to the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 edition number system. Code references not amended in
this section shall be enforced as published in the reference document.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These regulations
shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of City of
Yuma, hereinafter referred to as 'this code'."



   (B)   Section [A] 302.3 Application of other codes. Amend
"International Fire Code" in first sentence to "current adopted fire code."
Amend "International Zoning Code" in last sentence to "City of Yuma Zoning
Code." Add to end of section, "Substitute 'current adopted fire code'
throughout this code for the term 'International Fire Code'."



   (C)   Section [A] 103.1 General. Amend to read, "The Department of
Community Development, Building Safety Division, is hereby created and the
executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official."



   (D)   "Section [A] 103.1.1. Amend all sections of this code to
substitute 'building official' for the term 'code official.'"



   (E)   Section [A] 106.3 Prosecution of violation. Amend first
sentence to read, "Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or
order served in accordance with Section 107 shall be deemed guilty of a class
1 misdemeanor as described in Section 3 of this ordinance."



   (F)   Section [A] 106.4 Violation penalties. Amend to read, "Any
person who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by state or local laws and shall be subject to the
penalty and fine described in this ordinance. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense."



   (G)   Section [A] 111.2 Membership of the board. Amend to read, "The
membership of the Residential Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section
150-175 of the Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals for Residential
appeals (one-and two-family dwellings). The membership of the Building
Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-008 of the Yuma City Code, will
be the Board of Appeals for Commercial appeals."



   (H)   Delete the following sections in their entirety:



      Section [A] 111.2.1   Alternate members



      Section [A] 111.2.2   Chairman



      Section [A] 111.2.3   Disqualification of member



      Section [A] 111.2.4   Secretary



      Section [A] 111.2.5   Compensation of members



      Section [A] 111.3   Notice of Meeting



      Section [A] 111.4   Open Hearing



      Section [A] 111.4.1   Procedure



      Section [A] 111.5   Postponed hearing



      Section [A] 111.6   Board decision



      Section [A] 111.6.1   Records and copies



      Section [A] 111.6.2   Administration



   (I)   Section [A] 112.2 Issuance. Insert the following between the
first and second sentences, "In absence of anyone present on site, the order
shall be conspicuously posted on the premises."



   (J)   Section [A] 112.4 Failure to comply. Amend to read, "Any
person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalty and fine as
described in this ordinance."



   (K)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Amend first sentence to read, "All
premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant
growth not properly controlled."



   (L)   Section 303.2 Enclosures. Amend first sentence to read, "All
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than 24 inches (610
mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 60
inches (1524 mm) in height above the finished ground level measured on the
side of the barrier away from the pool."



   (M)   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Delete section in its entirety.



   (N)   Table 404.5 - Minimum Area Requirements. Add exception as
footnote "c" to table:



      "c. Exception. The minimum area requirements do not apply to
immediate family members. Immediate family is defined to include parent or
grandparent (including in-law and step); child or grandchild (including
adopted, foster, step or legal ward) regardless of age; sibling (including
inlaw, step, half) and spouse."



   (O)   Section 602.2 Residential Occupancies. Amend last sentence to
read, "Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall any portable space
heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating."



   (P)   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Amend first sentence to read,
"Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied,
to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a
minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
toilet rooms."



   (Q)   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Amend first sentence to
read, "Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain
a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied."



   (R)   CHAPTER 8 REFERENCED STANDARDS.  Delete reference to ICC
IZC-18 International Zoning Code.



   (S)   Replace Appendix A as follows:




"APPENDIX A





CITY OF YUMA BOARDING REQUIREMENTS





A101
GENERAL




A101.1 General. All windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner
to prevent entry by unauthorized persons.




A102
MATERIALS




A102.1 Boarding sheet material. Boarding sheet material shall be minimum
3/16-inch (4.76 mm) thick polycarbonate clear board panels.



A102.2 Boarding framing material. Boarding framing material shall be the
clear boarding bracing system (polyethylene) minimum 1-inch (25.4 mm) thick.



A102.3 Boarding fasteners.



   Option 1.   Boarding fasteners shall be minimum 3/8-inch (9.5 mm)
diameter carriage bolts of such a length as required to penetrate the
assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers and nuts. Washers
and nuts shall comply with the International Building Code.



   Option 2.   Boarding fasteners shall be minimum #8 Torx screw,
minimum 2-inch (51 mm) long, alternating every 6 inches (152 mm) on center
into existing 2-inch nominal king stud or trimmer (if king studs do not
exist, nominal 2x material shall be added around opening.).




A103
INSTALLATION




A103.1 Boarding installation. The boarding installation shall be in
accordance with Figures A103.1(1) and A103.1(2) and Sections A103.2 through
A103.5.



A103.2 Boarding sheet material. The boarding sheet material shall be cut to
fit the door or window opening neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal
overlap at the perimeter of the door or window.



A103.3 Windows.



   Option 1.   The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to
pass through or the window sash shall be removed and stored. The 2-inch by
4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) strong back framing material shall be cut minimum 2
inches (51 mm) wider than the window opening and shall be placed on the
inside of the window opening 6 inches (152 mm) minimum above the bottom and
below the top of the window opening. The framing and boarding shall be
predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned and the bolts, washers and nuts
shall be installed and secured.



   Option 2.   Boarding material can overlap door opening to be secured
with screws to the existing king stud and trimmer. Boarding sheet material
shall be secured with screws (min. #8 Torx screw) alternating every 6 inches
(152 mm) on center.



A103.4 Door walls.



   Option 1.   The door opening shall be framed with minimum 2-inch by
4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) framing material secured at the entire perimeter and
vertical members at a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center. Blocking shall
also be secured at a maximum of 48 inches (1219 mm) on center vertically.



   Option 2.   Boarding material can overlap door opening to be secured
with screws to the existing king stud and trimmer. Boarding sheet material
shall be secured with screws (min #8 Torx screw) alternating every 6 inches
(152 mm) on center.



A103.5 Doors. Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or
door openings. One door to the structure shall be available for authorized
entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved manner.




A104
REFERENCED STANDARD




IBC—18 International Building Code A102.1. A102.2. A102.3.



('80 Code, § 15-16.1)  (Ord. 1874, passed 11-7-79; Ord. 2098, passed
11-17-82; Ord. 2388, passed 2-3-88; Ord. 2549, passed 12-18-91; Ord.
O2006-25, passed 4-19-06; Ord. O2013-13, passed 4-3-13; Ord. O2018-053,
passed 12-5-18)



Sound Control Construction



§ 150-120  Construction and Application.



   In addition to construction requirements of the Uniform Building Code
as adopted by the City Council, construction within the airport district
shall contain sound isolation in new building construction and additions to
existing buildings within the airport noise and accident potential zones
adjacent to the Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) and Yuma International
Airport as defined by zoning ordinances.



('80 Code, § 7-39)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



§ 150-121  Purpose.



   The purpose of this building code amendment is to establish standards
of isolation against exterior aircraft noise for areas in the vicinity of the
MCAS and Yuma International Airport where the exterior day-night sound level
(Ldn) exceeds 65 dB.  The amendment requires buildings in such noise zones
to be so designed and constructed as to isolate them appropriately from the
exterior noise exposures.



('80 Code, § 7-40)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



§ 150-122  Limitation of Applicability.



   The provisions of this amendment shall not require, or be construed to
require, buildings to be designed or constructed contrary to the provisions
contained elsewhere in the building code of the city.



('80 Code, § 7-41)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)




§ 150-123  Scope.




   (A)   The provisions of this amendment shall apply to buildings or
portions thereof, and to additions to existing buildings, that are
constructed after the effective date of this amendment and that are located
where the exterior day-night sound level exceeds 65 dB.  A building that has
been designed and constructed to include special sound isolation in
accordance with this amendment shall not be altered.  If a building is
altered, it shall be proven that such alterations do not diminish the
noise-isolating properties of the building.



   (B)   If the gross floor area of a structure or project is expanded
by less than 50%, the requirements of this section apply only to the area of
expansion.  If the gross floor area of a structure or project is expanded by
50% or more, the requirements of this section apply to the entire structure,
except for existing single family, duplex dwellings or any multifamily
property used for residential purposes.



('80 Code, § 7-42)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79; Am. Ord. O2002-10, passed
2-20-02)



§ 150-124  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION (NLR).  Difference in noise level from outside
to inside of the building.  NLR is a difference, in decibels, between
A-weighted sound levels; it depends primarily on the nature of the walls,
ceilings, windows, doors and vents and, to a lesser extent, on the amount of
sound-absorbing material in the room in which the sound is received.  It
shall be measured, if so required by the building official, in a completed
and furnished building by application of the testing procedure described in
this amendment.



   QUALIFIED ARCHITECT OR ENGINEER.  An architect or engineer registered
in the state who, by reason of this training and experience, is considered
qualified to pass judgement on acoustical design, materials, and methods of
construction for the attenuation of noise.  The qualification of the
architect or engineer relative to acoustical design must be submitted to and
found to be acceptable by the building official.



   SOUND ABSORPTION.  Capacity of the materials and furnishings in a
habitable room to absorb sound.



   SOUND LEVEL.  In decibels, the quantity measured by an instrument that
satisfies American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters,
S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.  Sound level is understood
to be measured with the A-weighted filter and slow response of the instrument.



   SOUND TRANSMISSION CLASS (STC) OF A PARTITION.  A singlefigure rating
of the sound-isolating properties of a partition, which takes into account
the relative importance of the sound transmission loss of the partition at
different frequencies.  The determination of the sound transmission class of
a partition is described in “Determination of Sound Transmission Class,”
American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation E413-73.



   SOUND TRANSMISSION LOSS OF A PARTITION.  A measure of the
sound-isolating properties of a wall, floor, ceiling, window or door, that is
characteristic of the partition itself and not the room of which it is a
part.  The determination of sound transmission loss of a partition, in the
field, is described in “Measurement of Airborne Sound Isolation in
Buildings,” American Society for Testing and Materials, Designation E336-71
or the latest revision thereof.



('80 Code, § 7-43)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



§ 150-125  Exterior Noise Isolation Standards.



   All assembly, educational, institutional, residential, and office
buildings located within designated noise impact zones shall be designed and
constructed to cause isolation against exterior noise with at least the noise
level reduction indicated in the zoning ordinance.  For each occupancy, the
zoning ordinance specifies the minimum sound level reduction required in each
airport noise and accident potential zone (ANAP).  An intent of these
requirements is to have residential, assembly, educational and institutional,
and the like, buildings constructed with sufficient sound isolation so that
any habitable room, furnished for normal use and with doors and windows
closed, shall be constructed with the noise level reduction as required by
the zoning ordinance for each occupancy.



('80 Code, § 7-44)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)  Penalty, see § 150-999



§ 150-126  Airport Noise and Accident Potential Zones.



   Noise zones, for the purpose of this amendment, are defined by contours
of the day-night sound level, according to the official zoning map of the
city.  The ANAP zones are intended to identify those areas in the vicinity
of the MCAS and Yuma International Airport which require sound isolation to
be included in the design and construction of proposed buildings.



   (A)   Performance standards.  Standards of construction considered
acceptable and in compliance with the intent and provisions of this amendment
are provided in § 150-128.  A building will generally be considered
acceptable by the building official if it incorporates the applicable
features described in § 150-128.  Alternate materials and methods of
construction may be permitted, provided such alternates are demonstrated to
the satisfaction of the building official to be equivalent to those described.



   (B)   Acoustical analysis and design report.  The applicant may
elect to have a qualified architect or engineer examine the noise levels and
needed building sound isolation requirements for a specific site.  The
analysis and design report signed by and prepared under the supervision of a
qualified architect or engineer shall be submitted with the application for
building permit.  The report shall show the topographical relationship of
the aircraft noise sources and the building site, identification of noise
sources and their characteristics, predicated noise spectra at the exterior
of the proposed building structure, basis for the predication (measured or
obtained from published data), and effectiveness of the proposed construction
showing that the prescribed interior day-night sound level is met.



('80 Code, § 7-45)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



§ 150-127  Expansion of Nonconforming Use.



   The expansion of a nonconforming use shall be designed and constructed
in such a manner that the interior sound level does not exceed 45 dB.



('80 Code, § 7-46)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)  Penalty, see § 150-999



§ 150-128  Sound Isolation Construction.



   Construction as outlined in this section that satisfies the
requirements of the zoning ordinance and for purposes of this amendment is
considered to meet the interior noise standard specified in § 150-125. 
Each item indicated in this section shall be identified on the project
drawings which are submitted with the permit application.  Certification by
an acoustical engineer or registered architect shall attest that construction
practices and the materials of the structure will achieve the interior noise
level reduction required by the prescribed noise attenuation standard.  The
engineer or architect shall submit relevant information to permit the City
Building Official to verify that the proposed measures will achieve the
specified interior noise level standards.



   (A)   Noise level reduction—25 decibels.  For a building located
where a noise level reduction of 25 decibels is required, the building shall
be constructed as follows:



      (1)   If wood frame construction is used, all exterior stud
walls shall have interior and exterior surfaces of an approved material at
least as massive as half-inch gypsum wallboard, and the intervening space
(studs) shall contain fibrous thermal insulation having a resistance of R-11
or greater.



      (2)   Arrangements for any habitable room shall be such that
any exterior door or window can be kept closed when the room is in use.



      (3)   Any air duct or connection out-of-doors must contain an
interior sound-absorbing lining acoustically equivalent at least to
fiberglass duct liner one inch thick and of a length greater than five times
the diameter of the duct.



      (4)   The ceiling below an attic space shall include gypsum
board or plaster at least one-half inch thick; fibrous thermal insulation
having a resistance of R-19 or greater shall be placed above the ceiling.



      (5)   There shall be no direct openings, such as mail slots,
from the interior to the exterior of the building.  All chimneys shall be
provided with well-fitted dampers.



      (6)   All openable windows shall be sound rated assemblies
having sound transmission class (STC) of at least 24.  Fixed windows shall
be well sealed and at least three-sixteenth-inch-thick glass.



      (7)   All entry doors shall be solid-core constructed,
close-fitting units with weather-stripping seals incorporated on all edges to
eliminate gaps.  Air gaps and rattling shall not be permitted.



      (8)   Masonry walls, if used, shall be at least equivalent in
weight to eight-inch, lightweight concrete blocks, at least one surface of
which is painted or plastered.



      (9)   The roof deck shall weigh at least seven pounds per
square foot with roof sheathing containing a solid core at least one-half
inch thick.



      (10)   Rooms when in use are expected to contain furniture, or
other materials that absorb sound equivalent to the absorption provided by
wall-to-wall carpeting over a conventional pad.



   (B)   Noise level reduction—30 decibels.  For a building located
where a noise level reduction of 30 decibels is required, the building shall
be constructed to incorporate the features described in preceding subsections
(NLR 25 dB) with the following additions:



      (1)   Windows, fixed or openable, shall be sound-rated units
with a sound transmission class (STC) of at least 32 (double-glazed).



      (2)   A ceiling or exhaust duct for the forced air ventilation
system shall be provided with a bend in the duct such that there is no direct
line of sight through the duct from outside to inside.  The bend shall be
lined with the equivalent of fiberglass duct liner one-half inch thick.



      (3)   The top floor-ceiling construction shall consist of
plaster or gypsum board at least five-eighths inch thick.



      (4)   The floor of the lowest room or area shall be a concrete
slab, or shall be sealed against exterior noise.



      (5)   Masonry walls, if used, shall be at least equivalent in
weight to eight-inch, lightweight concrete blocks.  At least one surface
shall be painted, plastered or covered with gypsum board.



      (6)   The roof deck shall weigh at least 12 pounds per square
foot.  Wood roof sheathing shall be continuous (plywood) and at least
five-eighths inch thick.



   (C)   Noise level reduction—35 decibels.  For a building located
where a noise level reduction of 35 decibels is required, a building shall be
constructed to incorporate the features described above (NLR of 25 and 30 dB)
with the following additional features:



      (1)   The use of exposed wood beam ceilings is prohibited
unless sound isolating treatment is provided between the ceiling and
roofline.  The minimum treatment shall consist of rigid fiberglass board,
nominally two inches thick placed over the interior ceiling and under at
least one-half inch of plywood sheathing.  The sheathing shall be nailed
only to the beam or major frame members and not to the interior exposed
ceiling at points between the beams.



      (2)   For attic spaces ventilated to the outside, the attic
floor shall be decked over with one-half inch plywood or equivalent and all
cracks caulked.  R-11 insulation shall be placed between the floor joists.



      (3)   Roof deck shall weigh at least 20 pounds per square
foot.  Roof sheathing shall be continuous, weighing a total of at least four
pounds per square foot.



      (4)   Wood paneling less than one-half inch thick shall be
used only over gypsum board of at least five-eighths inch thick.  Interior
gypsum board walls shall consist of two layers of one-half-inch board nailed
directly to the studs.



      (5)   Fixed or openable windows must be sound rated units with
at least a sound transmission class (STC) of 36.



   (D)   All residential buildings shall be constructed with minimum
R19 exterior walls, R30 roofs, dual-glazed windows, and solid wood,
foam-filled fiberglass or metal doors to the exterior.



('80 Code, § 7-47)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79; Am. Ord. O2002-10, passed
2-20-02)  Penalty, see § 150-999



§ 150-129  Field Inspection of the Completed Building.



   When inspection indicates that the construction is not in accordance
with the approved design, field testing by the applicant shall be required by
the building official.  Interior noise measurements shall be taken under
conditions of typical aircraft operation.  A test report signed by, and
prepared under, the supervision of a registered engineer or registered
architect of the state showing compliance or noncompliance with the
prescribed interior allowable levels shall be submitted to the building
official.



('80 Code, § 7-48)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



§ 150-130  Complaint Alleging Noncompliance.



   When a written complaint is submitted to the building official alleging
noncompliance with the interior day-night sound level standards, the building
official shall direct that field testing be conducted.  The complainant
shall post a bond or adequate funds in escrow for the cost of such testing. 
Such costs shall be chargeable to the complainant when the field tests show
compliance with the standards is in fact present.  If such tests show
noncompliance, then such testing costs shall be borne by the permit applicant
and the structure shall be altered as required to comply with the standards
at the expense of the permit applicant.



('80 Code, § 7-49)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



§ 150-131  Field Test Procedures.



   The test procedure which is to be followed in the event that an
evaluation of the noise level reduction (NLR) of the completed building is
required by the building official is provided in this section.  Alternates
to this procedure may be submitted to the building official prior to the
initiation of a field test.  Field tests should not be undertaken pursuant
to the provisions of the amendment prior to the approval of such alternates
by the building official.



   (A)   Interior sound level.  The interior sound level shall be
measured within a habitable room or rooms of the building.  The room or
rooms nearest to the aircraft noise source(s) shall be selected.  Indoor
measurements shall be made at a point five feet above the floor of the room
or rooms, three feet from the window nearest the aircraft noise source(s),
with curtain (if any) fully opened.  The measurement position shall be
midway between the sides of the window.  Heaters, air conditioners and other
equipment shall be inoperative during the measurement period.  Tests shall
be conducted in rooms with carpets and furnishings.



   (B)   Exterior sound level.  The exterior sound level shall be
measured at location away from the building (at least ten feet from any sound
reflecting surface).  The location should be in a direction from the
building nearest to the aircraft noise source(s).  The microphone shall be
positioned five feet above the ground.



   (C)   Analysis of data.  The interior and exterior sound level
shall be recorded for each aircraft noise event.  The difference in level
between the exterior and interior sound level shall also be recorded on the
data sheet submitted to the building official.  At least 100 events shall be
measured.  The events should be reasonably representative of the various
aircraft types which operate at the MCAS and airport.  The energy averaged
value of the difference in level measured shall be calculated and reported as
the noise level reduction (NLR).



   (D)   Documentation.  The report of, findings shall include the
following:



      (1)   Hard copy of instrument printouts of all measurements.



      (2)   Tabulation of the single event sound levels, sound level
differences and calculation of energy averaged value of the sound level
differences.



      (3)   Evidence of calibration of equipment before and after
test.



      (4)   A certification that the measurements are true and
accurate.



('80 Code, § 7-50)  (Ord. 1857, passed 7-18-79)



Contractor's Deposit Account



§ 150-155  Purpose.



   Authorization of the establishment and maintenance of a “contractor's
deposit account” in the interest of good service and savings of fuel will
permit certain contractors to purchase permits by use of a telephone.



('80 Code, § 7-91)  (Ord. 1938, passed 6-18-80)



§ 150-156  Scope.



   The contractor's deposit account is authorized for use by electrical,
mechanical and plumbing contractors who maintain a balance of money credited
in their accounts in excess of the amount of the permit.



('80 Code, § 7-92)  (Ord. 1938, passed 6-18-80)



§ 150-157  How Account Operates.



   (A)   Minimum deposit.  A contractor, at his option, may open a
contractor's deposit account.  If accepted for an account, the contractor
will deposit with the Division of Building Safety the minimum sum of $100
which will be credited to his account.



   (B)   Securing a permit.  To secure a permit, the contractor may
either call the Building Safety Division, or come into the division and
provide such information as is required (e.g., size of service, number of
branch circuits, traps, remote units, and the like) on which permit charges
are based.



   (C)   Verification of funds.  At the time, the permit clerk will
check the account ledger to ensure that the funds are available and will
provide the caller with a permit number and costs.  The clerk will also
advise the contractor when the account is getting low, based upon a usage
factor.



   (D)   Fine for insufficient funds.  There will be a $10 fine
assessed for all insufficient fund checks.  This assessment, along with the
amount of the insufficient funds, will be paid in cash to the Division of
Building Safety.



('80 Code, § 7-93)  (Ord. 1938, passed 6-18-80)



§ 150-158  Deposit of Monies.



   (A)   Permits will not be issued unless there is sufficient deposit
on hand to cover the requested issuance of permits.  This deposit may be by
mail or made in person.  Penalty fees, such as reinspection fees, shall not
be charged against this account.



   (B)   The monies received as deposit on the contractor's account
shall be sent daily to the Customer Service Division.



   (C)   The ledger of accounts shall be closed and balanced as of the
last working day of each month.  Before the 15th day of the following month,
a carbon (pink) copy of all permits debited against an account shall be
forwarded to the contractor.



('80 Code, § 7-94)  (Ord. 1938, passed 6-18-80)



Building Conservation



§ 150-170  Adoption of the 2018 International Existing Building Code.



   (A)   That certain documents, three copies of which are on file as
public record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being
marked and titled as the 2018 International Existing Building Code, which was
made public record by Resolution R2018-031, including Appendix A, of said
Existing Building Code, as amended herein, are hereby adopted by reference
and made a part hereof as if fully set out in the entirety herein.



   (B)   Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8
(A.R.S. § 41-1492 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
out in the entirety in this section.



('80 Code, § 7-116)  (Ord. 2547, passed 12-18-91; Ord. O2003-50, passed
10-15-03; Ord. O2013-12, passed 4-3-13; Ord. O-2013-49, passed 9-18-13; Ord.
O2018-052, passed 12-5-18)



Charter reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see Charter Art. VII, § 6(g)(6)



Statutory reference:



   Adoption of technical codes, see A.R.S. §§ 9-801 et seq.



§ 150-171  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2018 International Existing Building Code, as adopted by this subchapter.
Paragraph, section numbers refer to the International Existing Building Code,
2018 edition numbering system. Code references not amended in this section
shall be enforced as published in the reference document.



   (A)   Section [A] 101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These regulations
shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Yuma, hereinafter
referred to as 'this code.'"



   (B)   Section [A] 103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Amend to
read, "The Department of Community Development, Building Safety Division is
hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the
building official.'"



   (C)   "Section [A] 103.1.1. Amend all sections of this code to
substitute 'building official' for the term 'code official. '"



   (D)   Section [A] 105.2 Work exempt from permit. Add new item #7,
under "Building:"



      7.   "Window replacements of like size where framing is not
altered and any required emergency egress dimensions are not diminished from
existing, in Group R-3 one- and two-family dwellings and installed by either
a licensed contractor or owner-occupant of the residence."



   (E)   Section [A] 105.3.2 Time limitation of application. Amend
first sentence to read, "An application for a permit for any proposed work
shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing,
unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been
issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 180 days each."



   (F)   Section [A] 106.2.2 Fire protection system(s) shop drawings.
Amend to read, "Plan submittal documents shall include either a statement of
the design criteria for the fire protection system(s) to also include a
current fire flow test within the past 12 months or the complete design,
plans, calculations and data for the fire protection system(s). If only the
design criteria is initially submitted, the complete design, plans,
calculations and data for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to
indicate conformance to this code and the construction documents and shall be
approved prior to the start of system installation. In addition, where
applicable, shop drawings, calculations and data shall be submitted and shall
contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards
in Chapter 9 of the International Building Code."



   (G)   Section [A] 108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Amend by adding
Building Permit Fee Table 1-A:



TABLE 1-A: BUILDING PERMIT FEES



 


Schedule of  Building Permit Fees




Total Valuation

 

Fee






$1 to $500

 

$50.00




$501 to $2,000

 

$50.00 for the first $500 plus $4 for each additional $100, or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000




$2,001 to $25,000

 

$110.00 for the first $2,000 plus $16 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000




$25,001 to $50,000

 

$478.00 for the first $25,000 plus $12 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000




$50,001 to $100,000

 

$780.00 for the first $50,000 plus $8 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000




$100,001 to $500,000

 

$1,180.00 for the first $100,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000




$500,001 to $1,000,000

 

$3,580.00 for the first $500,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000




$1,000,001 and up

 

$6,580.00 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof




Other Inspections and Fees:



1.  Permit fees for mechanical, plumbing and electrical shall be as
indicated per applicable fee tables of the respective ordinances.



2.  Inspections outside of normal business hours, $50 per hour* (minimum
charge - 2 hours)



3.  Reinspection fees of $50 per hour*, for work not ready for inspection.



4.  Inspections on weekends and holidays, $100 per hour* (minimum charge - 2
hours).



5.  Inspection fees for which no fee is specifically indicated, $50 per
hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



6.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans, $50 per hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



7.  For use of outside consultant. For plan checking and inspections, or
both Actual Costs**




*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly wages and fringe benefits of
the employee involved.



**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.





 



   (H)   "Section [A] 108.2.1 Plan review fees. When submittal
documents are required by Section [A] 106.1, a plan review fee shall be paid
at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan
review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown in Table
1-A.



The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in Section [A] 108.2 and are in addition to the permit
fees.



When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the
rate shown in Table 1-A."



   (I)   Section [A] 108.6 Refunds."The building official shall
authorize the refunding of fees as follows:



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.



The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment."



   (J)   Section [A] 108.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Add
to end of section, "An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued.
The investigation fee shall be determined by the building official, based on
the circumstances, nature, and severity of the infraction. The minimum
investigation fee shall be $50.00 and the maximum shall be an amount up to
the same as the fee set forth in Table 1-A."



   (K)   Section [A] 109.3.5 Lath or gypsum board inspection. Delete
exception to section.



   (L)   Section [A] 112.1 General. Add to end of section, "The
membership of the Residential Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section
150-175 of the Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals for Residential
appeals (one- and two-family dwellings). The membership of the Building
Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-008 of the Yuma City Code, will
be the Board of Appeals for Commercial appeals."



   (M)   Section [A] 112.3 Qualifications. Delete section in its
entirety.



   (N)   Section [A] 113.4 Violation penalties. Amend to read, "Any
person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who repairs or alters or changes the occupancy of
a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents
or directive of the building official or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provision of this code, shall be subject to the penalty and fine
described in this ordinance."



   (O)   Section [A] 114.3 Unlawful continuance. Amend to read, "Any
person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalty and fine
described in this ordinance."



   (P)   Section 302.3 Additional codes. Amend "International Fire
Code" in first sentence to "current adopted fire code". Add to end of
section. "Substitute 'current adopted fire code' throughout this code for the
term 'International Fire Code'."



   (Q)   SECTION 305 ACCESSIBILITY FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS. Delete
section and subsections in its entirety and add new section to read, "SECTION
305 ACCESSIBILITY FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS.



Create new section "305.1 Scope. Accessibility provisions for maintenance,
change of occupancy, additions and alterations to existing buildings and
facilities, including those identified as historic buildings, shall comply
with Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8, Public
Accommodations and Services, The Arizonans with Disabilities Act, R10-3-401
through R10-3-404, which includes - 28 CFR 35 and 28 CFR 36 and Americans
with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities
(ADAAG), unless it is technically infeasible. Where compliance with this
section is technically infeasible, the alteration shall provide access to the
maximum extent that it is technically feasible."



   (R)   Section [BS] 401.3 Flood hazard areas.  Delete section it its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (S)   Section [BS] 502.3 Flood hazard areas. Delete section it its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (T)   Section [BS] 503.2 Flood hazard areas. Delete section it its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (U)   Section [BS] 701.3 Flood hazard areas. Delete section in its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (V)   Section 805.4.4 Panic Hardware. Amend first sentence to read,
"In any work area, and in the egress path from any work area to the exit
discharge, in buildings or portions thereof of Group A assembly occupancies
and Group E educational occupancies with an occupant load greater than 50,
all required exit doors equipped with latching devices shall be equipped with
approved panic hardware."



   (W)   Section [B] 1201.4 Flood hazard areas. Delete section it its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (X)   Section [BS] 1301.3.3 Compliance with flood hazard provisions.
Delete section in its entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



('80 Code, § 7-117)  (Ord. 2547, passed 12-18-91; Ord. O2003-50, passed
10-15-03; Ord. O2013-12, passed 4-3-13; Ord. O2018-052, passed 12-5-18)



Residential Advisory Board



§ 150-175  Residential Advisory Board.



   (A)   There is hereby established a Residential Advisory Board for
the purpose of advising the building official in matters pertaining to the
development and enforcement of the One and Two Family residential
construction codes. Duties of the Residential Advisory Board shall be as set
forth as prescribed in this section.  The Board shall consist of nine
members to be appointed by the Mayor and City Council.  The Fire Chief, or
designee, shall be non-voting member.  The Director of Community Development
or designee shall be a non-voting member and shall serve as secretary to said
Board.



      (1)   Members shall serve a term of five years, except that
three of the initial members shall be designated upon appointments to serve a
first term of two years, three shall be designated to serve a first term of
four years, and three shall be appointed to regular terms of five years. 
Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will expire on December 31 of the term
expiration year.



      (2)   Upon receiving notice of a vacancy on the Board, the
Board shall solicit input for replacement members, for a period of 30 days,
from professional, trade, industry, associations and groups to serve on the
Board. The Board will provide the list of nominees to the Mayor and City
Council for their consideration and appointment.



      (3)   Members shall serve without compensation; however, the
Council may allow such expenditures as are necessary for the performance of
their duties.



      (4)   Appointed members shall meet these qualifications:



         (a)   All must meet the requirements of Article IX of
the Charter of the City of Yuma;



         (b)   At least four shall be licensed Arizona General
Contractors;



         (c)   At least one shall be a licensed Arizona Plumbing
Contractor;



         (d)   At least one shall be a licensed Arizona
Electrical Contractor;



         (e)   At least one shall be a licensed Arizona
Mechanical Contractor;



         (f)   At least one shall be an Arizona registered
engineer or architect;



         (g)   At least one member shall be a citizen at large
who shall be indirectly associated with the construction industry, such as an
insurance agent, realtor, or appraiser.



         (h)   Should no professionals be available for
appointment that meet the criteria listed herein, the City Council may select
a person whose background approximates the knowledge and expertise being
sought.



      (5)   Any member whose term expires shall be eligible for
reappointrnent to another five-year term.



      (6)   Members of the Board may be removed by the Council for
inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office, after a public
hearing. A member missing three consecutively scheduled meetings without just
cause shall be grounds for replacement by the City Council.



      (7)   lf a vacancy on the Board occurs other than by an
expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term.
Such appointment shall be made by the Council.



      (8)   The Board, each January, shall elect a chairman and vice
chairman from among the appointive members. The Board shall adopt such rules
and regulations as it sees fit for the proper and efficient discharge of
their official duties.  The Board, may, in such rules and regulations,
delegate certain responsibilities tasks to be performed by a sub-board or
sub-boards of the Residential Advisory and Appeals Board.



      (9)   Five members of the Residential Advisory Board shall
constitute a quorum for transacting business.



      (10)    A majority vote of those Residential Advisory Board
members present and voting shall be required to take official action
including, but not limited to, the adopting of policy, deciding of appeals,
or submitting recommendations. No member shall be excused from voting except
on matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct. In all
other cases a failure to vote shall be entered in the minutes as an
affirmative vote.



   (B)   Duties of the Residential Advisory Board.  The Board shall be
responsible for:



      (1)   Recommending to Council desirable residential
construction code standards, and amendments thereto;



      (2)   Soliciting or receiving input from members of the design
and construction industry, and the general public, concerning residential
construction code issues, concerns, or trends, and providing appropriate
direction to the Director of Community Development, as required;



      (3)   Recommending residential construction code-related
education and training programs, activities, or events for members of the
design and construction industry, and providing appropriate direction to the
Director of Community Development for the purposes of implementation;



      (4)   Serve as an appeals board for the purpose of hearing and
deciding appeals of orders decisions, or determinations made by the Community
Development Department staff relative to the application and interpretation
of the residential construction codes.



   (C)   Sec. 107.  That Section 107 be amended tor read as follows:



   Right of Appeal: That the section heading "Right of Appeal" be amended
to read "Residential Advisory Board."  Whenever reference is made to the
Board of Appeals it shall be construed to mean the Residential Advisory Board
as defined herein.



   (D)   Sec. 107.1.  That Section 107.1 be amended to read as follows:



   Appeals Procedure.  The Residential Advisory Board shall also serve as
the board of appeals in deciding appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the Community Development Department staff relative to
the application and interpretation of the One and Two Family Dwelling
residential construction codes.  Any person may appeal the interpretation of
the residential construction codes in accordance with the following:



   (1)   The appeal shall be in writing to the Director of Community
Development upon such forms as provided by the Director.  The appeal shall
set forth the code section in dispute and an explanation of the reasons upon
which the person filing the appeal believes the Community Development
Department staff has incorrectly interpreted the code.



   (2)   The Director shall promptly review the appeal and prepare a
written report and recommendation, which shall be provided to the Appeals
Board.



   (3)   The Director shall, at least 48 hours prior to the meeting,
notify each member of the Board.



   (4)   The Appeals Board, upon receipt of the appeal from the
Director, shall conduct a hearing to review the appeal and the staff
report.  The Board shall receive testimony concerning the appeal from city
staff, the person filing the appeal, and from the public.



   (5)   Following the hearing, the Appeals Board shall vote to reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement or decision of
the Community Development Department staff, and make such order, requirement
or determination as necessary, with or without conditions or alterations.



   (6)   The Residential Advisory Board's decision shall be deemed
final unless overturned by a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   Sec. 107.2.  That Section 107.2 be amended to read as follows:



   Limitations of Authority: The Residential Advisory Board shall have no
authority relative to the interpretation of the adopted administrative
provisions of the One and Two Family Dwelling Residential Code nor shall the
board be empowered to waive requirements of this code.



(Ord. O2000-68, passed 9-20-00; Ord. O2004-35, passed 6-16-04; Ord. O2010-66,
passed 1-5-11)



Residential Construction Code



§ 150-180  Adoption of the 2018 International Residential Code for One- and
Two-Family Dwellings.



   That certain documents, three copies of which are on file as public
record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being marked and
titled as the 2018 International Residential Code for One-and Two-Family
Dwellings, which was made public record by Resolution R2018-030, including
Appendices G, H, J, K, O, P, Q and S of said Residential Code, as amended
herein, are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if fully
set out in the entirety herein.



(Ord. O2001-74, passed 9-19-01; Ord. O2002-11, passed 3-20-02; Ord. O2005-49,
passed 7-20-05; Ord. O2013-11, passed 4-3-13; Ord. O2018-051, passed 12-5-18)



§ 150-181  Amendments.



   The following amendments, additions, and deletions are hereby made to
the 2018 International Residential Code for One-and Two-Family Dwellings, as
adopted by this subchapter. Paragraph, section numbers refer to the 2018
International Residential Code for One-and Two-Family Dwellings numbering
system. Code references not amended in this section shall be enforced as
published in the reference document.



   (A)   Section R101.1 Title. Amend to read, "These provisions shall
be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the
City of Yuma, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as
'this code.'"



   (B)   Section R101.2 Scope. Add to end of Exception: "Subject to
preemption by Arizona Revised Statutes, Title 9, Chapter 7, Article 1,
Section 807, Mandated Sprinklers in Certain Residences Prohibited."



   (C)   Section R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. Add to end of
section. "Where reference in this code is made to the International Fire
Code, it shall be taken to mean the current adopted fire code."



   (D)   Section R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. Amend to read,
"The Department of Community Development, Building Safety Division, is hereby
created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building
official."



   (E)   Section R104.10.1 Flood hazard areas. Delete section in its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (F)   Section R105.1 Required. Add to end of section, "In addition,
Park Models, as defined in Chapter 2 of the Code, require a building permit
for placement. Electrical connections that are hard-wired to the unit require
a separate permit. Mechanical equipment that is external to the unit requires
a separate permit. Tie-down anchors are required for park model installations
as specified in Chapter 4."



   (G)   Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Add new items #11 and
#12, under "Building":



      11.   "Window replacements of like size where framing is not
altered and any required emergency egress dimensions are not diminished from
existing.



      12.   Replacement of an existing electric water heater in the
same location.



Items #11 and #12 apply only to work performed by a licensed contractor or
the owner/occupant of the premises."



   (H)   "Section R105.10 Toilet facilities on construction sites.
Toilet facilities shall be provided for construction workers and such
facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. Construction worker
toilets of the non-sewer type shall conform to ANSI Z4.3.



Toilet facilities shall be required at a ratio of at least one toilet for a
maximum of 15 lots under construction."



   (I)   "Section R105.11 Construction Debris.  "Construction sites
shall be kept reasonably clean of construction debris during the course of
construction. Construction debris shall be removed or retained on the lot and
not at risk to be displaced from the lot by wind. Debris shall not be allowed
to transfer to adjacent lots or City rights-of- way.



If the Building Official determines that the construction site is not in
compliance with this section or the debris presents a safety hazard for
inspection personnel, inspections shall not be performed until the
construction site is cleaned."



   (J)   Section R106.1.4 Information for construction in flood hazard
areas. Delete item 4 in its entirety.



   (K)   Section R106.4 Amended Construction documents. Add to end of
section, "Changes may be made without resubmittal that are not affecting
code-related items, or when otherwise approved by the building official."



   (L)   Section R108.2 Schedule of permit fees. Amend by adding
Building Permit Fee Table 1-A.



TABLE 1-A: BUILDING PERMIT FEES



 


Schedule of  Building Permit Fees




Total Valuation

 

Fee






$1 to $500

 

$50.00




$501 to $2,000

 

$50.00 for the first $500 plus $4 for each additional $100, or fraction
thereof, to and including $2,000




$2,001 to $25,000

 

$110.00 for the first $2,000 plus $16 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $25,000




$25,001 to $50,000

 

$478.00 for the first $25,000 plus $12 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $50,000




$50,001 to $100,000

 

$780.00 for the first $50,000 plus $8 for each additional $1,000, or fraction
thereof, to and including $100,000




$100,001 to $500,000

 

$1,180.00 for the first $100,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $500,000




$500,001 to $1,000,000

 

$3,580.00 for the first $500,000 plus $6 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof, to and including $1,000,000




$1,000,001 and up

 

$6,580.00 for the first $1,000,000 plus $4 for each additional $1,000, or
fraction thereof




Other Inspections and Fees:



1.  Permit fees for mechanical, plumbing and electrical shall be as
indicated per applicable fee tables of the respective ordinances.



2.  Inspections outside of normal business hours, $50 per hour* (minimum
charge - 2 hours)



3.  Reinspection fees of $50 per hour*, for work not ready for inspection.



4.  Inspections for weekends and holidays, $100 per hour* (minimum charge -
2 hours).



5.  Inspection fees for which no fee is specifically indicated, $50 per
hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



6.  Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to
plans, $50 per hour* (minimum charge - one-half hour)



7.  For use of outside consultant. For plan checking and inspections, or
both Actual Costs**




*    Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the
greatest. This shall include supervision, hourly wages and fringe benefits of
the employee involved.



**  Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.





 



   (M)   "Section R108.2.1 Plan review fees. When submittal documents
are required by Section R106.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time
of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee
shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown in Table 1 -A.



The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the
permit fees specified in Section R 108.2 and are in addition to the permit
fees.



When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require
additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the
rate shown in Table 1-A."



   (N)   Section R108.5 Refunds. Amend to read, "The building official
shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:



      1.   The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was
erroneously paid or collected.



      2.   Not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no
work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.



      3.   Not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when
an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been expended.



The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid
except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later
than 180 days after the date of fee payment."



   (O)   Section R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance.  Add
to end of section, "An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee,
shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued.
The investigation fee shall be determined by the building official, based on
the circumstances, nature, and severity of the infraction. The minimum
investigation fee shall be $50.00 and the maximum shall be an amount up to
the same as the fee set forth in Table 1 -A."



   (P)   Section R109.4 Approval required. Add to end of section,
"Inspection comments shall include code section references, when requested."



   (Q)   Section R110.3 Certificate issued. Amend to read, "After the
building official inspects the building or structure and does not find
violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by
the jurisdiction, the building official may issue a certificate of occupancy
upon request, which shall contain the following:



      1.   The building permit number.



      2.   The address of the structure.



      3.   The name and address of the owner or the owner's
authorized agent.



      4.   A description of that portion of the structure for which
the certificate is issued.



      5.   A statement that the described portion of the structure
has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code.



      6.   The name of the building official.



      7.   The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.



      8.   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided and whether
the sprinkler system is required.



      9.   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building
permit"



   (R)   Section R112.1 General. Add to end of section, "The membership
of the Residential Advisory Board, as prescribed in Section 150-175 of the
Yuma City Code, will be the Board of Appeals."



   (S)   Section R112.3 Qualifications. Delete section in its entirety.



   (T)   Section R113.4 Violation penalties. Amend to read, "Any person
who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building
or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive
of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to the penalty and fine described
in this ordinance."



   (U)   Section R114.2 Unlawful continuance."Any person who shall
continue any work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to the penalty and
fine described in this ordinance."



   (V)    CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS.  "Park Model. Any factory assembled
portable unit, to which is affixed an Arizona recreational vehicle seal,
mounted on a chassis and wheels, not more than 12 feet in width and no
greater than 400 square feet nor less than 320 square feet in total area, and
permanently connected to utilities that are necessary for the operation of
the installed park model with no holding tank."



   (W)   TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA.



Amend table to add values applicable to this jurisdiction:



TABLE R301.2(1)



CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA



 


Ground Snow Load

 

Wind Design

 

Seismic Design Categoryf

 

Subject to Damage From

 

Winter Design Tempe

 

Ice Barrier Underlayment Requiredh

 

Flood Hazardsg

 

Air Freezing Indexi

 

Mean Annual Tempj




Speedd (mph )

 

Topographic effectsk

 

Weatheringa

 

Frost-
line depthb

 

Termitec




0

 

115

 

No

 

Do

 

Negligible

 

12"

 

Moderate  to Heavy

 

39

 

No

 

1980, 1987, 2004, 2006

 

0

 

73.9




 



 


Manual J Design Criteria



Elevation
 
Latitude
 
Winter Heating
 
Summer Cooling
 
Altitude Correction Factor
 
Indoor Design Temp
 
Design Temp Cooling
 
Heating Temp Diff
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


207
 
33
 
45
 
109
 
0.9925
 
72
 
75
 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Cooling Temp Diff
 
Wind Velocity Heating
 
Wind Velocity Cooling
 
Coincident Wet Bulb
 
Daily Range
 
Winter Humidity
 
Summer Humidity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


23.7
 
21
 
7.7
 
73
 
M
 
9.2
 
127. 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 



   (X)   Table R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA. Add
to end of footnote f. "All locations in City of Yuma shall be classified as
Seismic Design Category Do."



   (Y)   Section R301.2.2.6 Irregular buildings. Add exception to Item
6. Perpendicular shear wall and wall bracing. "Exception: Angled walls, per
provisions of Section R602.10.1.4."



   (Z)   Section R302.1 Exterior walls. Add exceptions 6 and 7 to
section:



      6.   "In mobile home parks and other applicable zoning
districts,(such as MHS. MHP. RVS. RV Co-Op) that are existing at time of this
code adoption, dwelling units and their attached accessory structures are
permitted to maintain their prior avproved fire separation distance, subject
to compliance with other City codes, but in no case shall the fire separation
distance be less than 3 feet (914 mm), with unlimited unprotected openings,
and no projections allowed.



      7.   For existing dwellings and other structures having legal,
nonconforming setbacks at time of this code adoption, where approved by the
zoning administrator and the building official, additions are permitted to
comply with the existing nonconforming setbacks, provided the minimum fire
separation distance is 3 feet (914 mm), with unlimited unprotected openings,
and no projections allowed."



   (AA)   Section R304.1 Minimum area. Add to end of section. "Every
dwelling unit shall have at least one habitable room that shall have not less
than 120 square feet (11 m2) of gross floor area."



   (BB)   Create new section. "Section R304.4 Access from bedrooms.
Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or
habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other
habitable spaces."



Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.



   (CC)   Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire
systems. Delete section in its entirety. (Preemption by ARS § 9-807).



   (DD)   Section R313.2.1 Design and installation. Clarification: This
section is to remain.



   (EE)   Section R317.3.1 Fasteners for preservative-treated wood. Add
fourth exception to section:



      4.   "Fasteners for preservative-treated wood in areas not
normally subjected to high moisture."



   (FF)   Section R318.1 Subterranean termite control methods. Add to
end of section, "Method 3 or 4 shall be incorporated per Section R317.1,
regardless of other methods or combination of methods utilized."



   (GG)   SECTION R322 FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION. Delete section in
its entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (HH)   Section R324.2 Solar thermal systems. Amend to read, "Solar
thermal systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with Chapter 23
and the current adopted fire code."



   (II)   Section R401.2 Requirements. Add to end of section,
"Engineered fill building pads shall be placed in 12-inch lifts, compacted to
not less than 95% Maximum Density, per ASTM D698 or D1557. The building pads
shall extend a minimum of 3-feet beyond the footprint of the building at an
elevation level not less than 10-inches below the finished floor.



Park Model installations shall be provided with tie-downs using approved
manufactured housing tie-down anchors. As a minimum, tie-down anchors shall
be installed at each corner of the unit and intermediately spaced at maximum
12 feet (3658 mm) on-center."



   (JJ)   Section R401.2 Requirements. Add exception to section:



      "Exception: Fills depths 12-inches or less may not require
testing subject to determination by the building official."



   (KK)   Section R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design
Categories D0, D1 and D2. Amend third sentence to read, "Required interior
braced wall panels at buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1
and D2 shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or
concrete footings in accordance with Section R403.1.3.4 at intervals not
exceeding 60 feet (18288 mm) in both directions."



   (LL)   Section R403.1.3 Footing and stem wall reinforcing in Seismic
Design Categories D0, D1 and D2. Add to end of section, "The reinforcing
steel requirements of this section and subsections shall also be applicable
in Seismic Design Category C for unincorporated areas in Yuma County."



   (MM)   Section R403.1.3.4 Interior bearing and braced wall panel
footings in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2.  Amend to read, "In
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, interior footings supporting bearing
walls or braced wall panels with a foundation, and cast monolithicallv with a
slab on grade, shall extend to a depth not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below
the top of the slab."



   (NN)   Section R403.1.4 Minimum depth. Amend first sentence to read,
"All exterior footings shall be placed at least 12 inches (305 mm) below the
undisturbed ground surface, or 12 inches (305 mm) into engineered pad."



   (OO)   Section R403.1.6.1 Foundation anchorage in Seismic Design
Categories C, D0, D1 and D2. Add item 7 to section:



      7.   "Interior braced wall panels when not supported by a
continuous foundation shall be attached to the concrete slab on ground using
½ inch (12.7 mm) diameter anchor or expansion bolts spaced at not more than
6 feet (1829 mm) on center, or an equivalent method such as approved
pneumatic anchor pins as per manufacturer requirements. Cut nails or
adhesives shall not be permitted."



   (PP)   Section R408.7 Flood Resistance. Delete section in its
entirety in favor of adopted City floodplain ordinances.



   (QQ)   Section R506.1 General. Add to end of section, "Control
joints in unreinforced concrete slab-on-ground floors shall be provided at
maximum 12 feet (3658 mm) on center in both directions."



   (RR)   Section R506.2.3 Vapor retarder. Amend section title to read,
"Section R506.2.3 Vapor retarder (Optional)."



   (SS)   Section R602.10.1.3 Spacing of braced wall lines. Add
exception to section:



      "Exception: As an exception to braced wall line spacing of Table
R602.10.1.3, in detached one- and two-story dwellings, for seismic bracing,
spacing between braced wall lines may be up to 30 feet (9144 mm) x 45 feet
(13716 mm) for one single room and one attached garage, each not exceeding
1,350 square feet (125.42m2) per dwelling unit. When this exception is taken
all the following shall apply:



      1.1   Wall bracing at braced wall lines surrounding the single
room and one attached garage shall be Method WSP of Section R602.10.4.



      1.2   Braced wall panel locations shall be as per Sections
R602.10.2.2 and R602.10.2.2.1, and length of bracing provided as per Sections
R602.10.3 and R602.10.5.



      1.3   The entire length of braced wall lines surrounding the
single room and garage shall be continuously sheathed with wood structural
panel sheathing (WSP).



      1.4   Braced wall panel locations at the single room and
garage shall have a maximum 3 1/2:1 height-width ratio, except for methods
ABW and PFH of Section R602.10.4.



      1.5   Braced wall lines surrounding the single room and garage
shall be supported by continuous foundations around the entire braced wall
lines.



      1.6   Spacing of all other interior braced wall lines shall
not exceed 25 feet."



   (TT)   Section R602.10.2.2.1  Braced wall panel location  in 
Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2. Add exception 3 and 4 to section:



      "3.   Interior braced wall panels shall begin within 10 feet
(3810 mm) from each end of a braced wall line as determined in Section
R602.10.1.1.



      4.   For braced wall panel construction Method WSP of Section
R602.10.4, the braced wall panel shall be permitted to begin no more than
12.5 feet (3810 mm) from each end of the braced wall line, where a designed
collector is provided. See sketches SK1, SK2, and SK3 for designed collectors
and applicable conditions."



   (UU)   Section R602.10.7 Ends of braced wall lines with continuous
sheathing. Add exception to section:



      "Exception: The first braced wall panel shall be permitted to
begin 12.5 feet (3810 mm) from each end of the braced wall line in Seismic
Design Category D0,where a designed collector is provided. See sketches SK1,
SK2, and SK3 for designed collectors and applicable conditions."



   (VV)   Section R602.10.8 Braced wall panel connections. Add to end
of section, "This section also applies for connections of interior braced
wall panels to roof trusses and rafters."



   (WW)   TABLE R702.3.5 MINIMUM THICKNESS AND APPLICATION OF GYPSUM
BOARD AND GYPSUM PANEL PRODUCTS. Amend last sentence of footnote "d" of table
to read, "Where applying a water-based texture material, the minimum gypsum
board thickness shall be increased from 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch for 16-inch on
center framing."



   (XX)   Section N1101.16 (R401.3) Certificate (Mandatory). Amend
section title to read, "N1101.14 (R401.3) Certificate (Optional)."



   (YY)   Section N1102.3 (R402.3) Fenestration (Prescriptive). Add
exception to section:



      "Exception: Standard insulated garage doors shall be permitted at
conditioned garages and are not subject to the fenestration air leakage
requirements of Section N1102.4.3. For use of this exception the garage
conditioning shall be a dedicated mechanical system. Register/diffuser
openings at the garage ceiling shall include ceiling radiation dampers or
ducts shall be constructed of minimum No. 26 gage (0.48 mm) sheet steel."



   (ZZ)   Section N1102.4 (R402.4) Air Leakage (Mandatory). Add to end
of section, "Building envelope air tightness and insulation installation
shall be demonstrated to comply with one of the following options given by
Section N1102.4.1.2 or N1102.4.1.3."



   (AAA)   Section N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing. Amend section
title to read, "N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing option."



   (BBB)   "Section N1102.4.1.3 Visual inspection option. The
components listed in Table N1102.4.1.1, applicable to the method of
construction, are field verified. Where required by the building official, an
approved party independent from the installer of the insulation, shall
inspect the air barrier and insulation."



   (CCC)   Table N1102.4.1.1 (R402.4.1.1) AIR BARRIER AND INSULATION
INSTALLATION. Amend as follows:



      a.   "COMPONENT, 'Shower/tub on exterior wall.' Delete in its
entirety.



      b.   COMPONENT, 'Electrical/phone box on exterior walls.'
Delete in its entirety.



   (DDD)   Section N1103.5 (R403.5) Service hot water systems. Amend
section title to read, "Service hot water systems (Optional)."



   (EEE)   Section N1103.5.1 (R403.5.1) Heated water circulation and
temperature maintenance systems (Mandatory). Amend section title to read,
"Heated water circulation and temperature maintenance systems (Optional)."



   (FFF)   Section N1103.6 (R403.6) Mechanical Ventilation. Amend to
section title to read, "Section N1103.6 (R403.6) Mechanical ventilation
(Optional)."



   (GGG)   Section N1103.10.3 (R403.10.3) Covers. Amend section title
to read, "Section N1103.10.3 (R403.10.3) Covers (Optional)."



   (HHH)   Section N1103.12 (R403.12) Residential pools and permanent
residential spas. Delete section in its entirety.



   (III)   Section N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment (Mandatory).
Amend section title to read, "Section N1104.1 (R404.1) Lighting equipment
(Optional)."



   (JJJ)   Section M1602.2 Return Air Openings. Amend Exception 5 to
read:



      "5. For other than dedicated HVAC systems, return air shall not
be taken from indoor swimming pool enclosures and associated deck areas."



   (KKK)   Section G2406.2 (303.3) Prohibited locations. Delete items 3
and 4 in their entirety.



   (LLL)   Section G2407.5 (304.5) Indoor combustion air. Add to
beginning of section, "Indoor combustion air shall not be used in new
construction within the building envelope. Garages of minimum 400 square feet
in area may use combination of infiltration and partial exterior combustion
air for one standard water heater fuel gas appliance up to 50,000 Btu/h total
input capacity."



   (MMM)   Section G2407.7 (304.7) Combination indoor and outdoor
combustion air.  Add to beginning of section, "Combination indoor and
outdoor combustion air shall not be used in new construction within the
building envelope. Garages of minimum 400 square feet in area may use
combination of infiltration and partial exterior combustion air for one
standard water heater fuel gas appliance up to 50,000 Btu/h total input
capacity."



   (NNN)   Section G2413.2 (402.2) Maximum gas demand. Add to end of
section. "Where an input rating is not indicated, the gas supplier, appliance
manufacturer or a qualified agency shall be contacted, or the rating from
Table G2413.2 may be used for estimating the volumetric flow of gas to be
supplied.



 


TABLE G2413.2 (R402.2)



APPROXIMATE GAS INPUT FOR TYPICAL APPLIANCES




Appliance

 

Input BTU/M (Approx. )



Space Heating Units

Hydronic boiler

   Single family

   Multifamily, per unit

Warm-air furnace

   Single family

   Multifamily, per unit
 
 

100,000

60,000

100,000

60,000


Space and Water Heating Units

Hydronic boiler

   Single family

   Multifamily, per unit
 
 

120,000

60,000


Water Heating Appliances

Water heater, automatic instantaneous

   Capacity at 2 gal/minute

   Capacity at 4 gal/minute

   Capacity at 6 gal/minute

Water heater, automatic storage, 30 to 40 gal tank

Water heater, automatic storage, 50 gal tank

Water heater, domestic circulating or side-arm
 
 

142,000

285,000

428,400

35,000

50,000

35,000


Cooking Appliances

Built-in oven or broiler unit, domestic

Built-in top unit, domestic

Range, free standing, domestic
 
 

25,000

40,000

65,000


Other Appliances

Barbecue

Clothes dryer, Type 1 (domestic)

Gas fireplace, direct- vent

Gas light

Gas log

Refrigerator
 
 

40,000

35,000

40,000

2,500

80,000

3,000



 



   (OOO)   Section G2414.5.3 (403.5.3) Copper or copper-alloy tubing. 
Add to end of section, "Copper or copper-alloy tubing shall not be used in
natural gas piping systems, due to hydrogen sulfide content which cannot be
guaranteed to be delivered from the serving utility provider to meet the code
acceptable levels."



   (PPP)   Section G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Amend to
read, "Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 12
inches (305 mm) below grade."



   (QQQ)   Section G2415.12.1 (404.12.1) Individual outdoor appliances.
Delete section in its entirety.



   (RRR)   Section G2415.17.1 (404.17.1) Limitations.  Amend exception
3 to read:



      "3.   Plastic pipe shall be permitted under uncovered outdoor
patio, walkway and driveway slabs provided that the burial depth complies
with Section G2415.12."



   (SSS)   TABLE G2427.10.2.4 (503.10.2.4) MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR
GALVANIZED STEEL VENT CONNECTORS FOR LOW-HEAT APPLIANCES.



      Thickness      Gauge



      "0.019 inch      28 Ga.



       0.023 inch      26 Ga.



       0.029 inch      24 Ga.



       0.034 inch      22 Ga.



       0.056 inch      18 Ga."



   (TTT)   Section G2445.4 (621.4) Prohibited Locations. Add to end of
section, "Unvented room heaters shall not be installed in bedrooms or
bathrooms."



   (UUU)   Section P2503.4 Building sewer testing. Delete section in
its entirety.



   (VVV)   Section P2503.5.2 Finished plumbing. Delete item 2 in its
entirety.



   (WWW)   Section P2603.5.1 Sewer depth."Building sewers that connect
to private sewage disposal systems shall be at not less than 12 inches (305
mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building
sewers shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below grade."



   (XXX)   Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge pipe. Amend
Item #5 to read:



      "5. Discharge to the floor of the garage (where the garage floor
is sloped and below the floor level of the dwelling), to a waste receptor or
to the outdoors."



   (YYY)   Section P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. Rename
section/title to read "Section P2902.5.3 Landscape irrigation systems." Add
to beginning of section. "A landscape irrigation system shall be provided for
all new dwellings, consisting of a stub-out, electric valve (or valves) and
backflow protection."



   (ZZZ)   Section P2904.1 General. Add item #5 to end of section:



      "5. The system is integral with the domestic water piping system.
See Section P2902.5.4 for protection of separate/independent sprinkler piping
systems."



   (AAAA)   Section P2906.5 Water-distribution pipe. Add to end of
section, "Use of copper at inaccessible water piping under slabs shall be
limited to Type K, with no joints."



   (BBBB)   Section E3406.3 Minimum size of conductors. Amend first
sentence to read, "The minimum size of conductors for feeders and branch
circuits shall be 12 AWG copper and 1 AWG aluminum or copper-clad aluminum
for current carrying conductors (shall not apply for grounding conductor)."



   (CCCC)   Section E3601.1 Scope. Add to end of section, "Local
utility company installation regulations may exceed/supersede installation
requirements of this chapter."



   (DDDD)   Section E3604.2.2 Vertical clearance from grade. In item 1,
amend 10 feet (3048 mm) to 12 feet 6 inches (3810 mm). In item 2, amend 12
feet (3658 mm) to 12 feet 6 inches (3810 mm).



   (EEEE)   Section E3607.3.2 Grounded conductor, existing premises.
Add exception to section:



      "Exception: If the Load Center or Panel Board does not have
provisions for a Main Disconnect and an approved fastening method, a
permanent placard shall be installed on the Main Service to indicate the
location of the detached Panel on the property. The over current protective
device shall also have a lock-out device installed."



   (FFFF)      TABLE E3702.14 (Table 210.24) BRANCH-CIRCUIT
REQUIREMENTS-SUMMARY.  Amend table to delete 14 AWG conductors.



   (GGGG)   Section E3901.12 HVAC outlet.  Amend exception to read:



      "Exception: A receptacle outlet shall not be required for the
servicing of evaporative coolers or rooftop HVAC equipment."



   (HHHH)   Section E3902.2 Garage and accessory building
receptacles.  Add exception to section:



      "Exception:  GFCI protection shall not be required for single
receptacle outlets dedicated for a specific use (such as a freezer) and
single receptacle outlets for garage door openers."



(Ord. O2001-74, passed 9-19-01; Ord. O2005-49, passed 7-20-05; Ord. O2007-22,
passed 4-18-07; Ord. O2007-30, passed 5-16-07; Ord. O2013-11, passed 4-3-13;
Ord. O2013-54, passed 10-16-13; Ord. O2018-051, passed 12-5-18)



§ 150-182  Conflicts.



   Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code and other
codes of the jurisdiction specify different materials, methods of
construction or other requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.



(Ord. O2001-74, passed 9-19-01)



§ 150-999  Penalty.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation  of, any provision of this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of  this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a class 1  misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000, or by imprisonment for not more than ten days, or by both fine
and imprisonment. Each separate day or part thereof during which any
violation of said sections occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as
herein provided.



('80 Code, § 24-14)  (Ord. 2679, passed 12-21-94; Ord. O2000-68, passed
9-20-00; Ord. O2002-11, passed 3-20-02)



Chapter 151:  Floodplain Management




Section




General Provisions



   151-01   Findings of facts



   151-02   Purpose



   151-03   Methods of reducing flood losses



   151-04   Definitions



   151-05   Lands to which this chapter applies



   151-06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard



   151-07   Compliance



   151-08   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   151-09   Interpretation



   151-10   Disclaimer of liability



   151-11   Statutory exceptions



   151-12   Unlawful acts



   151-13   Declaration of public nuisance statute



   151-14   Abatement of violations



   151-15   Severability



Administration



   151-16   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator



   151-17   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
(FPA)



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



   151-18   Standards for construction



   151-19   Standards for storage of materials and equipment



   151-20   Standards for utilities



   151-21   Additional development standards, including subdivisions



   151-22   Standards for manufactured homes



   151-23   Standards for recreational vehicles



   151-24   Floodways



Variance Procedure



   151-25   Nature of variances



   151-26   Appeal Board



   151-27   Conditions for variances



Requirements for Colorado River Communities



   151-28   Colorado River floodway



   151-29   Colorado River floodway fringe



   151-30   Flood-related erosion-prone areas of the Colorado River



 



   151-99   Penalty



General Provisions



§ 151-01  Findings of Fact.



   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.



   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights
and velocities, and when inadequate anchored, cause damage in other areas. 
Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage, also contribute to the flood loss.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-02  Purpose.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of areas of special flood hazard as to minimize blight areas
caused by flooding;



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
an area of special flood hazard;



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;



   (I)   Maintain eligibility for disaster relief.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-03  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.



   This chapter takes precedence over Ordinances No. 2359 and O2004-45 and
repeals them.  This chapter also takes precedence over any less restrictive
conflicting ordinance. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter
includes methods and provisions to:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-04  Definitions.



   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.



   "A" ZONE.  See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, LOW-COST AND SMALL.  A structure that is:



      (1)   Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or
limited storage (small, low-cost sheds); and



      (2)   Less than 400 square feet in area and $20,000 in value.



   APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's
FIRM with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average
depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.



   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.  Theses areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, and A1-30 on the
FIRM and other areas determined by the criteria adopted by the Director of
the ADWR.  (See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA)



   BASE FLOOD.  A flood, which as a one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD).



   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The elevation shown on the FIRM for Zones
AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V-30 that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from a flood that has a one percent of greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (i.e.,
below ground level) on all sides.



   BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



   CITY.  The City of Yuma, being in Yuma County, State of Arizona.



   COLORADO RIVER BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.  The flood elevation having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or a flow of
40,000 cubic feet per second (cfs), whichever is greater.



   COLORADO RIVER FLOODPLAIN.  The combined area of the Colorado River
Floodway and the Colorado River Floodway Fringe.



   COLORADO RIVER FLOODWAY.  The channel of the Colorado River and that
part of the floodplain that are necessary to safely convey the floodway flow
of either a one in 100 year flow consisting of controlled releases and
tributary inflow, or a flow of 40,000 cubic feet per second (cfs), whichever
is greater.



   COLORADO RIVER FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area subject to inundation by
floods of varying magnitudes, up to and including the floodway flow, but
which is not required for the safe conveyance of the floodway flow and is not
included in the computation of the Colorado River Floodway base flood
elevation.



   COMMUNITY.  Any state, area or political subdivision thereof, or any
Indian tribe or authorized tribal organization, or authorized native
organization, which has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management
regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction.



   DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.



   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain,
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



   EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by running water, wind or
other geological agents. This peril is not, per se, covered under the program.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of flood waters;



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source; and/or



      (3)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.



   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM).  The official map on which
FEMA or the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  The official map on which FEMA or
FIA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  The official report provided by FEMA
that includes flood profiles, FIRMs, FBFMs and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.



   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREAS.  Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.  See FLOOD or FLOODING.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR (FPA).  The community official designated by
title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.



   FLOODPLAIN BOARD (FPB).  The City Council of the City of Yuma, at such
times as they are engaged in the enforcement of this chapter.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  The ordinance and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading  and erosion control) and other
application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. 
This term describes such federal, state or local regulations in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.



   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.



   FLOOD-RELATED EROSION.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the
shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such
as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and
unforeseeable event which results in flooding.



   FLOODWAY.  The area of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height. Also referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.



   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE.  A use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary
for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and
ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.



   GOVERNING BODY.  The local governing unit, i.e. county or
municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide
for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.



   HARDSHIP. As related to §§ 151-25 through 151-27 of this chapter,
meaning the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant
the requested variance. The Yuma City Council requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval
of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional
hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without
granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires
the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.



   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE.  The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic
places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior; or



      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic
places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:



         (a)    By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or



         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in
states without approved programs.



   LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement. See BASEMENT.  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor;
provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or
rent.



   MARKET VALUE. Defined in the substantial damage and substantial
improvement procedures.



   MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of the NFIP, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988,
or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood
insurance rate map are referenced.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purposes of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, NEW CONSTRUCTION means structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.



   OBSTRUCTION.  Including, but not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along,
across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or
change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its
location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of
water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.



   ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. The flood having a one
percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. See BASE FLOOD.



   PERSON.  An individual or the individual's agent, a firm, partnership,
association or corporation, or an agent of the aforementioned groups, or this
state or its agencies or political subdivisions.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:



      (1)   Built on a single chassis;



      (2)   Four hundred  square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projection;



      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light-duty truck; and



      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.



   REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION (RFE).  An elevation one foot above the BFE
for a watercourse for which the BFE has been determined and shall be
determined by the criteria developed by the Director of the ADWR for all
other watercourses.



   REGULATORY FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.



   RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.



   SHEET FLOW AREA. See AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  An area in the floodplain subject
to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on a FBFM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, Al-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not
part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of
the improvement. This term includes structures that have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions; or



      (2)    Any alteration of a historic structure provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.



   VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations.  A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.



   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the NGVD of 1929,
the NAVD of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and
frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.



   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-05  Lands to Which This Chapter Applies.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within
the corporate limits of the City of Yuma.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-06  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.



   The areas of special flood hazard identified by FEMA in a scientific
and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City
of Yuma, Arizona", dated November 15, 1985, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated November 15, 1985, and the area of the Colorado River
mapped by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation and
subject to provisions of Public Law 99-450, Colorado River Floodway Act, and
all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is
the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which
are recommended to the FPB by the FPA. The FPB, within its area of
jurisdiction, shall delineate (or may, by rule, require developers of land to
delineate) for areas where development is ongoing or imminent, and thereafter
as development becomes imminent, floodplains consistent with the criteria
developed by FEMA and the Director of the ADWR. The FIS and FIRM panels are
on file at the City Clerk Office, One City Plaza P.O. Box 13012 Yuma, AZ
85366-3012 or at the City of Yuma Department of Public Works, 155 W. 14th
Street, Yuma, AZ 85364.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-07  Compliance.



   All development of land, construction of residential, commercial or
industrial structures, or future development within delineated floodplain
areas is subject to the terms of this chapter and other applicable
regulations.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151-08  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-09  Interpretation.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-10  Disclaimer of Liability.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.  Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.  Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. 
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer
or employee thereof, the State of Arizona or FEMA, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made hereunder.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-11  Statutory Exceptions.



   (A)   In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3609(H), unless expressly
provided, this and any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter do not
affect:



      (1)   Existing legal uses of property or the right to
continuation of such legal use. However, if a nonconforming use of land or a
building or structure is discontinued for 12 months, or destroyed to the
extent of 50% of its value as determined by a competent appraiser, any
further use shall comply with this chapter and regulations of the Yuma City
Council;



      (2)   Reasonable repair or alteration of property for the
purposes for which the property was legally used on August 3, 1984, or any
regulations affecting such property takes effect, except that any alteration,
addition or repair to a nonconforming building or structure which would
result in increasing its flood damage potential by 50% or more shall be
either flood-proofed or elevated to or above the regulatory flood elevation;



      (3)   Reasonable repair of structures constructed with the
written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613; and



      (4)   Facilities constructed or installed pursuant to a
Certificate of Environmental Compatibility issued pursuant to A.R S. Title
40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2.



   (B)   Before any authorized construction begins for the exceptions
listed below, the responsible person must submit plans for the construction
to the FPB for review and comment. In accordance with A.R.S. § 48-3613,
written authorization shall not be required, nor shall the FPB prohibit:



      (1)   The construction of bridges, culverts, dikes and other
structures necessary to the construction of public highways, roads and
streets intersecting a watercourse;



      (2)   The construction of storage dams for watering livestock
or wildlife, structures on banks of a watercourse to prevent erosion of or
damage to adjoining land if the structure will not divert, retard or obstruct
the natural channel of the watercourse or dams for the conservation of
floodwaters as permitted by A.R.S. Title 45, Chapter 6;



      (3)   Construction of tailing dams and waste disposal areas
for use in connection with mining and metallurgical operations.  This
subsection does not exempt those sand and gravel operations that will divert,
retard or obstruct the flow of waters in any watercourse from complying with
and acquiring authorization from the FPB pursuant to regulations adopted by
the FPB under this chapter;



      (4)   Other construction upon determination by the FPB that
written authorization is unnecessary;



      (5)   Any flood control district, county, city, town or other
political subdivision from exercising powers granted to it under A.R.S. Title
48, Chapter 21, Article 1;



      (6)   The construction of streams, waterways, lakes and other
auxiliary facilities in conjunction with development of public parks and
recreation facilities by a public agency or political subdivision; and



      (7)   The construction and erection of poles, towers,
foundations, support structures, guy wires and other facilities related to
power transmission as constructed by any utility whether a public service
corporation or a political subdivision.



   (C)   In addition to other penalties or remedies otherwise provided
by law, this state, a political subdivision or a person who may be damaged or
hoc been damaged as a result of the unauthorized diversion, retardation or
obstruction of a watercourse has the right to commence, maintain and
prosecute any appropriate action or pursue any remedy to enjoin, abate or
otherwise prevent any person from violating or continuing to violate this
section or regulations adopted pursuant to this subchapter. If a person is
found to be in violation of this section, the court shall require the
violator to either comply with this section if authorized by the FPB or
remove the obstruction and restore the watercourse to its original state. The
court may also award such monetary damages as are appropriate to the injured
parties resulting from the violation including reasonable costs and attorney
fees.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-12  Unlawful Acts.



   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to engage in any development or to
divert, retard or obstruct the flow of waters in a watercourse if it creates
a hazard to life or property without securing the written authorization
required by A.R.S. § 48-3613. Where the watercourse is a delineated
floodplain, it is unlawful to engage in any development affecting the flow of
waters without securing written authorization required by A.R.S. § 48-3613.



   (B)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day that a violation
continues shall be a separate offense punishable as hereinabove described.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-13  Declaration of Public Nuisance Statute.



   All development located or maintained within any area of special flood
hazard after August 8, 1973, in violation of this chapter, is a public
nuisance per se and may be abated, prevented or restrained by action of this
chapter.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-14  Abatement of Violations.



   Within 30 days of discovery of a violation of this chapter, the FPA
shall submit a report to the FPB which shall include all information
available to the FPA which is pertinent to said violation.  Within 30 days
of receipt of this report, the FPB shall either:



   (A)   Take any necessary action to effect the abatement of such
violation; or



   (B)   Issue a variance to this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of §§ 151-25 through 151-27 herein; or



   (C)   Order the owner of the property upon which the violation
exists to provide whatever additional information may be required for their
determination.  Such information must be provided to the FPA within 30 days
of such order, and the FPA shall submit an amended report to the FPB within
20 days.  At their next regularly scheduled public meeting, the FPB shall
either order the abatement of said violation or they shall grant a variance
in accordance with the provisions of §§ 151-25 through 151-27 herein; or



   (D)   Submit to FEMA a declaration for denial of insurance, stating
that the property is in violation of a cited state or local law, regulation
or ordinance, pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of
1968 as amended.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-15  Severability.



   This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



Administration



§ 151-16  Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.



   The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer, implement and
enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance
with its provisions.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-17  Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator (FPA).



   Duties of the FPA shall include, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Permit review.  Review all development permits to determine
that:



      (1)   The permit requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied;



      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been
obtained;



      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;



      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the
carrying capacity of areas where BFEs have been determined but a floodway has
not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, ADVERSELY AFFECT means
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.



   (B)   Substantial improvement and substantial damage procedures.



      (1)   Develop detailed procedures for identifying and
administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining market value.



      (2)   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments
and divisions and implemented by community staff.



   (C)   Use of other base flood data. When BFE data has not been
provided in accordance with  § 151-06, the FPA shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any BFE data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer §§ 151-18 through 151-24. Any such
information shall be consistent with the requirements of FEMA and the
Director of the ADWR and shall be submitted to the FPB for adoption.



   (D)   Obtain and maintain for public inspection.



      (1)   The certified RFE required in § 151-18(C)(1).



      (2)   The floodproofing certification required in §
151-18(C)(2).



      (3)   The flood vent certification required in Section
151-18(C)(3)(a).



      (4)   The elevation certification required for additional
development standards, including subdivisions, in § 151-21(A)(2).



      (5)   The floodway encroachment certification required in §
151-24(A).



      (6)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including
justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
biennial report submitted to FEMA.



      (7)   Obtain and maintain improvement calculations.



   (E)   Notification of other entities.



      (1)   Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:



         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the ADWR prior to
such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to FEMA through appropriate notification means; and



         (b)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity of the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse be maintained.



      (2)   BFE and rate of flow due to physical alterations:



         (a)   BFEs may increase or decrease resulting from
physical changes affecting flooding conditions. As soon as practicable, but
not later than six months after the date such information becomes available,
the FPA shall notify FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or
scientific data in accordance with Volume 44 Code of Federal Regulations
section 65.3. Such a submission is necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements will be based upon current data.



         (b)   Within 120 days after completion of construction
of any flood control protective works which changes the rate of flow during
the flood or the configuration of the floodplain upstream or downstream from
or adjacent to the project, the person or agency responsible for installation
of the project shall provide to the governing bodies of all jurisdictions
affected by the project a new delineation of all floodplains affected by the
project. The new delineation shall be done according to the criteria adopted
by the Director of the ADWR.



      (3)   Corporate boundary changes.  Notify FEMA and the ADWR
of acquisition by means of annexation, incorporation or otherwise, of
additional areas of jurisdiction.



   (F)   Map determinations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to
the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§ 151-25 through 151-27.



   (G)   Remedial actions. Take actions on violations of this ordinance
as required in § 151-14 herein.



   (H)   Biennial report.  Complete and submit a Biennial Report to
FEMA.



   (I)   Colorado River Floodway requirements.  Assure that proposals
for development in the Colorado River Floodway and in the Colorado River
Floodway Fringe meet the additional requirements described in §§ 151-28
through 151-30, including the review and concurrence by the Bureau of
Reclamation before any proposed development in the Colorado River Floodway is
permitted.



   (J)   Establishment of development permit.  A development permit
shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including
placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard
established in § 151-06. Application for a development permit shall be made
on forms furnished by the FPA and may include, but not be limited to, plans
in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:



      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all structures. In Zone AO, elevation of
existing highest adjacent natural grade and proposed elevation of lowest
floor of all structures;



      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to
which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed;



      (3)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure
meet the floodproofing criteria in § 151-18(C)(2);



      (4)   BFE data for subdivision proposals or other development
greater than 50 lots or five acres; and



      (5)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction



§ 151-18  Standards for Construction.



   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are
required:



   (A)   Anchoring.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy; and



      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring
standards of § 151-22(B).



   (B)   Construction materials and methods.



      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;



      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;



      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements and
other proposed new development shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other services
facilities that are designed and /or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
and



      (4)   Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be
constructed around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.



   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.



      (1)   Residential construction.



         (a)   Residential construction, new or substantial
improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:



            1.   In an AO Zone, elevated to or above the RFE,
or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth
number is specified.



            2.   In an A Zone where a BFE has not been
determined, elevated to or above the RFE or be elevated in accordance with
the criteria developed by the Director of the ADWR.



            3.   In Zones AE, AH and Al-30, elevated to or
above the RFE.



         (b)   Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of
the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community's building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall
be provided to the FPA.



      (2)   Non-residential construction.  Nonresidential
construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to
conform with § 151-18(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities:



         (a)   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended
under § 151-18(C)(1)  so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;



         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the FPA.



      (3)   Flood openings.  All new construction and substantial
improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must meet or exceed the following criteria:



         (a)   Have a minimum of two openings, on different sides
of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be
equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood water; or



         (b)   If it is not feasible or desirable to meet the
openings criteria stated above, a registered engineer or architect may design
and certify the openings.



      (4)   Manufactured homes.  Manufactured homes shall also meet
the standards in § 151-22.



      (5)   Garages and low cost accessory structures.



         (a)   Attached garages.



            1.   A garage attached to a residential structure,
constructed with the garage floor slab below the RFE, must be designed to
allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See  § 151-18(C)(3).  Areas
of the garage below the RFE must be constructed with flood resistant
materials. See § 151-18(B).



            2.   A garage attached to a nonresidential
structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed.



         (b)   Detached garages and accessory structures.



            1.   Accessory structure used solely for parking
(two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost
sheds), as defined in § 151-04, may be constructed such that its floor is
below the RFE, provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:



               a.   Use of the accessory structure must be
limited to parking or limited storage;



               b.   The portions of the accessory structure
located below the RFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;



               c.   The accessory structure must be
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;



               d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in
the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the RFE;



               e.   The accessory structure must comply
with floodplain encroachment provisions in § 151-24; and



               f.   The accessory structure must be
designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with
§ 151-18(C)(3).



            2.   Detached garages and accessory structures not
meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all
applicable standards in § 151-18.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-19  Standards for Storage of Materials and Equipment.



   (A)   The storage or processing of materials that could be injurious
to human, animal or plant life if released due to damage from flooding is
prohibited in special flood hazard areas.



   (B)   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not
subject to damage by floods and if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-20  Standards for Utilities.



   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system and discharge from systems into flood waters.



   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.



   (C)   Waste disposal systems shall not be installed wholly or
partially in a regulatory floodway.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-21  Additional Development Standards, Including Subdivisions.



   (A)   All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development
(including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions), greater
than 50 lots or five acres whichever is lesser, shall:



      (1)   Identify the area of the special flood hazard and the
elevation of the base flood.



      (2)   Identify on the final plans the elevation(s) of the
proposed structure(s) and the pads. If the site is filled above the BFE, the
final lowest floor and grade elevations shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.



   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



   (D)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-22  Standards for Manufactured Homes.



   All manufactured homes that are placed on site or substantially
improved shall:



   (A)   Be elevated so that the bottom of the structural frame or the
lowest point of any attached appliances, whichever is lower, is at or above
the RFE; and



   (B)   Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.  Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-23  Standards for Recreational Vehicles.



   All recreational vehicles placed on site shall:



   (A)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or



   (B)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security
devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or



   (C)   Meet the permit requirements of §§ 151-16 and 151-17 of this
chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in § 151-22.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-24  Floodways.



   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 151-06
are areas designated as floodways.  Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:



   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a
registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.



   (B)   If this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§ 151-18 through 151-24.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



Variance Procedure



§ 151-25  Nature of Variances.



   (A)   The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter
are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a
piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted
for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that
complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional
hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The
characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to
the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.



   (B)   It is the duty of the Yuma City Council to help protect its
citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of
the cost of insuring a structure that is built below the RFE are so serious
that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the
flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited.
Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed
and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be
properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in
which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-26  Appeal Board.



   (A)   The FPB of the Yuma City Council shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   The FPB shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the FPA in
the enforcement or administration of this chapter.



   (C)   In passing upon such applications, the FPB shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:



      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands
to the injury of others;



      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage;



      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its
contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;



      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;



      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location,
where applicable;



      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;



      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;



      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;



      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood
for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise,
and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and



      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and
after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, water system, and streets and
bridges.



   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors of § 151-26(C)  and the
purposes of this chapter, the FPB may attach such conditions to the granting
of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.



   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given
written notice over the signature of a community official that:



      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure
below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 for $100 of insurance coverage, and



      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases
risks to life and property; and



      (3)   The land upon which the variance is granted shall be
ineligible for exchange of state land pursuant to the flood relocation and
land exchange program provided by A.R.S. Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2. A
copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the Yuma County
Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of
title of the affected parcel of land.



   (F)   The FPA shall maintain a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance and report such variances issued
in its biennial report submitted to FEMA.



(Ord. O2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-27  Conditions for Variances.



   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the BFE, provided the procedures of §§ 151-16 through
151-24 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.



   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places
or the State Inventory of Historic Places, upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structures continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.



   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway
if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.



   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.



   (E)   Variances shall only be issued upon a:



      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;



      (2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would
result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;



      (3)   Showing that the use cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. This
includes only facilities defined in § 151-04 of this chapter in the
definition of FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE; and



      (4)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



(Ord. O-2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



Requirements for Colorado River Communities



§ 151-28  Colorado River Floodway.



   Since the Colorado River Floodway has, under flood conditions, proven
to be an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which
carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply to the Colorado River Floodway, in addition to the basic
requirements of §§ 151-16 through 151-24.



   (A)   Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development are prohibited. Necessary river control,
water conservation, power, water quality structures and related works, and
improvements and alterations to approved structures associated with allowed
uses of the floodway under § 151-28(B) are excluded from this prohibition if
they follow the NFIP Floodway Revision process described in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44CFR 65.12 for a conditional letter of map revision
and the proposed project is reviewed and concurred with by the Bureau of
Reclamation and approved by the community. Within six months of the
completion of the approved project, the as-built data for the project must be
submitted for a letter of map revision to assure the accurate depiction of
the Colorado River Floodway on the FIRM.



   (B)   Allowed uses of the floodway may include functions and uses
that serve the public interest, that are compatible with the floodway
operation, and that will not cause a rise in the Colorado River base flood
elevation. These may include river control, water conservation and diversion,
power and water quality structures and related works; remedial or corrective
actions including, but not limited to, drainage facilities to assist in
controlling adjacent high ground water conditions caused by flood flows;
public and tribal roads; military activities; fish and wildlife enhancement
projects; navigational aids; emergency action assistance; public health
assistance; compatible public, private and tribal recreational developments
such as parks, golf courses, docks and boat launching ramps; and compatible
agricultural uses that do not include permanent crops which would constitute
an obstruction to river flood flows.



   (C)   The FPA shall require permits for proposed development that is
allowed by § 151-30(A). The proposed development must be reviewed and
concurred with by the Bureau of Reclamation to assure compatibility with the
floodway operation prior to approval of the permit(s).



(Ord. O-2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-29  Colorado River Floodway Fringe.



   The following provisions apply in addition to the basic requirements of
§§ 151-16 through 151-24:



   (A)   Fill, permanent structures or buildings, including residential
structures, may be placed or erected in the Colorado River Floodway Fringe,
provided, in the case of buildings, that the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basements) is at least one foot above the Colorado River BFE.



   (B)   Land may be filled, provided the top of the compacted fill
shall at no point be below the Colorado River BFE for at least twenty-five
feet beyond the limits of any structure erected or placed thereon.



(Ord. O-2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-30  Flood-Related Erosion-Prone Areas of the Colorado River.



   (A)   The FPA shall require permits for proposed construction and
other development within the floodway fringe area of the Colorado River. Such
permits shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations
and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will
not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing
hazard.



   (B)   If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of
flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement
shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid
aggravating the existing erosion hazard.



   (C)   A setback from the floodway is required for all new
development to create a buffer and to provide access to the floodway for
possible maintenance and improvements work. The buffer may consist of a
natural vegetation or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated
according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rates in relation
to the anticipated "useful life" of structures, and depending upon the
geologic, hydrologic, topographic, and climatic characteristics of the land.
The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as agriculture,
forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas, and for other
activities using temporary and portable structures only.



   (D)   A waiver to the setback requirements may be granted if it can
be demonstrated that adequate erosion and flow velocity protection can and
will be constructed and maintained, and provided that the erosion protection
meets the applicable parts of Volume 44, Code of Federal Regulations, section
65.5(a)(6). All plans for erosion and flow velocity protection must have the
review and concurrence of the Bureau of Reclamation and be reviewed and
approved by the FPA.



(Ord. O-2006-53, passed 8-16-06)



§ 151-99 Penalty



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation of, any provision of this ordinance. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions in this ordinance shall be guilty
of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or
both fine and imprisonment. Fine and imprisonment must consider the nature of
the violation, its seriousness and the prior history of the violator. Each
separate day or part thereof during which any violation of said sections
occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



(Ord. O2013-62, passed 12-4-13)



Chapter 152:  [Repealed]



Chapter 153:  Subdivisions



Section



General Provisions



   153-01   Purpose and intent for plat approval procedure



   153-02   Definitions



   153-03   General principles of acceptability



   153-04   Streets



   153-05   Blocks



   153-06   Lots



Procedure for Plat Approval



   153-15   Pre-application procedure



   153-16   Preliminary plat process



   153-17   Procedure for approval of final plat



   153-18   Procedure for approval of lot split



   153-19   Optional commercial and industrial master plat process



   153-20   Filing fee



Preliminary Plan



   153-30   Purpose and intent



   153-31   Preliminary plat and plans submittal requirements



   153-32   (Repealed)



   153-33   (Repealed)



   153-34   (Repealed)



Final Plat



   153-45   Preparation and recording of plat required



   153-46   Final plat process



   153-47   Final plat submittal requirements



   153-48   (Repealed)



   153-49   (Repealed)



   153-50   Final plat materials and documents required



   153-51   Assurance of completion



Required Improvements



   153-60   Improvements responsibility of subdivider; compliance with
standards



   153-61   Streets and drainage



   153-62   Utilities



   153-63   Schedule of installation



Administration and Enforcement



   153-75   Administration by City Planning Department



   153-76   Variances



   153-77   Large scale development



   153-78   Sale of lots by metes and bounds description



   153-79   Issuance of building permits



   153-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Regulation of use of land, see Charter Art. III, § 12



General Provisions



§ 153-01 Purpose and Intent for Plat Approval Procedure.



   Under the authority of the City Charter, Article III, Section 12, Land
Use, and state statutes granting to municipalities the right to review and
approve subdivision of lands (Title 9, Chapter 6, Article 6.2, Municipal
Subdivision Regulations), the city shall regulate as is necessary for the
public benefit the use of all land within the corporate limits.  The
subdivision of land affects public rights-of-way and their use.  Therefore,
procedural requirements for the review and processing of plats shall be
established for the subdivision of land.



(Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-02  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGREED SCHEDULE.  A time schedule agreed upon by the subdivider and
the Planning Commission for installation of required public improvements, and
the sequence in which each will be installed.



   ALLEY.  A minor public right-of-way used primarily for vehicular
access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.



   ASSURANCE OF COMPLETION.  A contract secured by a bond in an amount
and with surety satisfactory to the City Engineer, guaranteeing completion of
public improvements which are shown on the subdivision preliminary plan.



   BOARD OF SUPERVISORS.  Chief legislative body of the County of Yuma.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line indicating the minimum horizontal
distance between the street line and buildings or any projection thereof,
other than steps, eaves, or overhangs.



   CITY.  The City of Yuma, being in Yuma County, State of Arizona.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The chief legislative body of the City of Yuma.



   COUNTY.  County of Yuma, State of Arizona.



   CROSSWALK WAY.  A public right-of-way used primarily for pedestrian
travel through or across any portion of a block.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A short, minor street having but one end open for motor
traffic; the other being terminated by a vehicular turn-a-round.



   DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.   The Department of Community
Development of the City of Yuma, Arizona.



   EASEMENT.   A grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose or purposes, of a designated strip of land to the general public, a
corporation, or other individuals.



   GENERAL PLAN.   The comprehensive, long-range general plan for the
development of the City of Yuma consisting of statements of community goals
and development policies, including maps, any necessary diagrams and text
setting forth objectives, principles, standards and plan proposals.



   LOT.  A portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of
ownership or for development or both, and having frontage on a dedicated
street.  In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the
right-of-way of a street or crosswalk may be included.



   LOT FRONTAGE.  The front dimension of a lot measured along the street
right-of-way.



   LOT WIDTH.  The width of the lots at the building line measured
parallel to the street right-of-way line.



   MAJOR STREET PLAN OR OFFICIAL MAP.  A part of the master plan showing
the location and dimensions of principal thoroughfares (land shown in parks
along such thoroughfares is not deemed part of the street right-of-way).



   MASTER PLAN.  A comprehensive subdivision development or neighborhood
plan consisting of statements of neighborhood goals and development policies,
including maps, any necessary diagrams and text setting forth objectives,
principles, standards and plan proposals to guide subdivision design and
platting.  A MASTER PLAN shall consist of not less than 80 acres of land.



   OFFICIAL MAP.  The map established by the City Council as provided by
law, showing the streets theretofore existing and established by law as
public streets and any amendments thereto adopted by the City Council, as
appropriate, or additions thereto resulting from approval of subdivision
plats and the subsequent recording of such approved plats.



   PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.  Planning and Zoning Commission of the
City of Yuma.



   PLAT OF SUBDIVISION.  A map showing the division of any tract of land
into two or more parcels, and prepared for the purpose of recording.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANT.  A restriction on the use of private property
within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection against
undesirable aspects of development.  Protective  covenants regulating the
use of land represent an express agreement between the subdivider and the lot
purchasers.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.  Any of the following:  roadway pavement, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, and
other appurtenant construction as related to the subdivision preliminary plan.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land lying between the property
lines of a street or thoroughfare, alley, crosswalkway, or easement.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic
between curbs, or the improved portion within the right-of-way.



   RULES OF PROCEDURE.  Regulations adopted by the Planning Commission
and the City Council for the submission and approval of subdivision plats.



   SIDEWALKS.  The portion of a street or crosswalkway, paved or
otherwise surfaced, intended for pedestrian use only.



   STREET.  A right-of-way designed for vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
regardless of its designation by name, such as street, thoroughfare, avenue,
land, place or the like.



   STREET, ACCESS OR FRONTAL.  A street running parallel to and adjacent
to or in the immediate vicinity of a major street or highway and which has as
its purpose the relief of such major street from the local service of
abutting properties.



   STREET ARTERIAL.  A street of great continuity, existing or planned
which serves or is intended to serve foreign and local traffic, and which is
designated on the major street plan to identify those streets comprising the
basic structure of the street system of the city and surrounding area. 
Arterials are only those streets designated on the master street plan,
including additions or corrections thereto.



   STREET, COLLECTOR.  A street designed to serve as an important
trafficway for a neighborhood, or as a feeder to an arterial street.  The
determination of such street classification in any specific instance shall
rest with the Planning Commission.



   STREET, LOCAL.  A street of limited continuity which serves or is
intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood.



   STREET STANDARDS.  City of Yuma standard specifications as adopted or
amended.



   SUBDIVIDER.  Any person, firm or corporation acting as a unit, or any
agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
subdivision as defined herein.



   SUBDIVISION.  A division of land into two or more lots, tracts or
parcels for the purpose of financing, sale or lease, whether immediate or
future, except for any division of land which qualifies as a lot split as
specified in § 153-18.  SUBDIVISION shall include any condominium,
cooperative, community apartment, townhouse, or similar project in which an
undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive
occupancy of any unit thereon, and further indicating the building(s) or the
manner in which the building(s) or airspace above the property shown on the
plat is to be recorded.



   SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAT.  A drawing showing a proposed
subdivision of land together with the public improvements which are to be
installed therein.  Such a drawing is not recordable.



   TRACT.  A defined area of land regardless of size.



   ZONING.  Regulation by districts of the height, area, and use of
buildings; use of land and density of population.



('80 Code, App. B, § I)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1966, passed
10-1-80; Ord. 2384, passed 1-6-88; Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-03  General Principles of Acceptability.



   (A)   Master plan.



      (1)   Streets shall conform substantially to the general plan
adopted by the city and any revisions or amendments thereof.  Whenever a
tract to be subdivided includes any part of a street indicated as an arterial
street on the major street plan of the general plan, such part of such street
shall be dedicated by the subdivider.



      (2)   Where frontal or access roads are deemed necessary,
additional right-of-way shall be 40 feet on either side of the arterial
street.



   (B)   Public open spaces and sites.  Where, as indicated by the
master plan, a proposed subdivision contains, wholly or in part, a proposed
public open space or a proposed site for a public building, such sites shall
be reserved unless the concerned authority states it has no intention of
development in the area.  The Planning Commission will immediately notify
the concerned authority.



   (C)   Neighborhood plan.  If a tentative plan has been approved by
the Planning Commission for the neighborhood of the proposed subdivision, the
street system of the latter shall conform substantially thereto.



   (D)   Unsubdivided portion of tract.  The Planning Commission may
require a sketch of the tentative future street system beyond the limits of
the tract adjacent to the land area presently being subdivided.



   (E)   Provision for future subdivision.  If a tract is subdivided
into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be
arranged to allow the opening of the future streets and logical further
subdivision.



   (F)   Reserved strips prohibited.  There shall be no “reserved”
strips controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to
public use.



('80 Code, App. B, § VI)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1496, passed
5-19-76; Ord. 2384, passed 1-6-88; Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)  Penalty,
see § 153-99



§ 153-04  Streets.



   (A)   Circulation.



      (1)   The street pattern shall provide ease of circulation
within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining streets or
unsubdivided land, as may be required by the Planning Commission.



      (2)   Local residential streets should be so planned as to
discourage their use by non-local traffic.  Where a street will eventually
be extended beyond the subdivision but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim
turn-around may be required.



   (B)   Arterial streets.  If a new subdivision involves frontage on
an arterial street, as defined herein, the street layout should be planned to
avoid, as far as possible, any private residential driveways from having
direct access to such by providing access or frontal streets.



   (C)   Existing streets.  Existing streets (constructed or recorded)
in adjoining territory shall be continued at equal or greater width and in
similar alignment by streets proposed in the subdivision, unless variations
are approved by the Planning Commission.



   (D)   Cul-de-sacs.  Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 600 feet,
unless necessitated by topography or other circumstances beyond the
subdividers control.



   (E)   Half-streets.  No half-streets will hereinafter be
accepted.  Where there exists a dedicated or platted half-street adjacent to
the tract to be subdivided, the other half, being a minimum width to meet
this chapter, shall be plotted.



   (F)   Stub streets.  Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land,
stub streets shall be provided at locations as determined by the Planning
Commission to insure future access and traffic circulation.



   (G)   Intersections.  All street intersections shall be at right
angles.  Where, because of topographic or other reasons, an intersection
cannot be at right angles, such intersection shall be designed to insure
safety.



   (H)   Easements.  Easements for slopes and utilities shall be
dedicated to the public wherever necessary.  Said easements shall be at
least eight feet wide across the rear or front of all lots, except that a
utility easement adjacent to unsubdivided lands shall be at least ten feet
wide.  In addition, easements may be required at other suitable locations.



   (I)   Dimensional standards.



      (1)   Minimum width.  The street right-of-way and roadway
width shall not be less than the minimum width shown in the following table:



 




Type of Street

 

Minimum Right-of-Way Width

 

Minimum Roadway Width



Collector; residential
 
60'
 
44'



Collector; high volume, midsection, or nonresidential

 
80'
 
48'


Local; residential*
 
50'
 
40'


Local; less than 1,500 ft. in length*
 
50'
 
38'


Access or frontal**
 
40'
 
32'


Alley
 
20'
 
20'


Cul-de-sac; residential
 
50' (radius)
 
42' (radius)


Cul-de-sac; nonresidential
 
60' (radius)
 
50' (radius)


Arterial**
 
100'
 
68' (plus median)


General note:  Additional right-of-way may be required for drainage,
utilities, slope-rights, or irrigation facilities.



*  Streets serving multi-family/commercial land uses shall have a 40-foot
roadway width.



** In new residential developments a frontage/access street is normally
required for lots fronting on arterial streets.










      (2)   Alignment; minimum standards.



         (a)   Two copies of the complete, plans and profiles for
street and alley improvements shall be submitted for approval of the City
Engineer prior to approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission.



         (b)   Vertical curves:



            1.   Arterial streets:  As determined by the City
Engineer.



            2.   Collector, local streets:  Minimum length
100 feet, except in cases approved by the City Engineer.



         (c)   Horizontal curves:



            1.   Arterials, access and frontal streets:  500
feet.



            2.   Collector streets:  200 feet.



            3.   Local streets:  100 feet.



            4.   Alleys:  Laid out to provide turning radius
at alley intersection.



      (3)   Reversed curve.  Unless approved by the City Engineer,
all streets shall have a tangent of 100 feet between reverse curves.



      (4)   Curb radii.  At the intersection of two streets,
property line corners shall be rounded by an arc of 20 foot radius.  The
minimum radii shall be increased when the smallest angle of intersection is
less than 90 degrees, or in any case where the City Engineer considers an
increase necessary.



('80 Code, App. B, § VI)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1496, passed
5-19-76; Ord. 2384, passed 1-6-88; Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)  Penalty,
see § 153-99



§ 153-05  Blocks.



   (A)   Length of residential blocks shall not be more than 1,000 feet
long unless approved by the Planning Commission.  Blocks longer than 800
feet in length shall have a crosswalkway near the center of the block when
required as necessary by the Commission.



   (B)   Irregular shaped blocks (including superblocks) indented by
cul-de-sacs containing interior parks or playgrounds and adequate parking
space, will be acceptable when properly designed and covered by agreements as
to maintenance of such park areas.



   (C)   Orientation on arterials:  If frontage on an arterial street
is involved, the long dimension of the block shall preferably front thereon
by means of an access or frontal road, in order to create as few
intersections as possible with the arterials.



   (D)   Business or industrial:  Blocks intended for business or
industry shall be of such length and depth as may be considered most suitable
for their prospective use by the Planning Commission, including adequate
provision for parking, on-site loading and unloading and buffer, as required
by the zoning ordinance.



('80 Code, App. B, § VI)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1496, passed
5-19-76; Ord. 2384, passed 1-6-88; Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)  Penalty,
see § 153-99



§ 153-06  Lots.



   (A)   Minimum width.  The minimum width of residential lots for all
subdivisions shall be 50 feet at the building line and shall have a minimum
area as approved by the County Health Unit, unless a larger area is required
by the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Length and width ratio.  It is desirable that the length of a
lot shall be not more than four times its width.



   (C)   Fronting on arterials.  Lots fronting on arterials should be
of such depth to accommodate setbacks as set forth in the zoning ordinance.



   (D)   Double frontage.  Double frontage lots shall be avoided,
except to overcome disadvantages of topography and orientation.



   (E)   Side lot lines.  Side lines of lots shall be approximately at
right angles or radial to the street line unless, in the opinion of the
Planning Commission, a variation from this rule will give a better street and
lot plan.



   (F)   Corner lots.  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to
permit the maintenance of the side street building line after providing a
minimum building width of 30 feet, and a side yard, as required by the zoning
ordinance, on the interior side of the lot.



   (G)   Building sites.  Every lot must contain a suitable building
site, which will provide minimum yard requirements in compliance with the
zoning ordinance.



   (H)   Street frontage.  Every lot shall front on a public street
having a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet for a distance of not less than 35
feet measured along said right-of-way line.



('80 Code, App. B, § VI)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1496, passed
5-19-76; Ord. 2384, passed 1-6-88; Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)  Penalty,
see § 153-99



Procedure for Plat Approval



§ 153-15  Pre-Application Procedure.



   (A)   Informal consideration.  While the subdivision is still in
the preliminary planning stage, the  applicant shall consult with the
Department of Community Development through a pre-development meeting, for
informal review regarding the general plan, the zoning code, drainage and
floodplain regulations, utility regulations, Uniform Building Code, the
subdivision code and standards for the design and installation of public
improvements.



   (B)   Upon receiving favorable feedback from the pre-application
meeting, the applicant may then proceed to prepare the preliminary plat for
submittal.



   (C)   Under no circumstances shall informal favorable consideration
by the Department of Community Development be construed as formal approval of
any subdivision.



('80 Code, App. B, § II)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-16  Preliminary Plat Process.



   (A)   The applicant shall prepare a preliminary plat together with
other supplemental material as identified in § 153-31, Preliminary Plat and
Plans Submittal Requirements.



   (B)   Five sets of the preliminary plat, including four blue line
copies and one electronic copy of the preliminary plat, and supplementary
material as specified, shall be submitted to the Department of Community
Development.



   (C)   At the time of submittal of all required preliminary plat and
necessary supplemental materials to the Department of Community Development,
a public hearing date with the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
scheduled in accordance with the Case Review Hearing Deadlines calendar for
the year.  Generally, public hearings with the Planning and Zoning
Commission occur within 60 days of application submittal.  At the public
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall express its approval or
disapproval of the proposed preliminary plat.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if
disapproved, shall express the reasons for the disapproval.



   (D)   The action of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any
conditions established by the Commission.    One copy shall be returned to
the applicant, and the other copy retained by the Department of Community
Development.



   (E)   Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not
constitute approval of the final plat.  Rather, it shall be deemed an
expression of approval to the subdivision layout, road alignments and numbers
of lots submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of
the final plat.  The final plat shall be processed in accordance with the
requirements of §§ 153-45, 153-46, 153-47, 153-50 and 153-51 of this code.




('80 Code, App. B, § II)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)




§ 153-17  Procedure for Approval of Final Plat.



   (A)   The final plat shall be prepared as specified in §§ 153-45
through 153-51 and shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved.  If desired by the subdivider, the final plat may be submitted in
portions or phases, which include those lands that will be developed
immediately, provided that such portion or phase conforms to all subdivision
requirements and conditions of preliminary plat approval.



   (B)   The final plat shall be submitted to the Department of
Community Development within three years of the approval of the preliminary
plat; otherwise, such preliminary plat approval shall become null and void. 
An extension of time applied for and granted by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall extend said deadline.  The recording of a phase of the
preliminary plat automatically extends the approval of the preliminary plat
for three years from the final plat approval of the phase.  However, the
maximum time period a preliminary plat may be approved without a final plat
submittal is six years.




('80 Code, App. B, § II)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)




§ 153-18  Procedure for Approval of Lot Split.



   (A)   Any division of land into three or fewer parts in which no
right-of-way dedication, utility extension or other off-site public
improvement is involved may be processed as a lot split subject to approval
by the City Planning Director and City Engineer.



   (B)   Any proposed lot split shall be submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Division to determine compliance with applicable platting, subdividing
and zoning regulations.  The Planning Director or City Engineer may require
the submittal of any additional information as is pertinent to make this
determination.



   (C)   The final plat shall be prepared by an Arizona registered
surveyor on a sheet suitable for recording, or on polyester or linen or a
copy reproduced on polyester by a photographic silver imaging process or
other method that assures archival quality.  Required signatures shall be
original signatures, not copies, and shall include provisions for signatures
by the City Planning Director and City Engineer.  The plat must be 24" x 36"
or other size as required by the Yuma County Recorder.  All drawing,
printing, and signatures shall be directly applied to the sheet to be
recorded.  The use of nonpermanent inks, press-on adhesive letters, films,
or tapes is prohibited.  The plat shall further include the items specified
in §§ 153-47 and 153-48.



('80 Code, App. B, § II)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2005-40,
passed 6-1-05)



§ 153-19  Optional Commercial and Industrial Master Plat Process.



   (A)   Purpose.  The commercial or industrial subdivision master
plat process establishes an optional procedure within the city's subdivision
plat process for subsequent divisions of a commercial or industrial master
plat into smaller lots or tracts.  A commercial or industrial master plat
shall comply with all applicable city, state and federal development
standards in effect at the time of development and the plat shall comply with
the purpose and intent of the city's subdivision regulations.



   (B)   This procedure can only be followed if:



      (1)   The commercial or industrial subdivision master plat has
completed preliminary and final plat approval per Chapter 153 of the City of
Yuma Code of Ordinances;



      (2)   No further right-of-way dedication, utility extension or
other off-site public improvement is involved;



      (3)   Infrastructure, grading, and all site remediation and
improvements are completed prior to the division of the master plat into
subsequent lots or tracts.



   (C)   Subsequent divisions of the master plat shall be processed in
accordance with the procedures specified within § 153-18 Procedure for
Approval of Lot Split.  Minimum lot size is determined by the requirements
of the zoning district.



(Ord. O2005-40, passed 6-1-05)



§ 153-20  Filing Fee.



   Each subdivision as defined herein shall be accompanied by a completed
application form as provided by the City of Yuma Planning Division, and a
nonreturnable filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City
of Yuma Ordinance No. 1943, and successors.



('80 Code, App. B, § II)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2005-40,
passed 6-1-05)



Preliminary Plan



§ 153-30  Purpose and Intent.



   The preliminary plat is intended to precede the final subdivision plat.
Its purpose is to show all facts needed to enable the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the administrative staff of the city to determine whether the
proposed layout of the subject land and the proposed public improvements are
in the public interest.  All required engineering and surveying work must be
performed by or under the supervision of a registered engineer or surveyor
registered in accordance with the provisions of the Arizona State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors.  The following
graphic and plat descriptive items are required to be shown on a preliminary
plat.



('80 Code, App. B, § III)  (Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-31  Preliminary Plat and Plans Submittal Requirements.



   (A)   Preliminary plat information:



      (1)   Plat scale:  1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or
100 feet shown on the plat;



      (2)   Plat may be submitted on several sheets and accompanied
by an index sheet showing entire subdivision;



      (3)   Subdivision name, names and addresses of owner and
developer;



      (4)   Location by section, township, range, county, state;



      (5)   Plat signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor;



      (6)   North arrow;



      (7)   Subdivision boundary shown as a heavy, dark, solid line
with accurate distances and bearings to primary control points;.



      (8)   Location, width and status  (i.e., fee title, easement,
county declaration, etc.) of all streets, alleys and other rights-of-way
within and adjacent to the plat;



      (9)   Names of streets within (existing and proposed) and 150
feet outside of the plat boundaries;



      (10)   Bearings and distances to the nearest established
section, or patent corners or other official monuments;



      (11)   Federal Emergency Management Agency flood zone
designations shall be clearly indicated or noted on the plat;



      (12)   Lengths of all arc radii;



      (13)   All existing easements or rights-of-way provided for
public services or utilities, canals, or drainage ditches including purposes
and any limitations of such easements.  Also show and identify all other
geophysical features within and 150 feet outside the plat boundaries;



      (14)   Proposed easements for right-of-way provided for public
services or utilities, including purposes and any limitations of such
easements;



      (15)   Lot lines (existing and proposed) with dimensions to
the nearest foot and bearings;



      (16)   Building setback lines, shown graphically along all
streets with dimensions;



      (17)   All access points (vehicular and pedestrian) located
within 150 feet of the proposed subdivision including their location, name,
width, title status (i.e., easement, fee title) and recording information, if
applicable;



      (18)   Names and property lines of adjacent subdivision lots,
and unsubdivided lands, shown with lightly dashed lines.  Unsubdivided lands
shall have reference to Yuma County Assessor's Parcel Numbers.  Note
locations and uses of all parcels or lots with non-residential uses;



      (19)   Accurate description of all monument or marker
locations used on the plat;



      (20)   Accurate outlines of any areas being dedicated for
public use with purposes indicated thereon and any area reserved by deed
covenant for common use by all property owners in the subdivision, including
private streets, if any;



      (21)   Retention designations and volumes as required, if
applicable.  Deed restrictions to be recorded on subdivision plat with
identified stormwater storage requirements;



      (22)   Clearly identify or note zoning district boundaries and
designations on the property and within 150 feet outside the plat boundary;



      (23)   Draft restrictive covenants applying to lots in the
subdivision;



      (24)   Show USPS approved cluster box unit  mailbox locations.



         (a)   Coordinate with the USPS for locations of cluster
box unit mailboxes,



         (b)   Provide easement(s) and/or fee title dedication to
the City of Yuma on the plat for the location(s) of the cluster box unit
mailboxes,



         (c)   The cluster box unit mailboxes and supporting
structures shall be located so that they do not create a traffic hazard,
sight hinderence or other safety hazard per the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials' (AASHTO's) "Intersection Sight
Distance" methodology, as presented in the most current revision adopted by
the State of Arizona of "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets".



      (25)   Two full street access points shall be shown for the
proposed development.  Where such access cannot be provided due to existing
development or land-locked property, provisions may be added to conditions
for subdivision approval, which improve accessibility or reduce fire hazards
through sprinklered structures and/or other solutions.



   (B)   Preliminary plat paving, grading and drainage plan information:



      (1)   Subdivision name; scale of 1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40,
50, 60, or 100 feet;



      (2)   North arrow;



      (3)   Plan sealed, signed and dated by a registered engineer;



      (4)   Proposed subdivision boundary, drawn in a solid heavy
line;



      (5)   Preliminary stormwater drainage report with plan;



      (6)   Street locations and overall layout, including street
widths, street lengths, street names, alleys and typical and unusual
cross-sections;



      (7)   Stormwater management features such as catch basins,
storm drains, culverts, retention basins (historical flows), detention
basins, lift stations and drainpipes with corresponding invert elevations to
city datum control;



      (8)   Irrigation canals, drainage ditches, above ground
infrastructure on street rights-of-way and other geophysical features shall
be clearly indicated or noted on the plat;



      (9)   General finish grade information.



   (C)   Preliminary plat water, sewer and landscaping plan information:



      (1)   Subdivision name; scale of 1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40,
50, 60, or 100 feet;



      (2)   North arrow;



      (3)   Plan sealed, signed and dated by a registered engineer;



      (4)   Proposed subdivision boundary, drawn in a solid heavy
line;



      (5)   Water pipe sizes, locations, valves, manholes identified;



      (6)   Sewer pipe grades, sizes, locations, lift stations,
manholes identified;



      (7)   Statement of sewer and water system integration with
existing city systems and datum control;



      (8)   Identify landscaping areas;



      (9)   Irrigation canals, drainage ditches, above ground
infrastructure on street rights-of-way and other geophysical features shall
be clearly indicated or noted on the plat (as needed);



      (10)   Proposed underground utility easements and main line
gas or other utility locations.



   (D)   Preliminary plat boundary and topography map information:



      (1)   Subdivision name;



      (2)   Location including section, township, range, county and
state;



      (3)   Section and corporate lines clearly indicated;



      (4)   Scale of 1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or 100
feet;



      (5)   North arrow;



      (6)   Survey sealed, signed and dated by a registered land
surveyor;



      (7)   Federal Emergency Management Agency flood zone
designations shall be clearly indicated or noted on the survey;



      (8)   Basis of bearings;



      (9)   Legend (line types, symbols and abbreviations);



      (10)   Description of city benchmarks and primary control
points used;



      (11)   Proposed subdivision boundary, drawn in a solid heavy
line;



      (12)   Land elevation contours based on city datum within 150
feet of platted area, one foot contour intervals unless otherwise approved by
a city development engineer;



      (13)   Irrigation canals, drainage ditches, above ground
infrastructure on street rights-of-way and other geophysical features shall
be clearly indicated or noted on the Boundary and Topography Map.



('80 Code, App. B, § III)  (Ord. O2002-24, passed 5-1-02; Ord. O2010-62,
passed 12-1-10)



§ 153-32  (Repealed).



§ 153-33  (Repealed).



§ 153-34  (Repealed).



Final Plat



§ 153-45  Preparation and Recording of Plat Required.



   A subdivision final plat is the official recordable plat.  All
required engineering and surveying work must be performed by or under the
supervision of a professional engineer and land subdividing and property pin
setting by or under the supervision of a land surveyor, registered in
accordance with the provisions of the State of Arizona State Board of
Technical Registration.  The final plat must bear the seal, signature and
date of said professional engineer or surveyor.



('80 Code, App. B, § IV)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-46  Final Plat Process.



   (A)   The final plat shall be prepared as specified in §§ 153-47
and 153-50 and shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as
approved.  If desired by the applicant, the final plat may be approved and
recorded in phases.  Each phase is required to conform to all city
requirements and conditions of approval of the preliminary plat.



   (B)   Five complete sets (four blueline and one electronic copies)
of the final plat, and other supplementary material required for review,
shall be submitted to the Department of Community Development.  Other final
plat supplementary materials shall include:



      (1)   Completed application form and staff notes from
pre-development meeting;



      (2)   Filing fee;



      (3)   Environmental transaction screen or equivalent
documentation (two copies);



      (4)   Engineer's construction cost assessment for determining
assurances and pro-rata fees and credits.



   (C)   If the Department of Community Development determines that all
conditions of approval and city codes are satisfied, then the Department of
Community Development will forward the final plat to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for consideration based on the Planning and Zoning Commission
application deadline schedule.



('80 Code, App. B, § IV)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-47  Final Plat Submittal Requirements.



   (A)   Final plat information:



      (1)   Final scale to be shown on plat:  1 inch equals 10, 20,
30, 40, 50, 60, or 100 feet;



      (2)   Plat may be submitted on several sheets and accompanied
by an index sheet showing entire subdivision;



      (3)   Subdivision name, and unit number, if any;



      (4)   Names and addresses of owner and developer; location by
section, township, range, county and state;



      (5)   Professional land surveyor's certification;



      (6)   North arrow;



      (7)   Signature lines and dates on plat for:  City Department
of Community Development, City of Yuma Engineer, Acceptance by Mayor, City
Clerk or designee, Health Department where applicable; owner(s) signed and
notarized approval of plat and dedications of streets, alleys, easements, and
any other public areas;



      (8)   Subdivision boundary with accurate distances and
bearings to primary control points;



      (9)   Location and width of all streets, crosswalks, alleys
and other rights-of-way within the plat;



      (10)   Names of streets within and adjacent to the plat
boundaries as defined in approved preliminary plat;



      (11)   Bearings and distances to the nearest established
section or patent corners or other official monuments;



      (12)   Lengths of all arcs, radii, internal angles, tangent
lengths and radial bearings, if necessary;



      (13)   All existing easements for right-of-way provided for
public services or utilities, including purposes and any limitations of such
easements;



      (14)    Proposed easements for right-of-way provided for
public services or utilities, including purposes and limitations of such
easements;



      (15)   Sequentially-numbered lots with accurate dimensions in
feet, to the nearest hundredth and bearings and angles for applicable lot
lines;



      (16)   Accurate description of all monument or marker
locations used on the plat;



      (17)   Accurate outlines of any areas being dedicated for
public use with purposes indicated thereon and any area reserved by deed 
covenant for common use by all property owners in subdivision, including
private streets, if any;



      (18)   Building setback lines, shown graphically along all
streets with dimensions;



      (19)   Stormwater retention designations and volumes as
required for lots within the subdivision, if applicable (deed restrictions to
be recorded on lots with identified stormwater volume storage requirements);



      (20)   Any restrictive covenants applying to lots in the
subdivision (signed by the owner(s)) and printed on subdivision plat or
recorded in the Office of the Recorder;



      (21)   Show easement(s) for USPS approved cluster box units;
monuments or markers shall be located and in place prior to final approval;



         (a)   The cluster box unit mailboxes must meet the
specifications of the United States Postal Service (USPS) with the
inscription "US Mail" and "Approved by the Postmaster General" plainly
legible and be approved by the local postmaster prior to installation.



      (22)   Monuments or markers shall be located and in place
prior to final plat acceptance of the subdivision of the city.



      (23)   One full street access and a second access (permanent
or temporary) including subdivision improvement plans for each phase of the
development shall be shown having accessible routes for emergency access
personnel and equipment, subject to the approval of the Fire Marshal.  Where
such access cannot be provided due to existing development or land-locked
property, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend conditions for
subdivision approval, which improve accessibility or reduce fire hazards
through sprinklered structures.



   (B)   Final plat boundary and topographic survey map information:



      (1)   Scale:  1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or 100
feet shown on plat;



      (2)   Title block including the following information: 
Subdivision name and unit number, if any;



      (3)   Name and address of registered land surveyor;



      (4)   Subdivision boundary with accurate distances and
bearings to primary control points;



      (5)   Location and width of all streets, crosswalks, alleys
and other rights-of-way within and adjoining the plat;



      (6)   Names of streets within and adjacent to the plat
boundaries as defined in the approved preliminary plat;



      (7)   Bearings and distances to the nearest established
section or patent corners or other official monuments (street lines or
political subdivision boundaries);



      (8)   Lengths of all arcs, radii, internal angles, tangent
lengths and radial bearings, if necessary;



      (9)   All easements, restrictive covenants and right-of-way
provided for public services or utilities, including purposes and any
limitations of such easements;



      (10)   Accurate description of all monument or marker and
benchmark locations used on the plat.



   (C)   Final plat grading, paving and drainage plan map information:



      (1)   Scale:  1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or 100
feet shown on plat;



      (2)   Title block including the following information: 
Subdivision name and unit number, if any, and professional engineer preparing
map information including address and phone;



      (3)   Subdivision boundary;



      (4)   Location and width of all streets, crosswalks, alleys
and other rights-of-way within and adjoining the plat;



      (5)   Names of streets within and adjacent to the plat
boundaries as defined in the approved preliminary plat;



      (6)   All easements for right-of-way provided for public
services or utilities, including purposes and any limitations of such
easements;



      (7)   Accurate description of all monument or marker and
benchmark locations used on the plat;



      (8)   Monuments or markers to be constructed in accordance
with the City of Yuma standard specifications and/or other specifications;



      (9)   Applicable lot lines with accurate dimensions; onsite
stormwater retention designations;



      (10)   Boundary and topographic survey information;



      (11)   Street plans with grades and details;



      (12)   Drainage plans and profiles with grades and details;



      (13)   Street lighting locations and details where necessary.



   (D)   Final plat water, sewer, utility and landscaping plan
information:



      (1)   Scale:  1 inch equals 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, or 100
feet shown on plat;



      (2)   Title block including the following information: 
Subdivision name and unit number, if any, and professional engineer preparing
map information including address and phone;



      (3)   Subdivision boundary;



      (4)   Names of streets within and adjacent to the plat
boundaries as defined in the approved preliminary plat;



      (5)   All existing easements for right-of-way provided for
public services or utilities, including purposes and any limitations of such
easements;



      (6)   Applicable lot lines with accurate dimensions;



      (7)   Accurate outlines of any areas being dedicated for
public use with purposes indicated thereon and any area reserved by deed
covenant for common use by all property owners in subdivision, including
private streets, if any;



      (8)   Monuments or markers to be constructed in accordance
with City of Yuma standard specifications and/or other specifications;



      (9)   Boundary and topographic survey information including
benchmarks;



      (10)   Water plans and details;



      (11)   Sewer plans and details;



      (12)   On-site stormwater retention designations;



      (13)   Public utilities, including telephone, cable
television, electricity or other public utilities and details where necessary;



      (14)   Landscaping plans including systems for retention
and/or detention areas/recreation areas or parks - total linear footage of
irrigation lines for landscaping shall be provided by location.



      (15)   Lighting locations and details where necessary.



('80 Code, App. B, § IV)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02; Ord. O2010-62, passed 12-1-10)



§ 153-48  (Repealed).



§ 153-49  (Repealed).



§ 153-50  Final Plat Materials and Documents Required.



   Upon approval of the final plat by the City Council, the following
materials shall be provided to the Department of Community Development prior
to recordation of the plat:



   (A)   Two review copies of the final plat, complete subdivision
improvement plans and profiles for street, water, sewer,  stormwater
drainage and alley improvements shall be submitted to the Director of the
Department of Community Development prior to recordation of the final plat.



   (B)   Three reproducible (i.e., mylar) copies of the final plat,
with proper signatures to be distributed to the following upon recordation: 
County Recorder's Office, City of Yuma Department of Community Development,
and applicant.



   (C)   Prior to construction, six sets of the complete subdivision
improvement plans, including street plan and profiles, water, sewer,
stormwater drainage and alley improvements shall be submitted to the Director
of the Department of Community Development.




('80 Code, App. B, § IV)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)




§ 153-51  Assurance of Completion.



   Prior to recordation of a final plat, the applicant shall either
construct or install required improvements and repair existing streets and
other public facilities damaged in the development of the property or execute
and file with the Department of Community Development an agreement between
the applicant and the city.  Said agreement shall specify the period within
which required improvements and repairs shall be completed and, if the work
is not completed within the period specified, it shall provide the city with
the ability to  complete the work and recover the full cost and expense of
all improvements, together with all court costs and attorney fees necessary
to collect said amounts from the applicant.



   (A)   The applicant shall file with the agreement, to assure full
and faithful performance thereof, one of the following:



      (1)   A surety bond executed by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the State of Arizona.



      (2)   A personal bond co-signed by at least one additional
person together with evidence of financial responsibility and resources of
those signing the bond sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of ability
to proceed in accordance with the agreement.



      (3)   Cash deposit, including certificates of deposit.



      (4)   Letter of credit.



   (B)   Such assurance of full and faithful performance shall be in a
form approved by the City Attorney and shall be for a sum approved by the
City Engineer as sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements and repairs
and related engineering and incidental expenses.  The amount shall be based
on a construction estimate of the work to be completed, prepared by a
registered engineer and shall be a minimum of 100% of the uncompleted
construction estimate, concurred to by the City Engineer.



   (C)   If the applicant fails to carry out the provisions of the
agreement, without the written concurrence of the City Engineer and the City
Engineer determines that the city will incur costs or expenses to complete
these provisions, the City Engineer shall call on the assurance monies and
deposit those monies in an account specifically set aside for completion of
the requirements.  If the amount of the assurance monies, called on by the
City Engineer, exceeds the costs and expenses incurred by the city for
completion of the required improvements, the City Engineer shall refund the
remainder.  If the amount of the assurance monies, called on by the City
Engineer, proves to be insufficient to satisfy the costs and expenses
incurred by the city, the applicant shall be liable to the city to satisfy
the full amount of the shortfall, upon demand by the city.  Ten percent of
the required assurance amount shall be retained pending the city's full
acceptance of subdivision improvements by the City Engineer.  Release of
assurances shall be based on the amount of work remaining to be completed.
The city will provide written notification of the subdivision improvements
acceptance and cause the release of assurances.



('80 Code, App. B, § IV)  (Ord. 1012, passed 4-20-66; Ord. 1939, passed
6-18-80; Ord. 1966, passed 10-1-80; Ord. 2144, passed 8-3-83; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02; Ord. O2006-74, passed 11-1-06)



Required Improvements



§ 153-60  Improvements Responsibility of Subdivider; Compliance with
Standards.



   All public improvements shown on the preliminary plan, an any
additional improvements that may be required by the Planning Commission as a
condition for approval of the final plat, shall be the responsibility of the
subdivider.  All improvements constructed shall meet the City of Yuma
standard specifications, as adopted or amended.



('80 Code, App. B, § V)  (Ord. 2101, passed 11-17-82)  Penalty, see §
153-99



§ 153-61  Streets and Drainage.



   (A)   Access.  Any land hereinafter subdivided shall have frontage
on an existing dedicated and improved street, road, or highway.  Where such
proposed subdivision does not meet this condition, it shall be the
responsibility of the subdivider to provide access by means of a dedicated
and improved street or road.



   (B)   Grading.  All streets and alleys within the limits of the
subdivision shall be graded full width of the dedicated right-of-way, and all
roadways shall be improved to meet the City of Yuma standard specifications,
as adopted or amended.



   (C)   Drainage.  Any land which is considered to be excessively
irregular shall be provided with proper drainage.  Where surface drainage is
adequate, all appurtenant structures such as combination curb and gutter,
driveway and alley entrances, valley gutters, culverts, and the like, will be
constructed.  Where subsurface drainage is required, all manholes, inlets,
or connections to existing systems shall he required.  This work shall be
done prior to any street surfacing.



   (D)   Sidewalks.  Sidewalks of such width and type as required by
the City of Yuma standard specifications, as adopted or amended, shall be
constructed on both sides of all streets within the subdivision, and in all
crosswalkways.



('80 Code, App. B, § V)  (Ord. 2101, passed 11-17-82)  Penalty, see §
153-99



§ 153-62  Utilities.



   (A)   Sewer.  Sewer lines shall be installed to serve all lots
within the subdivision in accordance with minimum standards of the city. 
Where sewer service is not available, a system for disposal of sewerage shall
be installed in accordance with minimum requirements of the City-County
Health Department.  Plans for disposal systems and sanitary sewers shall be
approved by the Arizona State Board of Health.



   (B)   Water.  Water mains shall be installed to serve all lots
within the subdivision, or certified evidence shall be submitted by the
subdivider that potable water is available in sufficient quantity.



   (C)   Electricity.  Certification from the local electric power
company, that electrical service is available and will be provided, shall be
submitted by the subdivider.  Location of power distribution poles and
street light standards shall be indicated on preliminary plat.



   (D)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be installed in
accordance with requirements of the City Engineer, City of Yuma Fire
Department, and the recommendations of the Board of Fire Underwriters.



   (E)   Street Lighting.



      (1)   Street lighting shall be installed in accordance with
city standards along all streets within the subdivision and along perimeter
streets developed in conjunction with the subdivision.  Where all utilities
are proposed to be underground, underground street light circuits shall also
be provided.  The pole, lamp, luminaries and bracket and underground
circuits shall be provided by the developer.



      (2)   Upon acceptance of the street lighting improvements by
the city, the monthly street lighting charges shall be paid by the city. 
The street lighting improvements shall be maintained by the city.



   (F)   Street name signs.  Signs shall be placed at all street
intersections.  Specifications for design, construction, location and
installation shall be in accordance with City of Yuma standard
specifications, as adopted or amended.



   (G)   Utility connections.  Where practicable, no utilities shall
be installed under any streets except where access lines are required from
one area to another.



   (H)   Mailboxes.  USPS-approved cluster box unit mailboxes shall be
installed by the developer in the location(s) approved by the USPS and
identified on the final plat.  For residential developments, mailbox units
must be installed prior to the final inspection of the first dwelling unit
(not including the model homes). The responsibility of maintenance,
replacement and repairs of the cluster box unit mailboxes is that of the home
owners after initial installation by the developer.



('80 Code, App. B, § V)  (Ord. 2101, passed 11-17-82; Ord. O2010-62, passed
12-1-10)  Penalty, see § 153-99



§ 153-63  Schedule of Installation.



   (A)   The improvements required to be made under these regulations
shall be installed in compliance with schedules agreed upon during approval
of preliminary plan.



   (B)   Installation of all improvements shall be done under
supervision of the City Engineer or under the supervision of the offices of
the city having jurisdiction.



('80 Code, App. B, § V)  (Ord. 2101, passed 11-17-82)  Penalty, see §
153-99



Administration and Enforcement



§ 153-75  Administration by City Planning Department.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Department
of Community Development, and appeals from any decision of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall go to the City Council.  Notice of the appeal shall
be given to said Planning and Zoning Commission 30 days preceding any meeting
held by the City Council pertaining to said appeal.



('80 Code, App. B, § VII)  (Ord. 2091, passed 9-22-82; Ord. O2002-24,
passed 5-1-02)



§ 153-76  Variances.



   Where the Planning Commission finds that hardships may result from
strict compliance with any of these regulations, it may vary the regulations
so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured;
provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the
intent and purpose of the Master Plan or of these regulations.



('80 Code, App. B, § VII)  (Ord. 2091, passed 9-22-82)



§ 153-77  Large Scale Development.



   The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified in
the case of a plan and program for complete community or a neighborhood unit,
which in the judgment of the Planning Department and the City Engineer,
provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation,
recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed
and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal
provisions as will assure conformity to, and achievement of, the plan.



('80 Code, App. B, § VII)  (Ord. 2091, passed 9-22-82)



§ 153-78  Sale of Lots by Metes and Bounds Description.



   The sale of property to be used as lots, plots, or building sites in
subdivisions only by a metes and bounds description shall be presumed to be
an attempt to evade the provisions of this ordinance, and such an instrument
shall not be eligible for filing and recording in the office of the County
Recorder.



('80 Code, App. B, § VII)  (Ord. 2091, passed 9-22-82)



§ 153-79  Issuance of Building Permits.



   No building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building on
any property other than on a lot of record prior to adoption of these
regulations or a resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision
without approval of the City Planning Commission.



('80 Code, App. B, § VII)  (Ord. 2091, passed 9-22-82)



§ 153-99  Penalty.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter.  Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions or the requirements of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not
more than ten days or by both fine and imprisonment.  Each separate day or
part thereof during which any violation of this chapter occurs or continues
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof
shall be punishable as herein provided.



('80 Code, App. B, § VII)  (Ord. 2091, passed 9-22-82)



Chapter 154:  Zoning



Section



General Provisions



Article 01 - Interpretation, Scope and Definitions



   154-01.01   Interpretation, purpose and conformity



   154-01.02   General provisions for buildings and uses



   154-01.03   Enforcement



   154-01.04   Building permits already issued



   154-01.05   Fees and charges



         (A)   Zoning applications



         (B)   General Plan or text amendment applications



         (C)   Conditional use permit applications



         (D)   Variance or appeal applications



         (E)   Subdivision review applications



         (F)   Miscellaneous applications



         (G)   Continuations for any of the above processes



         (H)   Engineering fees



   154-01.06   Repealed



   154-01.07   Definitions



Article 02 - Administration



   154-02.01   Planning and Zoning Commission



         (A)   Created



         (B)   Responsibilities



         (C)   Duties



         (D)   Powers



         (E)   Composition



         (F)   Terms of members



         (G)   Organization



         (H)   Removal



         (I)   Compensation; expenses



   154-02.02   Hearing Officer



         (A)   Establishment



         (B)   Authority



         (C)   Variances



         (D)   Temporary uses



         (E)   Expansion of nonconforming uses or structures



         (F)   Conditional use permits



         (G)   Appeals



         (H)   Hearing Officer



   154-02.03   Zoning Administrator



         (A)   Establishment



         (B)   Duties



   154-02.04   Design and Historic Review Commission (DHRC)



         (A)   Establishment



         (B)   Organization of the DHRC



         (C)   Purpose



         (D)   Duties



         (E)   Appeals and variances



   154-02.05   Board of Adjustment



         (A)   Authority



         (B)   Duties



   154-02.06   Minor Variance Committee



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Duties



Article 03 - Zoning Procedures



   154-03.01   Citizen review process



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Notification



         (C)   Neighborhood meetings



   154-03.02   Notification for public hearings



         (A)   Zoning amendments (boundaries and/or regulations)



         (B)   Variances



         (C)   Appeals of the Zoning Administrator and the Minor
Variance Committee



         (D)   Conditional use permits



   154-03.03   Zoning amendments



   154-03.04   Variances and appeals



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applications



         (C)   Public hearing



         (D)   Zoning Board of Adjustment action



         (E)   Stay of proceedings



         (F)   Expiration and time extensions



         (G)   Revocation or modification of variances



         (H)   Minor variances



   154-03.05   Conditional use permits



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Conditions of approval



         (C)   Exceptions; approval or denial



         (D)   Types of conditional uses



         (E)   Application



         (F)   Public hearing



         (G)   Planning and Zoning Commission action



         (H)   Expiration and time extensions



         (I)   Revocation or modification of conditional use
permits



   154-03.06   Protected development rights



   154-03.07   Plan of development (PSC Zoning District)



   154-03.08   Design review procedure



   154-03.09   Historic designation establishment procedure



   154-03.10   Land use waiver (AD Overlay Zone)



Article 04 - Zoning Districts, Maps and Annexation



   154-04.01   Zoning districts established



         (A)   Classifications



         (B)   Specific plans



   154-04.02   Boundaries and areas



   154-04.03   Repealed



   154-04.04   General Plan



   154-04.05   Annexed areas



         (A)   Zoning classification



         (B)   Building permits



         (C)   Nonconforming uses



Article 05 - Rural and Low Density Residential Zoning Districts



   154-05.01   Agriculture District (AG)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



   154-05.02   Suburban Ranch Districts (SR-1, SR-2, SR-3 and SR-4)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses02



         (F)   Property development standards



   154-05.03   Residential Estate Districts (RE-12, RE-18 and RE-35)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



   154-05.04   Low Density Residential Districts (R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-12,
R-1-20 and R-1-40)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



   154-05.05   Low Density Single-Family Residential District (R-l-5)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



Article 06 - Manufactured Housing and Recreational Vehicle Zoning Districts



   154-06.01   Residence-Manufactured Housing District (R-MH)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability and general requirements



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards0



         (F)   Exterior appearance criteria



         (G)   Plans submittal



   154-06.02   Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District (RVS)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



   154-06.03   Manufactured Housing Subdivision District (MHS)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



         (F)   Other requirements for manufactured home
subdivisions



         (G)   Waivers



   154-06.04   Manufactured Housing Park District (MHP)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



         (F)   Placement standards



         (G)   Waivers



Article 07 - Multiple-Family Residential Zoning Districts



   154-07.01   Medium Density Residential District (R-2)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



   154-07.02   Medium Density Single-Family Residential District (R-2-5)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



   154-07.03   High Density Residential District (R-3)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



Article 08 - Commercial Zoning Districts



   154-08.01   Transitional District (TR)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



   154-08.02   Planned Shopping Center District (PSC)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Procedural regulations



         (D)   Property development standards



   154-08.03   Limited Commercial District (B-1)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



   154-08.04   General Commercial District (B-2)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



   154-08.05   Business Park District (BP)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Conditional uses



         (D)   Property development standards



Article 09 - Industrial Zoning Districts



   154-09.01   Industrial Park District (I-P)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses3



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards85



   154-09.02   Light Industrial District (L-I)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Permitted accessory uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards9



   154-09.03   Heavy Industrial District (H-I)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Permitted principal uses



         (C)   Conditional uses



         (D)   Property development standards



Article 10 - Old Town Zoning District



   154-10.01   Old Town District (OT)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Prohibited uses



         (F)   Property development standards



   154-10.02   Project review



         (A)   Applicability



         (B)   General requirements



   154-10.03   Signage regulations



         (A)   General regulations



         (B)   Permitted sign types



         (C)   Prohibited signs



         (D)   Sign standards



         (E)   Sign examples



Article 11 - Historic Park District



   154-11.01   Historic Park District (HP)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Conditional uses



         (F)   Property development standards



Article 12 - Military Reservation District



   154-12.01   Military Reservation District (MR)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



Article 13 - Recreation and Open Space



   154-13.01   Recreation and Open Space District (RO)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Conditional uses



         (E)   Property development standards



Article 14 - Overlay Zoning Districts



   154-14.01   Aesthetic Overlay District (AO)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Design review procedure



         (D)   Property development standards



         (E)   Aesthetic overlay district design guidelines



         (F)   Building permits based upon approved project
design plan



         (G)   Amendments to approved project design plan



         (H)   Minor project design plan changes



   154-14.02   AutoCenter Overlay District (ACO)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Property development standards



         (D)   Design review procedures



   154-14.03   Bed and Breakfast Overlay District (BB)



         (A)   Purpose and intent



         (B)   Property development standards



         (C)   Additions to the overlay district



   154-14.04   Historic Overlay District (H)



         (A)   Purpose and intent



         (B)   Initiation of historic site or district



         (C)   Historic District criteria



         (D)   Historic site criteria



         (E)   Building and demolition permits for historic sites
and structures within Historic Districts



         (F)   Public safety exceptions



         (G)   Conflicting regulations



   154-14.05   Airport Overlay District (AD)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Additional height and use regulations



         (E)   Land use waiver



         (F)   Nonconforming uses



         (G)   Administration



         (H)   Amendments



         (I)   Variances



   154-14.06   Public Overlay District (P)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Permitted principal uses



         (D)   Permitted accessory uses



         (E)   Property development standards



         (F)   Procedure



   154-14.07   Planned Unit Developments Overlay District (PUD)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Criteria for establishment



         (D)   Application



         (E)   Final approval



   154-14.08   Smart Growth Overlay District (SGO)



         (A)   Purpose



         (B)   Intent



         (C)   Applicability



         (D)   Permitted principal uses and conditional uses



         (E)   Rezoning submittal requirements



         (F)   Minimum requirements



         (G)   Development, design and landscaping standards



         (H)   Density



         (I)   Sign standards



         (J)   Variations, minor deviations and major deviations



   154-14.09   Infill Overlay District (IO)



         (A)   Purpose and intent



         (B)   Applicability



         (C)   Relationship to underlying zoning districts



         (D)   Use regulations



         (E)   Pre-development meetings



         (F)   Design review procedures



         (G)   Infill Incentive Plan



Article 15 - General Provisions



   154-15.01   Purpose



   154-15.02   General provisions for buildings and uses



   154-15.03   Height limits



   154-15.04   Projections, encroachments1



   154-15.05   Swimming pools



   154-15.06   Walls and fences



   154-15.07   Manufactured home placement permits



   154-15.07.01   Park Model Placement Permits



   154-15.08   Home occupations



         (A)   Purpose and intent



         (B)   Performance standards



         (C)   Uses not permitted



         (D)   Limited use home occupation



   154-15.09   Live/work space



   154-15.10   Adult oriented businesses



         (A)   Purpose9



         (B)   Findings



         (C)   Location requirements



         (D)   Number in building



         (E)   Nonconformity



         (F)   Encroachment of other uses



         (G)   Variance to location requirements



   154-15.11   Noise limitation standards for B-1 and B-2 Commercial
Zones



   154-15.12   4H and FFA



   154-15.13   Mobile food vending



   154-15.14   Transient food vending



   154-15.15   Accessory buildings, uses and structures in certain
residential districts



   154-15.16   Accessory dwellings, carriage houses and garage
apartments in residential districts



   154-15.17   Corner markets in residential districts within the
Infill Overlay District



   154-15.18   Composting



Article 16 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations



   154-16.01   Purpose



   154-16.02   General requirements



   154-16.03   Parking lots



         (A)   Design standards



         (B)   Improvement of parking lots (five or more required
spaces)



         (C)   Vehicular access required



   154-16.04   Parking in residential or services districts



   154-16.05   Location



   154-16.06   Exempt areas



   154-16.07   Parking spaces required



   154-16.08   Off-street loading regulations



   154-16.09   Variances from the off-street parking and loading
regulations



   154-16.10   Permitted reductions



Article 17 - Sign Regulations



   154-17.01   Purpose1



   154-17.02   Applicability and general requirements



         (A)   Scope



         (B)   Responsibility



         (C)   Nonconforming signage



         (D)   Conflict and severability



         (E)   Message substitution clause



         (F)   Sign face area



         (G)   Additional sign regulations



   154-17.03   On-site signage



         (A)   Address/nameplates



         (B)   Freestanding signage on shared premises



         (C)   Standards and criteria for permanent on-site
signage



         (D)   Temporary signage



         (E)   Directional signage



   154-17.04   Off-site signage



         (A)   Required zoning districts and frontages



         (B)   Standards and criteria for off-site signage



         (C)   Prohibited locations



   154-17.05   Additional requirements and provisions



         (A)   Construction and installation standards



         (B)   Sign label



         (C)   Maintenance



         (D)   Damaged or deteriorated signage



         (E)   Sign removal



         (F)   Locations within right-of-way



         (G)   Balloons and inflatable devices




   154-17.06   Prohibited and exempt signs and restrictions




         (A)   Prohibited signs



         (B)   Exempt signage



         (C)   Signage for which no permits are required



   154-17.07   Administration



         (A)   Responsibilities



         (B)   Issuance of building permits



         (C)   Fees



         (D)   Variances



   154-17.99   Penalty



Article 18 - Outdoor Lighting Regulations



   154-18.01   Purpose



   154-18.02   General requirements



         (A)   Top-mounted



         (B)   Bottom-mounted



         (C)   Mercury vapor



         (D)   Searchlights



         (E)   Recreational facilities



         (F)   Outdoor advertising off-site signs



         (G)   Flagpoles



   154-18.03   Permanent exemptions



         (A)   Nonconforming fixtures



         (B)   Fossil fuel light5



         (C)   State and federal facilities



   154-18.04   Submittal of plans



         (A)   Submittal contents



         (B)   Subdivision plat certification



Article 19 - Personal Wireless Communications



   154-19.01   Purpose



   154-19.02   General application requirements



   154-19.03   General development standards



   154-19.04   New and replacement freestanding monopoles and lattice
towers



   154-19.05   Temporary mobile personal wireless communication units



   154-19.06   Roof-mounted personal wireless communication facilities



   154-19.07   Wall-mounted personal wireless communication facilities



   154-19.08   Concealed/disguised personal wireless communication
facilities



   154-19.09   Personal Wireless Communication Facilities, Wi-Fi radio
equipment, microcell equipment, and small cells on public rights-of-way.



   154-19.10   Illustrative examples and table of uses



   154-19.11   Eligible facilities requests



Article 20 - Landscape Regulations



   154-20.01   Purpose



   154-20.02   Applicability



         (A)   Applicability in zoning districts



         (B)   Change of use



         (C)   City landscaping guidelines



         (D)   Conflicts with other regulations



         (E)   Uses prohibited; alleys



         (F)   De minimus standards



   154-20.03   Landscape design standards



         (A)   Landscape design



         (B)   Plant and hardscape material



   154-20.04   Required landscape areas



         (A)   Single-family residential requirements



         (B)   Requirements for all other zoning districts



   154-20.05   Maintenance



         (A)   Maintenance required



         (B)   Irrigation system maintenance required



         (C)   Maintenance responsibility



         (D)   City maintenance responsibility



   154-20.06   Administration



         (A)   Landscape plan submittal requirements



         (B)   Encroachment permits required



         (C)   Assurance of installation



         (D)   Variances



Article 21 - Nonconforming Provisions



   154-21.01   Extending existing uses or structures



   154-21.02   Replacing nonconforming buildings or structures



   154-21.03   Nonconforming Airport District Overlay



         (A)   Nonconforming uses



         (B)   Discontinuance of legal nonconforming uses



         (C)   Expansion of a legal nonconforming use



         (D)   Change of legal nonconforming use



   154-21.04   Nonconforming signage



         (A)   Continuance



         (B)   Repairs and alterations



         (C)   Replacement of on-site signage



Article 22 - Non-Profit Medical Marijuana Dispensaries



   154-22.01   Purpose



   154-22.02   Definitions



   154-22.03   Location Restrictions and Operating Provisions



Penalty



   154-999   Penalty



List of Tables



   Table No. 1   AutoCenter Overlay signage



   Table No. 2   Airport Overlay District land use matrix



   Table No. 3   RADSA/AIOD-1/AIOD-2 land use compatibility matrix



   Table No. 4   Loading space requirements



   Table No. 5   Standards and criteria for permanent on-site signage



   Table No. 6   Standards and criteria for temporary signage



   Table No. 7   Sign area and sign height



   Table No. 8   Shielding requirements



   Table No. 9   Distance and output (MCAS)



   Table No. 10   Personal wireless communication facilities permitted
uses by  zoning district



List of Illustrations



   Illustrative Example 1   Old Town Zoning District; types of signs



   Illustrative Example 2   Graph No. 1



   Illustrative Example 3   Signage examples



   Illustrative Example 4   Types of antennas



   Illustrative Example 5   Use of existing vertical elements



   Illustrative Example 6   Use of existing building height and wall
mounting



   Illustrative Example 7   Types of towers



   Illustrative Example 8   Typical required screening for facilities



List of Appendices



   Appendix A:  Cielo Verde Specific Plan



Charter reference:



   Regulation of land use, see Charter Art. III, § 12



Statutory reference:



   Municipal zoning, see A.R.S. §§ 9-462 et seq.



General Provisions



Article 01 - Interpretation, Scope and Definitions



§ 154-01.01  Interpretation, Purpose and Conformity.



   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of a comprehensive plan designed to lessen congestion in the
streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote the
health, safety, morals or general welfare; to provide adequate light and air;
to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other requirements. Except as herein provided to
the contrary, it is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul
or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or
ordinances or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted, except
that any structures or uses of land or buildings commenced after the
enactment of this chapter shall be subject to its provisions, and where there
is a conflict between any previous law or ordinance, rule or regulation which
might otherwise affect such structure or use, the provisions of this chapter
shall control.



   (B)   Where any action in regard to a structure or use is regulated
or controlled by more than one provision of this chapter, such action shall
comply with all applicable provisions of both regulations, except that if a
conflict exists the limitation or requirement which is most restrictive shall
govern.



   (C)   The land use conformity matrix shall be used to determine
consistency with the General Plan for zoning district changes. Arizona state
law requires all zoning or rezoning ordinances, regulations or specific plans
to be consistent with and conform to the land use element of the General
Plan. The City General Plan land use element prescribes a range of land uses.
This chapter prescribes a range of allowable uses and development standards
for zoning districts of the city. The land use conformity matrix identifies
the appropriate city zoning districts that are consistent with and conform to
each land use designation identified in the General Plan land use element.
The land use conformity matrix meets the purpose and intent of the General
Plan to provide a guide for land use, development and on-going planning
activities.



('80 Code, App. A, § 10)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. O2001-83, passed 10-3-2001; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-01.02  General Provisions for Buildings and Uses.



   (A)   Future changes; zoning effects, every structure and use. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building, structure or premises shall
hereafter be used, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be
constructed, erected, leased, reconstructed, extended, moved, enlarged or
materially altered except in conformity with the provision of this chapter
for the district in which it is located.



   (B)   Ordinance not retroactive.  If, at the time of the enactment
of this chapter, any lot, building or structure is being used in a manner or
for a purpose which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter and
which is not prohibited by some other ordinance, such manner or use or
purpose may be continued.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-01.03  Enforcement.



   (A)   Officials and employees.  All officials and employees of the
city vested with the authority or duty to issue permits shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit, certificate or license
for uses, purposes, buildings or structures in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter; any such permit, certificate or license issued in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.



   (B)   Violations.  Any building or structure set up, erected,
constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to
the provisions of this chapter, and any use of any land, building or premise
established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter shall be, and the same is hereby, declared to be unlawful and a
public nuisance; the Zoning Administrator shall immediately commence action
or proceedings to abate, to remove or to enjoin occupancy of such building,
structure or land in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other
steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief
as will abate and remove such buildings or structures, and restrain and
enjoin any person, firm or corporation from setting up, erecting, building,
maintaining, occupying or using any such building or structure or using
property contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The remedies provided
for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive.



('80 Code, App. A, § 200)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1378, passed
9-4-1974; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-01.04  Building Permits Already Issued.



Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof for which a
building permit has been granted before this chapter becomes effective and
the construction of which from such plans shall have been started within 60
days after this chapter becomes effective; except that if the building
operation in question is discontinued for a period of not less than 60 days,
any further construction shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 220)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O2010-32,
passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-01.05  Fees and Charges.



   There is hereby established the following fees.



   (A)   Zoning applications.



 


 
Fee


Airport district waiver
 
$500 for the first acre or portion thereof, plus an additional $50 for each
additional acre, or portion thereof


All residential districts
 
$300 for the first acre or portion thereof, plus an additional $20 for each
additional acre, or portion thereof


Amendment to an approved development plan
 
25% of original fee


Commercial and industrial districts
 
$500 for the first acre or portion thereof, plus an additional $50 for each
additional acre, or portion thereof


PUD/planned unit shopping center
 
$500 for the first acre or portion thereof, plus an additional $50 for each
additional acre, or portion thereof



 



   (B)   General Plan or text amendment applications.



 


 
Fee


To amend land use plan map
 
$400 + $50/acre


To amend land use plan text
 
$400 per chapter of text


To amend zoning or subdivision regulation text
 
$400 per chapter of text



 



   (C)   Conditional use permit applications.



 


 
Fee


All residential districts
 
$275


Commercial and industrial districts
 
$875


Downtown improvement district
 
$300



 



   (D)   Variance or appeal applications.



 


 
Fee


All residential districts
 
$125 for the first acre or portion thereof, plus an additional $20 for each
additional acre, or portion thereof


Appeal of ordinance interpretation
 
$200


Commercial/industrial districts
 
$500 for the first acre or portion thereof, plus an additional $20 for each
additional acre, or portion thereof


Exception request
 
50% of variance fee


Minor variance
 
50% of variance fee



 



   (E)   Subdivision review applications.



 


 
Fee




Amendment to an approved lot tie/lot split plat
 
$100 per request plus $15 per modification


Amendment to an approved subdivision plat
 
$500 per request plus $45 per modification


Extension of a preliminary plat approval
 
$95


Final plat
 
$300 + $2 per lot


Lot tie/lot split - multi-family or nonresidential
 
$300


Lot tie/lot split - single-family residential
 
$100


Preliminary plat
 
$1,000 + $5 per lot




 



   (F)   Miscellaneous applications.



 


 
Fee


Aesthetic Overlay District design review
 
$100


Right-of-way or alley abandonment
 
$250


Street name change
 
$745


Written verification of zoning
 
$45



 



   (G)   Continuations for any of the above processes.



 


 
Fee




Continued public hearing at request of applicant for 0—90 days (these fees
are cumulative)
 
10% of original fee


Continued public hearing at request of applicant for 91—365 days (these
fees are cumulative)
 
50% of original fee


Reconsideration of approved rezoning
 
75% of original fee


Request for changes to conditions of approved rezoning
 
60% of original fee


Time extension of approval
 
75% of original fee


Any property owner of land annexed into the city may file an application for
rezoning, variance or conditional use permit at no charge within six months
subsequent to the effective date of annexation. This provision does not
include applications for a Planned Unit Development, Planned Unit Shopping
Center or Airport District waiver.


If an application for rezoning and a planned unit development or planned unit
shopping center designation are processed concurrently, only the planned unit
development or planned unit shopping center fee shall be applicable.


All fees shall be due and payable at the time of filing any application for
the Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of Adjustment or City Council
agenda. The fee for a continued public hearing to a specific date shall be
due and payable at the time of the request for continuance.


An annual increase in the above planning and zoning fees is to be done each
subsequent July 1 based on the previous year’s West B/C Cost of Living
Index.




 



   (H)   Engineering fees.  There is hereby established the following
engineering fees.



 


 
Fee




Encroachment permit fees
 



   Annual utility maintenance permit*
 
$100


   Multi-family residential and all other permits
 
$40


   Single-family residential permit
 
$15


Public infrastructure oversight fees**
 



   1—25 lots
 
$75 per lot


   26—60 lots
 
$60 per lot


   61 + lots
 
$45 per lot


   All after the fact permits
 
Double the normal fee


*This fee does not apply to APS, Southwest Gas or Century Communications.


** The public infrastructure oversight fees cover the following services:


   (1)  Review and approval of materials submittals;


   (2)  Oversight of utilities (water/sewer) construction;


   (3)  Inspection of stormwater drainage facilities construction;


   (4)  Inspection of street construction (streets, curb, gutter,
sidewalks, pathways); and


   (5)  Inspection of non-water/sewer utilities in the public
right-of-way.


These public infrastructure oversight fees do not cover the following
services:


   (1)  ADEQ water and sewer related requirements;


   (2)  Surveying and construction staking;


   (3)  Landscape inspection;


   (4)  Inspection of non-water/sewer utilities in the public utility
easements;



   (5)  Meter/service connection for water and sewer; and


   (6)  Inspection of private fire suppression underground lines.


An annual increase in the above planning and zoning fees is to be done each
subsequent July 1 based on the previous year’s West B/C Cost of Living
Index.




 



(Ord. O98-52, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-01.06  Repealed.



§ 154-01.07  Definitions.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Where a land use is presented to the city and it is not defined
below, then the presented land use shall be classified to the defined land
use to which it is the most reasonably related.



   (B)   If the word or term is not defined in the zoning code, it
shall be defined according to the most recent edition of Webster’s New
International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



      ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN ROUTE.  A pedestrian route designed in
compliance with the Arizonians with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines
(ADAAG).



      ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.  An accessory building or
structure is one which:



         (a)   Is subordinate and incidental to the principal
building or principal use;



         (b)   Is subordinate in building area, intensity of use
or purpose to the principal building or principal use;



         (c)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience and
necessity of the occupants of the principal building or principal use; and



         (d)   Is located on the same lot with the same zoning as
the principal building or principal use.



      ACCESSORY DWELLING. An additional dwelling unit established in
conjunction with a single-family dwelling on the same lot. An accessory
dwelling is a site-built unit on a permanent foundation featuring a kitchen,
sleeping and full bathroom facilities; the accessory dwelling is subordinate
in size and intensity in comparison to the principle dwelling unit. An
accessory dwelling unit may also be referred to as a guest house, a converted
pool house, a carriage house and/or a garage apartment.



(Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



      ACCESSORY USE.  Any use which serves a principal use or building
and is subordinate to the principal use or building in terms of either area,
extent or purpose.



      ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS.  This term is synonymous with
“sexually oriented business” and means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater,
adult video store, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter
center.



         (a)   ADULT ARCADE.  Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion
picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are regularly
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one
time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis upon matters exhibiting “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”.



         (b)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT
VIDEO STORE.  A commercial establishment which has as a significant or
substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or
substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial
portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial
section of its sales or display space for sale or rental for any form of
consideration any one or more of the following:



            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other
printed matter or photographs, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion
pictures, video reproductions, compact discs, slides or other visual
representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or display of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”; or



            2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which
are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.



         (c)   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, bar, restaurant or
similar commercial establishment which regularly features:



            1.   Persons who appear semi-nude;



            2.   Live performances which are characterized by
the exposure of  “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual
activities”; or



            3.   Films, motion pictures, computer simulations,
holograms, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, which
are characterized by the exhibition or display of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”.



         (d)   ADULT MOTEL.  A hotel, motel or similar
commercial establishment which:



            1.   Offers accommodations to the public for any
form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, computer simulations, holograms, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized
by the exhibition or display of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public
right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of
photographic reproductions;



            2.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period
of time that is less than ten hours; or



            3.   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping
room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.



         (e)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A commercial
establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, holograms,
computer simulations, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the
depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”.



         (f)   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall,
auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear nude or semi-nude, or in live performances which are
characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by
“specified sexual activities”.



         (g)   ADULT VIDEO STORE.  See ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE or ADULT STORE.



         (h)   ESCORT.  A person who, for consideration, and for
another person, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, date or to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease.



         (i)   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business association
who furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of
its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.



         (j)   NUDE, NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing
of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus or anal cleft
with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or the showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



         (k)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO.  Any place where a person who
appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas”; a
commercial establishment which regularly features a person (or persons) who
appears semi-nude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money
or any form of consideration. A NUDE MODEL STUDIO does not mean a modeling
class or the facility for such class, operated:



            1.   By a proprietary school licensed by the State
Of Arizona; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation; or



            2.   By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation.



         (l)   SEMI-NUDE or in A SEMI-NUDE CONDITION.  The
showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the
areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks.
This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human breast,
but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast,
exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing
apparel, provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.



         (m)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER.  A business or
commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers
for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual
activities”. The definition of SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER or any sexually
oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.



         (n)   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.  Human genitals in a
state of sexual arousal.



            1.   The human male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or



            2.   Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or a female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.



         (o)   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the
following:



            1.   The fondling of another person’s genitals,
pubic region, anus or female breasts;



            2.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or



            3.   Excretory functions as part of, or in
connection with, any of the activities set forth in divisions 1. through 2.
above.



      AIRPORT.  For the purpose of the Airport Overlay District (AD),
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



         (a)   ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE ONE (APZ-1).  The area
within a 3,000 foot wide by 5,000 foot long rectangle that starts at the end
of each clear zone. It is centered and measured on the extended runway
centerline, terminating 8,000 feet from the end of each main military
runway(s).



         (b)   ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE TWO (APZ-2).  The area
within a 3,000 foot wide by 7,000 foot long rectangle that starts at the end
of each Accident Potential Zone One. It is centered and measured on the
extended runway centerline, terminating 15,000 feet from the end of each main
military runway(s).



         (c)   AIRPORT INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 1 (AIOD-1). 
Area of intermediate intensity use; directly under some regular flight paths
but not under straight-in approaches and departures to Runway 8-26. It
consists of that property located within an area bounded by the north
right-of-way line of 32nd Street on the north, the west right-of-way line of
Avenue 3 E on the west, the east right-of-way line of Avenue 4 E on the east,
and that area which is more than one-eighth of a mile (nominal) north of the
extended centerline of Runway 8-26 following existing property lines.
Additionally, this overlay district shall apply to property located within an
area bounded by the future alignment of 36th Street (the east-west
mid-section line) on the south, the west right-of-way line of Avenue 3 E on
the west, the east right-of-way line of Avenue 4 E on the east and a northern
boundary that is one-eighth of a mile (nominal) south of the extended
centerline of Runway 8-26 following existing property lines.



         (d)   AIRPORT INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT 2 (AIOD-2). 
Most intensive use/least restrictive area, AIOD; areas which are not directly
under either the regular straight-in approaches and departures to Runway 8-26
or other regular flight paths but whose proximity to flight paths
demonstrates a need for enhanced public safety measures. It consists of that
property located within an area bounded by the future alignment of 36th
Street (east-west mid-section line) on the south, the west right-of-way line
of 4th Avenue on the west, the west airport property line on the east, and
that area which is more than one-eighth of a mile (nominal) south of the
extended centerline of Runway 8-26 following existing property lines.



         (e)   AIRPORT NOISE AND ACCIDENT POTENTIAL MAP.  A map
prepared by the Department of Development Services for the city in the
vicinity of the Marine Corps Air Station and Yuma International Airport,
dated March, 1979, as amended, from the data contained in Report No. 651-78
and map dated November, 1978, Noise Contour Study, Marine Corps Air Station
and Yuma International Airport for the City and County of Yuma, prepared by
J.J. Van Houten and Associates (Noise Contour Lines); and from data contained
in Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 152, Airport Aides Program, 1974;
and Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Space, 1971, for Runways 17-35 and
8-26 (FAA clear zones); and from data contained in Facilities Planning Factor
Criteria for Navy and Marine Corps Shore Installations, NAVFAC P-80, Volume
1, (military clear zones) and Department of Navy, Aircraft Accident Potential
Zone Guidelines, May, 1976 (APZ-1 and APZ-2), for Runways 3Left/21Right and
3Right/21Left. The provisions of this map hereby create and establish
specific airport noise and accident potential zones and are hereby
incorporated by this reference and are hereby a part of the official zoning
ordinance of the city and a part of the official zoning map of the city for
the purpose of establishing various land uses and design criteria within the
Airport District.



            1.   65—70 dB NOISE ZONE.  The area between the
65 Ldn noise contour lines developed by the application of the day-night
average sound level methodology of sound measurement (Ldn).



            2.   70—75 dB NOISE ZONE.  The area between the
70 Ldn and 75 Ldn noise contour lines developed by the application of the
day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurement (Ldn), but,
not within any accident potential zone (APZ) or clear zone as defined herein.



            3.   GREATER THAN 75 dB NOISE ZONE. The area
within the 75 Ldn and greater noise contour line developed by the application
of the day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurement (Ldn),
but not within any accident potential zone (APZ) or clear zone as defined
herein.



         (f)   AIRPORT RUNWAY APPROACH CLEARANCE MAP.  A map
prepared by the Department of Development Services for the city in the
vicinity of the Marine Corps Air Station and Yuma International Airport,
dated March, 1979, as amended, from the data contained in Federal Aviation
Regulations (FAR), Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable Space, 1971, for
Runways 17-35 and 8-26, and from data contained in Naval Facilities (NAVFAC),
P-80, Runway Safety Clearances, 1975, for Runways 3Left/21Right and
3Right/21Left. The provisions of this map hereby create and establish
specific airport approach clearance zones consisting of the area on or
underlying the  primary,  approach, transitional, horizontal and conical
surfaces and are hereby incorporated by this reference and are hereby a part
of the official zoning ordinance of the city and a part of the official
zoning map of the city for the purpose of limiting the height of buildings
and structures into the navigable airspace above and surrounding the Marine
Corps Air Station and Yuma International Airport.



         (g)   CLEAR ZONE.



            1.   MILITARY CLEAR ZONE.  The area within a
3,000 foot long by 3,000 foot wide square measured along the extended
runway(s) centerline beginning at the end of all main military runways and
measured at right angles to the extended runway centerline.



            2.   CIVILIAN CLEAR ZONE.  An area on either side
of an extension of the centerline of a runway beginning at a line 200 feet
from the end of the runway and 500 feet in width and flaring outward to a
width of 650 feet for a utility runway (Runway 35), 700 feet for a
greater-than-utility runway (Runways 8 and 26) and 800 feet for a utility
runway with a nonprecision instrument approach (Runway 17) at a point 1,200
feet from the end of the runway. These clear zones are from data contained in
Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR), Part 77, Objects Affecting Navigable
Space, 1971.



         (h)   DAY-NIGHT SOUND LEVEL (LDN).  The time-weighted
day/night energy average of a noise level for a 24-hour time period.
Weighting factors are included which place a penalty on noise events
occurring at night between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and for those which occur
on weekends. It has as its base the A-weighted sound level which is designed
to approximate the response of the human ear to sound.



         (i)   DECIBEL (dB).  The physical unit commonly used to
describe noise levels as a measure of sound pressure levels.



         (j)   HIGH NOISE OR ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONE.  The area
within the noise contours established by the most recent air installation
compatible use zone report, including Accident Potential Zone One and Two,
plus the land starting 200 feet from the end points of the main military
runways and at a width of 3,000 feet and symmetrical about a centerline
between the runways extending outward to a point of 30,000 feet from the
point of beginning. The outer width is 17,500 feet.



         (k)   HIGH NOISE LEVELS.  Sound levels which equal or
exceed that within the 65 Ldn noise contour line developed by the application
of the day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurement (Ldn).



         (l)   Ldn.  The day-night sound level.



         (m)   RUNWAY.  An artificially surfaced strip of ground
that is designed and used at an airport for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft.



         (n)   RUNWAY APPROACH DEPARTURE SAFETY AREA - (RADSA). 
Least intensive use/most restrictive area; directly under regular,
straight-in approaches and departures to Runway 8-26 and/or directly under
other regular flight paths.



            1.   EAST AREA.  All property located in the area
bounded by the west right-of-way line of Avenue 3 E on the west, east-west
lines one-eighth of a mile (nominal) north and south of the extended
centerline of Runway 8-26 following existing property lines and the east
right-of-way line of Avenue 4 E on the east.



            2.   WEST AREA.  All property located within
one-eighth of a mile (nominal) north and south of the extended centerline of
Runway 8-26 following existing property lines between the west property line
of the airport and the west right-of-way line of 4th Avenue.



         (o)   TERRITORY IN THE VICINITY OF A MILITARY AIRPORT. 
The area five miles to the north, south and west and ten miles to the east of
the center of the main runway of a military airport.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)    (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837,
passed 6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. O2001-03, passed
1-3-2001; Ord. O2002-30, passed 8-7-2002)



      ALLEYS.  Any right-of-way dedicated to set aside for vehicular
traffic, entering or going through a city block. After the enactment of this
chapter no alley shall be less than 16 feet in width.



      ALTERATION.  Any aesthetic, architectural, mechanical or
structural change to the exterior surface of any part of an existing
building, structure or object.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



      AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL.  The composite noise from all sources near
and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes a normal or
existing level of environmental noise at a given location and time.



      ANTENNA.  Any device on a tower, building or structure that
radiates or captures electromagnetic waves for the purpose of communicating
information.



         (a)   PANEL ANTENNA.  A relatively flat rectangular
device that transmits or receives communications signals in directional
pattern of less than 360 degrees. See Article 19.



         (b)   PARABOLIC ANTENNA.  A dish shaped device that
transmits or receives communications signals in a specific directional
pattern. See Article 19.



         (c)   WHIP ANTENNA.  A long thin device that transmits
or receives communications signals in a 360 degree radial pattern and is
minimally viewable. See Article 19.



      APPURTENANCES.  Any architectural feature not used for human
occupancy, consisting of spires, belfries, cupolas or dormers, silos, parapet
walls and cornices without windows and mechanical and electronic equipment
usually carried above the roof level and having no more than 25% total roof
coverage, including, without limitation, chimneys, ventilators, skylights,
antennas, microwave dishes and solar systems.



      AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR.  All aspects of the repair of motor vehicles
including, but not limited to, lubrication, tune-up and preventive
maintenance.



      AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL.  A sound level typical of the sound levels
at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general
rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in
American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters S1.4-1971.
AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL is also called equivalent sound level (Leq).



      BASE STATION/EQUIPMENT CABINET.  The location of all mechanical
and electronic devices, relay boxes, switch units, junctions or other devices
used in the transmission of information on any personal wireless
communication system.



      BED AND BREAKFAST. A dwelling unit or guest house in which four
or fewer guest rooms are rented on a nightly basis, where at least one meal
is offered in connection with the provision of sleeping accommodations, and a
resident host lives on the site. Any dwelling in which more than four guest
rooms are provided shall be deemed a hotel.



(Ord. O99-92, passed 1-5-2000)



      BUILDING.  Any covered structure averaging more than six feet in
building height which is intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.



      BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance between the mean sea
level of the side yards immediately contiguous to the side of the building or
structure and the mean level of its roof, except in the absence of a side
yard, the vertical measurement shall be made from the mean original level of
that portion of the lot built upon, provided that the measurement shall be
made from not more than three feet below or six feet above the mean curb
level, or in absence of curb level, the mean front street level.



      CAFÉ. A small, informal establishment offering a limited variety
of food, beverage, and snack items, which may allow outdoor seating.



(Ord. O2018-033, passed 8-1-2018)



      CHILD DAY CARE SERVICES, SMALL.  Establishments primarily
engaged in the care of five or fewer infants or children under 18 years of
age, or in providing prekindergarten education, where medical care or
delinquency correction is not a major element. These facilities shall not
include any persons whose occupancy would constitute a direct threat to the
health or safety of other individuals or would result in substantial physical
damage to the property of others (SIC 8351).



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



      CHILD DAY CARE SERVICES, LARGE.  Establishments primarily
engaged in the care of six or more infants or children under 18 years of age,
or in providing prekindergarten education, where medical care or delinquency
correction is not a major element. These facilities shall not include any
persons whose occupancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or would result in substantial physical damage to
the property of others. Establishments of this type located within any
residential districts shall not be located within 1,320 feet of a child day
care services (large), a nursing care facility, large or small or a
residential care facility, large or small that are also located within any
residential district (SIC 8351).



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



      CLINIC. An institution in which a group of physicians and
surgeons, with their allied professional assistants, offer therapeutic,
diagnostic or preventive medical or dental care to ambulatory patients.



      CO-LOCATION.  The attaching of any additional antenna to an
existing antenna structure.



      COMMUNITY GARDEN.  The use of land for the cultivation and
harvesting of food crops and/or non-food ornamental crops, such as flowers,
for personal use, consumption, or donation.



(Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



      COMPOSTING, AGRICULTURAL COMPOSTING SITE. The use of five or more
contiguous acres of farmland for agricultural composting as defined by A.R.S.
§ 9-462.01(G)(1). "Agricultural composting" means the controlled biological
decomposition of organic solid waste under in-vessel anaerobic or aerobic
conditions where all or part of the materials are generated on the farmland
or will be used on the farmland associated with the agricultural composting
operation.



(Ord. O2019-001, passed 1-16-2019)



      COMPOSTING, BACKYARD COMPOSTING SITE. An area that supports no
greater than five cubic yards of composting of food scraps, garden wastes and
yard wastes from the onsite residential use and intended to be used on site.



(Ord. O2019-001, passed 1-16-2019)



      COMPOSTING, LARGE COMPOSTING SITE. An area of three or more
contiguous acres that supports no greater than 120 cubic yards of composting
of food scraps, garden wastes, yard wastes and other compostable materials
from the onsite residential or agricultural use and intended to be used
onsite.



(Ord. O2019-001, passed 1-16-2019)



      CONCENTRATION.  A group of sites, buildings, structures or
objects, in proximity, which contribute to a pattern or sense of time and
place, with relatively few intrusions (structures which detract from an areas
sense of time and place).



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



      CONCEALED/DISGUISED.  Any personal wireless communications
device that is hidden within an architectural feature or made to appear to be
a natural plant or feature.



      CONDOMINIUM.  A development consisting of real estate, portions
of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is
designated for common ownership solely by the owners of the separate
portions. Real estate is not a CONDOMINIUM unless the undivided interests in
the common elements are vested in the unit owners.



(Ord. O2009-55, passed 9-16-2009)



      CONTINUITY.  The state or quality of being in order, forming a
continuous or connected whole.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



      CONVENIENCE MARKET.  A commercial establishment having 5,000
square feet or less of gross ground floor area devoted to selling a variety
of goods comprised primarily of food and beverages, generally purchased in
small quantities. Accessory and other uses within the same building or on the
same lot shall not be used to determine gross ground floor area for the
CONVENIENCE MARKET.



      CORNER MARKET. A small retail or service-based establishment,
which is not required to be located on a street corner, primarily servicing
those residents within the neighborhood.



(Ord. O2018-033, passed 8-1-2018)



      CPTED (CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN).  Site
development which provides for:



         (a)   Building forms; environments where provisions are
designed to allow a belief that occupants are not vulnerable or isolated;



         (b)   Compatible building placement; environments where
provisions are designed to provide placement of compatible building types
together to enhance the safety of occupants;



         (c)   Lighting; environments where provisions are
designed for natural, night and security lighting and the avoidance of
unlighted areas;



         (d)   Natural surveillance; environments where
provisions are designed to allow adequate public and police surveillance by
such items as window placement, elimination of “blind” spots, and
appropriate landscaping and positioning of entrance doors to maintain sight
lines; and



         (e)   Territoriality; environments where provisions are
designed to allow a “marking” of place to provide a boundary or perceived
access control, including appropriate landscaping, fencing and screening.



      CREMATORY.  A service involving the cremation and reduction of
the deceased by combustion and evaporation.



(Ord. O2013-02, passed 1-16-2013)



      COLUMBARIUM.  A structure lined with compartments for urns
holding cremated remains.



(Ord. O2013-02, passed 1-16-2013)



      DECIBEL.  Decibel shall mean a unit for measuring the amplitude
of sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the
pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20
micropascals.



      DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A plan submitted to and approved by the city
pursuant to this chapter prior to December 31, 2000. Such plan shall describe
with reasonable certainty the density and intensity of use for a specific
parcel or parcels of property. Such plan may include a planned community
development plan, planned area development plan, planned unit development
plan, development plan approved pursuant to a development agreement, site
plan, subdivision plat or any other land use approval designation adopted
pursuant to this chapter.



      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICES.  The residential reception of
video programming signals from direct broadcast satellite, multi-channel
multipoint distribution (wireless cable and wireless internet) providers and
television broadcast stations.



      DISTURBING, EXCESSIVE OR OFFENSIVE NOISE.



         (a)   Any sound or noise which constitutes a nuisance
involving discomfort to persons residing in an area located within a
residential district; and/or



         (b)   Any sound or noise exceeding criteria standards,
or levels as set forth in this chapter.



      DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY.  An establishment which by design,
physical facilities, service or by packaging encourages or permits customers
to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained while remaining in their
motor vehicles.



      DWELLING.  A structure or portion thereof which is used
exclusively for human habitation.



      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.  A detached building arranged, intended
or designed to be occupied by not more than one family.



      DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY or DUPLEX.  A detached building under one
roof, arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by not more than two
families, each apartment extending from basement to roof of the structure
with a separate entrance to each dwelling, though there may be but one front
door and vestibule or hall.



      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A building arranged, intended or
designed to be occupied by three or more families, or by three or more
individuals or groups of individuals, living in separate apartments,
including apartment houses and apartment hotels.



      DWELLING UNIT.  One or more rooms within a building used for
residential purposes for one family and containing independent sanitary and
cooking facilities. The presence of cooking facilities conclusively
establishes the intent to use for residential purposes.



      ENTRY FEATURE.  A distinctive object or element located at or
near the point at which entrance is made.



      EXCEPTION.  A change in a development standard or dimension
granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission in conjunction with the
granting of a conditional use permit.



      EXTERIOR TRADE AND STORAGE.  Goods being stored or services
being conducted other than within an enclosed building.



      FAMILY.



         (a)   An individual or two or more persons related by
blood, marriage or adoption, living together within a single dwelling unit; or



         (b)   A group of not more than five persons, who need
not be related, living together within a single dwelling unit.



      FARMERS MARKET.  A place of commercial activity that consists of
the following elements:



         (a)   Open to the public for the purchase of fresh grown
products, in an open-air setting, or in an enclosed building or structure;



         (b)   Composed of three or more booths, stalls, stands
or spaces allotted to vendors, none of whom occupy the same booth, stall,
stand or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily basis;



         (c)   Primary merchandise for sale is dispensed from
individual booths and consists of fresh fruits and vegetables, food products,
and flowers;



         (d)   As an auxiliary use, the market may allow the sale
of secondary items such as arts and crafts (not including second hand goods),
and jewelry; however, the booths for such vendors shall not comprise more
than 20% of the total farmers market in number of booths or square footage.



      FOOD TRUCK.   A food vending unit operated by either a mobile
food vendor or a transient food vendor. In any zoning district that a FOOD
TRUCK is listed as an accessory use, it is recognized as accessory to any
permitted principal use in that zoning district.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



      FOOD VENDING UNIT. Any motorized or non-motorized vehicle,
trailer, kiosk, pushcart, or stand, not permanently attached to the ground
from which only food is peddled, vended, sold, served, displayed, offered for
sale or given away. Each motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, kiosk,
pushcart, or stand is considered a separate FOOD VENDING UNIT .



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



      FOOTCANDLE.  The basic measure used to indicate illuminance
(level of illumination). One FOOTCANDLE is equal to one unit light flux (one
lumen) distributed evenly over a one-square-foot area.



      FORM-BASED CODE (FBC).  Comparing it to contemporary zoning
district formats, a FORM-BASED CODE (FBC) can be described as follows: 
Combined with the requirements of the Smart Growth Overlay (SGO) District, an
FBC is a stand-alone document integrated into the SGO land use ordinance
addressing the district’s allowed uses, development and design standards.
Unlike standard zoning districts, SGO FBCs are site specific, concentrate
more on building form than building use, and contain a regulating plan for
reference. Regulating plans are equivalent to a Master Plan. FBCs are more
flexible, more comprehensive and detailed, making them more equivalent to a
zoning code rather than a zoning district. FBCs consolidate additional
sections or standards into the district ordinance dealing with topics such as
parking, landscaping, architecture and infrastructure. FBCs use an abundance
of illustrations and tables to clearly and concisely convey the requirements
of the code. At a minimum, FORM-BASED CODES consist of the following
sections:  Regulating Plan; Public Space Standards; Building Form Standards;
Administration; and Glossary.



      4H AND FFA ANIMAL PROJECT.  A project in which an elementary
school age through college age young person participates in and is an active
member of 4-H or FFA, has an appropriately tagged or tattooed animal for an
educational purpose during a specific period of time each year. Key
components to an animal project include the proper feeding, nutrition,
housing and grooming of the animals, as well as exhibiting the project
animals at the annual county fair. 4-H and FFA members and animal projects
must live within eligible boundaries to exhibit at the county fair.



(Ord. O2009-29, passed 10-7-2009)



      FULLY SHIELDED.  That fixtures are shielded in such a manner
that light rays emitted by the fixture either directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running
through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.



      GARAGE, PRIVATE.  A building devoted partially or wholly to the
storage of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles in connection with which no
public service is rendered and no business conducted.



      GARAGE, PUBLIC.  Any other than a private garage or a public
storage garage.



      GROCERY STORE.  A retail establishment primarily selling food as
well as other convenience and household goods. Also known as a SUPERMARKET.



      GUY WIRE TOWER.  Any tower that uses guy wire to stabilize a
tower structure.



      HEIGHT.  When referring to a freestanding monopole or lattice
tower, the vertical distance measured from the lowest grade level adjacent to
the structure to the highest point of the structure directly above the grade.
For roof-mounted antennas, the height of the antenna is measured from the
roof surface to the highest point of the structure directly above the roof
surface. Total height of the roof-mounted antenna is the antenna height plus
the building height.



      HILLSIDE.  Any land that has a slope greater than 10%.



      HOME HEALTH CARE SERVICES.  Establishments primarily engaged in
providing skilled or medical care in the home, under supervision of a
physician. These establishments do not include sales, renting or leasing of
health care products (SIC 808).



      HOME OCCUPATION.  An occupation or profession which is
customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in an attached or detached
enclosed building and is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
dwelling unit for residential purposes. All HOME OCCUPATIONS must comply with
§ 154-15.08.



      HOSPITAL.  Establishments primarily engaged in providing
diagnostic services, extensive medical treatment including surgical services,
and other hospital services, as well as continuous nursing services. These
establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds and equipment
and facilities to provide complete health care. As defined, the term HOSPITAL
shall not include convalescent homes with extended care facilities (SIC 806).



      HOSPITAL, ANIMAL OR ANIMAL BOARDING PLACE.  A building, lot or
plot of ground in or on which sick, injured or well animals are housed or
confined, except that this definition shall not apply to rooms in hotels,
private dwellings or rooming houses not intended to be regularly occupied by
sick, injured or well animals.



      HOTEL.  A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to
the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities. Access to all lodging rooms is
provided via the main lobby.



      INDIVIDUAL AND FAMILY SOCIAL SERVICES.  Establishments primarily
engaged in providing one or more of a wide variety of individual and family
social, counseling welfare or referral services, including refugee, disaster
and temporary relief services. These facilities shall not include any persons
whose occupancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or would result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others (SIC 8322).



      LANDSCAPE AREA.  Those areas which shall include trees, shrubs
and ground cover but exclude vehicular and pedestrian areas as identified in
an approved landscaping plan. According to Article 20, the minimum areas
within which landscaping shall be installed include the streetscape zone,
screening between districts, medians, off-street parking lots,
retention/detention basins, and other areas not used for structures, paving,
lighting, signage, and other similar improvements.



         (a)   ASSURANCE OF INSTALLATION.  A contract secured by
a bond, cash or surety in an amount satisfactory to guarantee the completion
of approved landscaping plans.



         (b)   GROUND COVER; INERT.  Materials which are not
living materials. They include:  ground cover, nonvegetative (inorganic).
Materials such as gravel, decomposed granite, crushed rock, river rock,
boulders or other similar materials. Asphalt, gunite and concrete shall not
be permitted as INERT GROUND COVER. Examples of acceptable INERT GROUND COVER
include gravel, crushed granite, tile, brick, flagstone and river rock. 
Aggregate ranging in size from a minimum of "¼-inch minus" up to boulder
size rocks, used  to cover the entire ground surface of a lot or parcel.



            1.   INERT GROUND COVER, COLORED GRAVEL.  Gravel
of various colors, generally consisting of a palette of more colorful tans,
browns, reds, rusts, golds and blond-colored gravel.



            2.   INERT GROUND COVER, YUMA GREY GRAVEL. 
Gravel generally referred to as Yuma grey, that has some variation in color
but is basically shades of grey.



            3.   INERT GROUND COVER, RIP RAP.  Rocks that are
a minimum of three inches in diameter to eight inches in diameter.



            4.   INERT GROUND COVER, BOULDER.  A large rock
usually rounded by weathering or abrasion, with an average dimension of 12
inches or more and is too heavy to be lifted readily by hand.



(Ord. O2014-06, passed 2-19-2014)



         (c)   GROUND COVER; VEGETATIVE.  Living plant materials
characterized by horizontal as well as vertical growth and which generally do
not exceed 18 inches in height. VEGETATIVE GROUND COVER shall include living
plant material which are of one gallon size, material planted from flats or
turf from seed or sod.



         (d)   IRRIGATION SYSTEM.  The method by which water is
distributed to the plant materials in the landscape area in order to sustain
growth. Underground irrigation systems, controlled by automatic valves shall
be provided for all required landscape areas. Any landscape area to be
maintained by the city shall have planting and irrigation plans approved by
the Parks and Recreation Department and Public Works Department prior to
installation.



         (e)   LANDSCAPE PLAN.  A scaled drawing showing, at a
minimum, the plant type(s) and location, size and area (location and square
footage), plant counts for each type of plant, the means and location of
irrigation and the maintenance schedule. These plans shall provide adequate
detail so as to clearly show compliance with the minimum standards of Article
20. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be prepared by a qualified
professional landscape architect, landscape designer or landscape contractor.
Tree and shrub (vine) staking details shall be shown.



         (f)   MAINTENANCE.  The routine work to support viable,
healthy and attractive landscaping including the following. Failure to
perform the below noted work shall constitute a violation of the zoning code
and will be subject to penalties as prescribed in this chapter.



            1.   Regular irrigation;



            2.   Pruning;



            3.   Fertilizing;



            4.   Clearing of debris and weeds;



            5.   Removal and replacement of dead plants; and



            6.   The repair and replacement of irrigation
systems and architectural features within landscaped areas.



         (g)   MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE.  A written statement
identifying the frequency of irrigation, fertilization, trimming or pruning
if appropriate, and replacement program for annuals or other short-lived
plants.



         (h)   PARKWAY.  The area located between the edge of
pavement or back of the curb and the property line within the public street
right-of-way. The adjacent property owner is responsible for maintenance of
the parkway for the full width of the property, except any portion(s) of the
parkway maintained by another entity.



         (i)   PUBLIC UTILITY.  Shall include city water, sewer,
and traffic facilities, Arizona Public Service (APS), cablevision companies,
telecommunication companies, Southwest Gas, the Arizona Department of
Transportation (ADOT), other publicly regulated utilities, railroads and
irrigation districts.



         (j)   RETENTION BASIN.  An area designed for the
collection and storage of stormwater. This definition shall be used in
conjunction with Article 20 only.



         (k)   SHRUB.  A plant, including deciduous, succulent,
and cacti varieties, which has several stems that rise from the ground level
reaching a minimum mature growth height of 18 inches.



         (l)   TREE.  A woody plant which has a single or
multiple trunk(s) at ground level but generally produces branches at some
height above the ground.



            1.   ACCENT TREE. Small, ornamental trees that
typically grow to a mature height of 15 to 20 feet, including some palm trees
and saguaro cacti.



            2.   SHADE TREE. Trees that grow to an average
mature height of 30 feet or more, an average spread of 30 feet or more, and
typically have a dense canopy that provides shade. The branching structure
can be more spreading, vase-shaped, or layered than street trees.



            3.   STREET TREE. Trees that grow to an average
mature height of 30 feet or more, generally have a high branching pattern,
and upright or rounded crown form. Street trees are planted near the sidewalk
or street to provide shade to pedestrians and visual enclosure to the street.



         (m)   TREE BELT. The area between the curb and the
sidewalk or trail, typically within the public street right-of way. Where
there is no curb, the edge of pavement shall delineate the tree belt.



         (n)   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE (CITY).  For lots adjoining
city rights-of-way, a triangular area formed by two intersecting curblines
and a line intersecting them at a point 33 feet from the intersection of
those curblines. The VISIBILITY TRIANGLE shall also conform to the
requirements of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets 1990 and
its successors which is published by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).



(Ord. O2009-04, passed 1-21-2009)



         (o)   VISIBILITY TRIANGLE (ADOT).  The visibility
triangle as defined by the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT) which
is required on all state routes within the city. For lots adjoining State of
Arizona rights-of-way, a rectangular area formed to allow a clear line of
sight in either direction for at least 400 feet from the front of a vehicle
located ten feet behind the edge of the highway to be entered.



         (p)   XERISCAPE.  Water-saving landscape practices that
take into account soil and drainage factors, microclimates, grouping of
plants with similar water requirements, efficient irrigation systems, native
vegetation, paving permeability, and low-water-using and drought tolerant
vegetation.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)



      LATTICE TOWER.  Any tower that uses three or more poles to form
the base and lattice bracing to connect the poles and increase structural
support.



      LINE, REAR.  A dividing line between two lots or between a lot
and an alley or easement, provided it runs parallel to the shorter dimension
of said lot. Any bounding line of a lot, which is not herein defined as a
rear line or street line shall be deemed a side line.



      LINE, SIDE.  A dividing line between two lots, or a lot and a
street, provided it runs parallel to the longer dimensions of said lot.



      LINE, STREET.  The dividing line between the street and the lot.



      LINKAGE.  The association or correlation of two or more sites,
buildings, structures or objects because of location, setting and similarity
of time, place and/or other characteristics.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



      LIVE/WORK BUILDING.



         (a)   A structure in which a combination of permitted
principal uses, including residential uses, is permitted provided that the
building units are:



            1.   Separated by having separate entrances and
are clearly independent of each other: or



            2.   Are live/work spaces with limited
combinations of principal permitted uses and provide a minimum of residential
facilities as defined under live/work space.



         (b)   A LIVE/WORK BUILDING may have a combination of
separated units and live/work spaces.



         (c)   LIVE/WORK BUILDINGS are subject to the residential
density limits of the zoning district in which it is located.



      LIVE/WORK SPACE.  A unit within a building that is jointly used
for commercial and residential purposes where the residential use of the
space is clearly secondary or accessory to the primary use as a place of
work. As a minimum, a LIVE/WORK SPACE will need to provide residential
facilities equivalent to those provided in what is variously described as an
efficiency unit or a studio apartment.



      LOT.  A lot shall be considered as being a parcel of land
surveyed or apportioned for sale or other purposes, as shown by the plat of
the subdivision of which it is a part filed in the office of the County
Recorder, or any tract of land the use of which is controlled or managed by
any person or group of persons under a unified and specific plan. No parcel
of land in a residence district shall be considered as being a LOT having an
area less than 6,000 square feet.



      LOT, CORNER.  A lot which occupies the angle at the intersection
of two streets.



      LOT COVERAGE.  The area of a lot covered by the footprint of all
structures, including any area under roof and on the ground, expressed as a
percentage of the total lot area. Driveways, walkways, swimming pools and
other similar structures as determined by the Zoning Administrator shall not
be considered when calculating LOT COVERAGE.



(Ord. O2009-60, passed 10-21-2009)



      LOT, DEPTH.  The depth of a lot is the mean distance between its
front street line and its rear line.



      LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat
of which has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder; or a lot,
parcel or tract of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of
the County Recorder.



      LOT, THROUGH.  A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets. A THROUGH LOT having a depth of 200 feet or
more shall provide front yard setbacks on both parallel frontages.



      LOT, WIDTH.  The width of a lot is its mean width measurement at
right angles to its depth.



      MAINTAINED FOOTCANDLE.  Predicted footcandles, at a given
location, calculated through application of a light loss factor.



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  Any parcel of land used or offered for
use in whole or in part, with or without charge for parking manufactured
homes for dwelling or sleeping purposes.



      MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE.  A parcel of land for rent which has
been designed to accommodate a manufactured home and provides the required
sewer and utility connections.



      MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION.  A subdivision designed and
intended for residential use where residence is in manufactured homes
exclusively, and lots are individually owned.



      MANUFACTURED HOUSING.  Any dwelling unit or units, to which is
affixed a United States Department of Housing and Urban Development seal,
which are fabricated either in whole or in large sections at a factory, are
designed and constructed on a chassis for transportation to the site, do not
require substantial assembly on site other than connection to utilities, and
are installed with or without a permanent foundation for residential
occupancy exclusively. For the purposes of this chapter, this category shall
include manufactured homes and factory-built buildings which are constructed
on a chassis for transportation to a building site, and designed to be
installed with or without a permanent foundation for residential occupancy. A
MANUFACTURED HOME means a factory assembled portable structure containing
more than 400 square feet, and which exceeds eight feet in width and/or 40
feet in length, and designed to be used as a dwelling unit, made to be
readily moveable on its own chassis and running gear. This category shall not
include modular housing or any dwelling unit or units which require
substantial assembly on site, nor shall this category include recreational
vehicles as defined by this chapter.



      MEDICAL AND DENTAL LABORATORIES.  Establishments primarily
engaged in providing professional analytic or diagnostic services to the
medical profession, to the patient on prescription of a physician, or in
making dental appliances to order for the dental profession, excluding
establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing artificial teeth, except to
order (SIC 807).



      MEMBERSHIP-BASED LODGING.  Dwelling unit or units operated by
membership organizations for the benefit of their constituents, and not open
to the general public. Included are fraternity and sorority residential
houses (SIC 7041).



      MINOR VARIANCE.  In any district, a variance not exceeding a 20%
reduction of a minimum, or increase of a maximum, zoning code required
standard or dimension.



      MISCELLANEOUS HEALTH AND ALLIED SERVICES.  Establishments
primarily engaged in various out-patient treatments and other medical
services not elsewhere classified. Included are kidney dialysis centers,
specialty outpatient facilities and blood banks (SIC 809).



      MOBILE FOOD VENDOR.



         (a)   Any person who sells, serves, offers for sale, or
gives away only food from a food vending unit which is parked or located on
one lot of record throughout the day with customers traveling to the food
vendor. This term does not include a person who operates as a transient food
vendor.




         (b)   MOBILE FOOD VENDORS can be a primary use, an
accessory use, or an interim use in a zoning district, as noted in each
district.




            1.   If a primary use mobile food vendor, the
owner must comply with all site improvement standards as required by code for
new construction on a vacant site (including setbacks, lot coverage, paved
parking, lighting, landscaping, storm drainage, etc.) and must provide
permanent restroom facilities, permanent seating area, and a way to secure
the site. Primary use mobile food vendors are exempt from the following
regulation: § 154-15.13(B)(1)(b).



            2.   If an accessory use mobile food vendor, the
owner must comply with regulations as outlined in § 154-15.13.



            3.   If an interim use mobile food vendor, the
owner must comply with regulations as outlined in § 154-15.13. An interim
use mobile food vendor shall be allowed for a period not to exceed one year
and may be exempt from the following regulation: § 154-15.13(B)(1)(b).



            4.   If an interim use mobile food vendor is on a
site longer than one year, the rules and requirements for the mobile food
vendor as a primary use apply and shall be met in order to be a legal use on
the site.



            5.   If an interim use mobile food vendor is on a
site and the vacant building on-site becomes occupied (primary use), the
mobile food vendor is then considered an accessory use on the site and all
provisions of § 154-15.13 apply.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



      MOBILE HOME.  See MANUFACTURED HOUSING.



      MOBILE VENDING SITE. The lot of record where the food vending
unit is located.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



      MODULAR HOUSING.  Any dwelling unit or units which are
fabricated either in whole or in sections at a factory wherein such sections,
or modules, are not constructed on a chassis. For the purposes of this
chapter, this category shall not include manufactured housing as defined
herein, but shall be considered equivalent to any dwelling or dwellings which
require substantial assembly on-site.



      MONOPOLE.  A self-supporting singular pole structure that
supports one or more antenna for communication purposes without the use of
any guy wire or lattice bracing.



      MORTUARY FUNERAL PARLOR or UNDERTAKING ESTABLISHMENT.  A
building or portion thereof which is designated, arranged or let to be used
or which is used for purposes connected with funerals.



      MOTEL.  A facility providing transient lodging accommodations to
the general public. At least 25% of all rooms shall have direct access to the
outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the
building.



      MOTOR FUEL DISPENSER.  An above-ground housing which uses a
remote submersible pump or other similar device, which is used for dispensing
motor fuels. For the purpose of calculating the parking spaces required for
motor fuel sales, the factor shall be the maximum number of vehicles which
can be serviced by a dispenser at one time.



      MOTOR FUEL PUMP.  A self-contained siphon or other similar
device which moves the fuel from the storage tank to the dispenser.



      MOTOR FUEL SALES (RETAIL).  A commercial establishment which
engages in retail sales of small quantities of lubrication oils, gasoline or
other motor vehicle for internal combustion engines from storage tanks above
or below the ground.



      MOTOR FUEL SALES (WHOLESALE).  A commercial establishment which
engages in wholesale motor fuel sales and which does not engage in motor fuel
sales to the general public.



      NATURAL SURVEILLANCE.  The ability to clearly observe exterior
spaces through thoughtful site design.



      NET LOT AREA.  The total lot area minus that area dedicated for
public right-of-way.



      NIT. In lighting, the nit is a unit of visible-light intensity,
commonly used to specify the brightness of a cathode ray tube or liquid
crystal display computer display. One nit is equivalent to one candela per
square meter.



(Ord. O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016)



      NOISE LEVEL.  Sound level and the terms may be used
interchangeably herein.



      NOISE LEVEL REDUCTION (NLR).  The difference in decibels of the
noise level from outside to inside of a building. Such reduction depends
primarily upon the construction and materials in the walls, ceilings,
windows, doors and vents. The design and construction criteria to achieve
various noise level reductions are contained within the City of Yuma Uniform
Building Code and successors.



      NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES, LARGE.  Establishments
primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and health-related personal
care to 11 or more residents, such as convalescent homes with health care and
rest homes with health care. These facilities shall not include any persons
whose occupancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of
other individuals or would result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others. Establishments of this type located within any
residential districts shall not be located within 1,320 feet of a child day
care services (large), a nursing care facility, large or small or a
residential care facility, large or small that are also located within any
residential district (SIC 805).



      NURSING AND PERSONAL CARE FACILITIES, SMALL.  Establishments
primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and health-related personal
care to ten or fewer residents, such as convalescent homes with health care
and rest homes with health care. These facilities shall not include any
persons whose occupancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or would result in substantial physical damage to
the property of others. Establishments of this type located within any
residential districts shall not be located within 1,320 feet of a child day
care services (large), a nursing care facility, large or small, or a
residential care facility, large or small that are also located within any
residential district (SIC 805).



      OFFICES AND CLINICS, MEDICAL.  Establishments of licensed
practitioners primarily engaged in furnishing medical, surgical and other
health services to persons. These facilities are limited to outpatient
services, and exclude nursing and personal care facilities, hospitals,
medical and dental laboratories and home health care services (SIC 8011,
8021, 8031 and 804).



      OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE.  An area usable for the parking of a
motor vehicle located entirely on private property consisting of a rectangle
measuring no less than ten feet by 20 feet, exclusive of those additional
areas required for safe ingress and egress to said space, whether enclosed or
open to the sky, with a vertical clearance of at least seven feet, and
provided with permanent access as designated by these regulations.



      ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.  Regular customary or usual
care, reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building,
structure or object, for the purpose of preserving said property and
maintaining it in safe and sanitary condition.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



      OUTDOOR LIGHT FIXTURE.  Outdoor artificial illuminating devices,
lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination or
advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, search,
spot or flood lights for buildings and structures, recreational areas,
parking lot lighting, landscape lighting, billboards and other signage and
street lighting.



      PARK MODEL.  Any factory assembled portable unit, to which is
affixed on Arizona recreational vehicle seal, mounted on a chassis and
wheels, not more than 12 feet in width and no greater than 400 square feet
nor less than 320 square feet in total area, and permanently connected to
utilities that are necessary for the operation of the installed park model
with no holding tank.



      PARKING LOT.  Any off-street parking facility designed to
accommodate five or more required parking spaces as specified in this
chapter. PARKING LOTS shall conform to the design standards contained herein
as well as other applicable city standards.



(Ord. O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)



      PARTIALLY SHIELDED.  That fixtures are shielded in such a manner
that the bottom edge of the shield is below the plane of the centerline of
the lamp reducing light above the horizontal.



      PATTERN BOOK.  Comparing it to contemporary zoning district
formats, a PATTERN BOOK can be described as follows:  Combined with the
requirements of the Smart Growth Overlay (SGO) District, a PATTERN BOOK is a
stand-alone document integrated into the SGO land use ordinance addressing
the district’s allowed uses, development and design standards. Unlike
standard zoning districts, SGO PATTERN BOOKS are site specific and normally
contain a Master Plan for reference. PATTERN BOOKS are more flexible, more
comprehensive and detailed, making them more equivalent to a zoning code
rather than a zoning district. PATTERN BOOKS consolidate additional sections
or standards into the district ordinance dealing with topics such as parking,
landscaping, architecture and infrastructure. PATTERN BOOKS use an abundance
of illustrations, photographs and tables to clearly and concisely convey the
requirements of the code. At a minimum, PATTERN BOOKS consist of the
following required sections:  Introduction; Community Patterns; and
Architectural Patterns.



      PERGOLA or SEMI-COVERED STRUCTURE.  An accessory structure
consisting of parallel colonnades supporting an open roof of girders and
cross rafters over which climbing plants may be trained. Also known as an
arbor, trellis or ramada.



      PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association or other legal entity.



      PERSONAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY.  A facility for the
provision of personal wireless services as defined by the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996. PERSONAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
are composed of two or more of the following components:



         (a)   Antenna;



         (b)   Mount of the antenna (tower, wall, roof or other
structure);



         (c)   Equipment cabinet/base station; and



         (d)   A wall or security barrier.



      PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES.  Per the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996, commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services
(excluding direct-to-home satellite service reception) and common carrier
wireless exchange access services. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES encompasses
many services and includes, but is not limited to: PCS, cellular radio mobile
services, paging systems, microwave systems, two-way radio services, common
carrier wireless exchange access services (also known as local wireless loop
telephone that provides an alternative to traditional wireline local exchange
providers) and other communications systems defined by the FCC as a personal
wireless service.



      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.  A development having a common area
owned by a homeowner’s association, or in common by the owners of the
separate interests who possess appurtenant rights to the beneficial use and
enjoyment of the common area.



(Ord. O2009-55, passed 9-16-2009)



      PORCH, OPEN.  A porch, deck or balcony, with or without a roof,
which projects beyond the main wall of a building, but if roofed it shall be
so constructed that the view sideways through the porch shall not be
obstructed except by columns essential only for the support of the roof.



      PREMISES.  Any property or properties developed as a unit,
including all building(s), off-street parking, points of access, common area
and any other appurtenances, all of which allows the parcel to function as a
whole.



      PRE-SCHOOL.  A facility engaged in educational work with four or
more pre-school children not related to the proprietor. Children enrolled are
not necessarily in need of supplemental parental care.



      PRINCIPAL OR PRIMARY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING.  A structure or
building where the principal or primary use of the lot is conducted. In all
residential zoning districts, the PRINCIPAL OR PRIMARY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING
shall be a dwelling unit.



      PRINCIPAL OR PRIMARY USE.  The major or predominant use of any
lot.



      PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT.  A right granted to undertake and
complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions
of a protected development right plan without compliance with changes in
zoning regulations and development standards adopted during the period of the
protected development right plan, except as provided in A.R.S. § 9-1204. In
the event of a conflict between the City Code and A.R.S. §§ 9-1201 through
9-1205, as amended, the statutory provisions shall govern.



      PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT RIGHT PLAN.  A city-approved development
plan or subdivision plat, identified as a PROTECTED DEVELOPMENT PLAN at the
time of the landowner’s submission or a master plan development which the
City Council has identified as a phased development for purposes of protected
development rights.



      PUBLIC STREET.  The land dedicated, accepted or condemned for
use as a highway for the benefit of the public at large or established as
such highway by the right of prescription of common user. However, any
right-of-way as may be created after the enactment of this chapter shall not
be considered to be a PUBLIC STREET unless it is 60 feet or more in width,
except where streets are entirely local, when the width of 50 feet may be
declared to be PUBLIC STREET if approved by the City Zoning Commission.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicular type unit 40 feet or less in
length and eight feet or less in width, primarily designed as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  Any parcel of land used or offered
for use in whole or in part, with or without charge, for parking of travel
trailers, pick-up campers, motor homes or similar devices used for temporary
portable housing for a relatively short-term occupancy.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE.  A parcel of land for rent which has
been designed to accommodate a recreational vehicle.



      RESIDENT HOST. A person(s) that manages the bed and breakfast
activity and that lives on the premises. A RESIDENT HOST does not have to be
the property owner.



(Ord. O99-92, passed 1-5-2000)



      RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, LARGE.  Establishments primarily
engaged in the provision of residential social and personal care for 11 or
more persons with some limits on ability for self-care, such as children, the
elderly, but where medical care is not a major element. Included are
establishments providing 24-hour year-round care for children. These
facilities shall not include any persons whose occupancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others. Establishments of this
type located within any residential districts shall not be located within
1,320 feet of a child day care services, large, a nursing care facility,
large or small or a residential care facility, large or small, that are also
located within any residential district (SIC 8361).



      RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY, SMALL.  Establishments primarily
engaged in the provision of residential social and personal care for ten or
fewer persons with some limits on ability for self-care, such as children,
the elderly, but where medical care is not a major element. Included are
establishments providing 24-hour year-round care for children. These
facilities shall not include any persons whose occupancy would constitute a
direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others. Establishments of this
type located within any residential districts shall not be located within
1,320 feet of a child day care services (large), a nursing care facility,
large or small, or a residential care facility, large or small that are also
located within any residential district (SIC 8361).



      RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.  The Suburban Ranch District, Residential
Estate District, Low Density Residential (R-1), Medium Density Residential
and High Density Residential (R-3), Manufactured Housing District and
Residence-Manufactured Housing District of this chapter of their successors.



      RESIDENTIAL USE.  Any structure intended for permanent
residency. This includes, but is not limited to, such residential structures
as single-family homes, apartment complexes, boarding houses, bed and
breakfasts, rental properties, nursing homes, group homes, residential care
facilities and similar uses and accessory structures, but does not include
hotels, motels or other temporary (a stay of less than 90 days) commercial
lodging located in commercial or mixed use zoning districts.



      RETAIL TRADE.  Of, or relating to, the sale of commodities or
goods in small quantities to the ultimate consumers.



      ROOF-MOUNTED.  Anything affixed to or located on the roof
structure of an existing building.



      ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES (LARGE). An owner occupied
establishment primarily engaged in renting rooms, with or without board, on a
fee basis. No more than two individuals shall be permitted in each designated
bedroom with a maximum of six individuals per establishment.



(Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



      ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES (SMALL). An owner occupied
establishment primarily engaged in renting rooms, with or without board, on a
fee basis. No more than one individual shall be permitted in each designated
bedroom with a maximum of two individuals per establishment.



(Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



      SCHOOL.  A place for instruction in the arts and sciences, but
excluding institutions whose primary purpose is the teaching of dancing,
physical culture, music (unless as a home occupation) trades or industries,
riding academies or the combination of any two or more of these.



      SEASONAL ITINERANT VENDOR.  A vendor of specific products
associated with certain civic, patriotic and/or religious holidays/events. 
The following are recognized:



         (a)   Halloween: Sales allowed between October 15 and
November 5 inclusive.  Products authorized: Pumpkins and related Halloween
accessories.



         (b)   Christmas: Sales allowed between November 25 and
December 25 inclusive.  Products authorized: Christmas trees.



         (c)   Silver Spur Rodeo: Sales allowed for seven days
prior to the start of the Silver Spur Rodeo and on each day of the rodeo. 
Products authorized: Rodeo attire and memorabilia.



         (d)   Independence Day and New Years Eve: Sales allowed
for 14 days prior to each holiday.  Products authorized: Permissible
consumer fireworks as defined by Arizona state statute.



(Ord. O2013-28, passed 5-15-2013)



      SETBACK BUILDING LINE.  A line established by ordinance or
official regulation as specified distance from any lot line.



      SIGN.  Any identification, description, illustration, symbol or
device, which is affixed directly or indirectly upon a building, vehicle,
structure or land and which identifies or directs attention to a product,
place, activity, person, institution or business.



         (a)   ABANDONED SIGNAGE.  Any sign, visible from a
position on or off the property upon which erected, which attracts the
attention of the public to something which existed at the time of its
installation on the property, and which has subsequently ceased to exist on
the property.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



         (b)   ANIMATED SIGNS.  Any sign which displays or
employs action or movement, whether driven by mechanical means or wind
actuated; signs which only rotate shall not be included in this category.



         (c)   BALLOONS/INFLATABLE DEVICES.  One or more
balloons or inflatable devices used as a permanent or temporary sign or as a
means of directing attention to: any business or profession; a commodity or
service sold, offered or manufactured; or to any entertainment.



(Ord.O2007-52, passed 10-3-2007)



         (d)   BANNER.  Any sign consisting of paper, fabric,
canvass, rubber, plastic or the like, with no other material for rigid
structural support.



         (e)   BILLBOARD, DIGITAL. Any permanent off-site sign,
utilizing digital message technology that directs attention to a business,
community service or entertainment not exclusively related to the premises
where such sign is located.



(Ord. O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016)



         (f)   BUILDING FACADE.  An exterior elevation of a
building, extending from the average grade level of the adjoining ground
within five feet of the building wall to the top line of the roof or parapet
wall, and also extending the entire width of the building elevation.



         (g)   BUSINESS PURPOSES.  Pertaining to economic
dealings or mercantile activity, which are engaged in as a means of
livelihood.



         (h)   CANOPY.  An architectural projection beyond the
external wall of a building forming part of the building facade.



         (i)   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.  A message displayed or
caused to be displayed before the public for business purposes involving or
pertaining to the manufacture or sale of products, property, accommodations,
services, attractions or activities, which:



            1.   Refers to the offer for sale or existence for
sale of products, property, accommodations, services, attractions or
activities; or



            2.   Attracts attention to a business or to
products, property, accommodations, services, attractions or activities, that
are offered or exist for sale or for hire.



         (j)   COPY.  The words, letters, symbols, illustrations
or other graphic characters used to convey the message of a sign.



         (k)   DEGREE OF NONCONFORMING.  The extent to which any
sign or sign structure does not conform to the standards and requirements of
this chapter, such as the height, sign face area, setback, vertical
clearance, number of signs or manner of keeping.



         (l)   EMBELLISHMENTS. Letters, figures or mechanical
devices that serve as add-ons to the billboard. These add-ons may extend
beyond the standard advertising structure, all to produce special effects.



(Ord. O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016)



         (m)   FLAG. A device generally made of flexible
material, usually cloth, paper or plastic, used as a symbol of a government,
school, or religion, and not containing a commercial message. Flags shall not
be considered a sign.



(Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



         (n)   FLASHING SIGN.  Any sign which contains a source
of light, internal or external, that intermittently cuts on and off, or which
creates the illusion of flashing or intermittent light through animation or
other means.



         (o)   FREESTANDING SIGN.  Any sign permanently anchored
to the ground which stands alone on its own foundation and structural
supports and free of support from any building. Any signage mounted on the
roof of any building shall not be considered as a FREESTANDING SIGN.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



         (p)   HEIGHT OF BUILDING.  For the purpose of
regulating sign locations, when a building facade has various elevations the
height of the predominant elevation shall be the BUILDING HEIGHT. Where a
predominant elevation cannot be determined, the lowest height shall govern.
In all situations, a sign shall not extend outside the silhouette of the
wall/roof to which it is attached.



         (q)   INDEXING SIGN.  Any sign designed with
multi-sided sign faces which is operated by some mechanical device, thereby
causing the faces to alternately turn and stop.



         (r)   MAXIMUM HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured
from the uppermost point of the sign face or sign structure, whichever is
higher, to the street grade of the nearest driving lane.



         (s)   MONUMENT SIGN.  A permanent freestanding sign
mounted on a base or other support, and where the entire bottom of the sign
is affixed to the ground. Such sign shall provide a solid and continuous
background for the sign face from ground level to the highest point of the
sign. MONUMENT SIGNS are detached from a building, and the bottom edge of the
sign face must be in continuous contact with the structural base and must be
a minimum of 12 inches above the ground. The height of any monument base or
other structure erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as
part of the sign height. The sign shall be clad to the ground with a base not
less than 75% of the total sign width. The height of the structure erected to
support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.
See illustration in § 154-17.03(G).



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



         (t)   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE.  A message that is not a
commercial message.



         (u)   OFF-SITE SIGN.  Any sign that may display a
message, whether commercial or noncommercial, that does not necessarily
relate to the premises upon which such sign is located.



         (v)   ON-SITE SIGN.  Any sign which pertains to the
business operated, activity conducted or products sold or manufactured, on
the premises upon which such sign is located, or which displays a
noncommercial message installed or caused to be installed only by the
property owner and/or lessee of the property upon which the sign is located.



         (w)   PARAPET.  A wall extending above the plateline of
the building.



         (x)   PEDESTAL SIGN.  A freestanding, ground mounted
sign, detached from a building, and the support structure is a base
constructed of a permanent material. The support structure of a PEDESTAL SIGN
and sign face shall be designed as one architecturally unified and
proportional element. The sign shall be clad to the ground with a base not
less than 65% of the total sign width. The height of the structure erected to
support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height.
See illustration in § 154-17.03.



         (y)   PERMANENT SIGN.  Any sign set in the ground with
its own foundation, or which is painted on or otherwise anchored to a
building, wall or other permanent structure, and any of which are installed
to achieve a lasting and enduring condition and location.



         (z)   PLATELINE.  The point where the roof structure
first touches an external wall.



         (aa)   POLE SIGN.



            1.   A freestanding sign which is supported by one
or more structural elements that are either:



               a.   Architecturally dissimilar to the
design of the sign; or



               b.   Which is less than one-fourth of the
width of the sign face.



            2.   The bottom edge of the sign face is eight
feet or more above finished grade. See illustration in § 154-17.03 .



         (bb)   PORTABLE SIGN SIGNAGE.  Any signage which is
designed to be placed upon the ground, rather than anchored to the ground or
to any structure, and which may be moved without disassembly or excavation of
the sign or sign structure



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



         (cc)   PRIMARY BUILDING FACADE.  The particular facade
of a building which faces the street to which the address of the building
pertains.



         (dd)   ROOF.  The protective cover of a building.



         (ee)   ROOFLINE.  The highest point of the main roof
structure or parapet wall, not including cupolas, pylons, projections or
minor raised portions of the roof.



         (ff)   SIGN FACE AREA.  The area of the smallest single
geometric figure or figures which entirely encloses both the copy and facing
of the sign. The spaces between letters, symbols and numerals, which make
words or elements of the sign, and contrasting backgrounds, illustrations,
borders or other devices shall be included.



         (gg)   STREET ADDRESS FRONTAGE.  The total linear
dimension of the property line which coincides with the edge of the adjoining
street right-of-way to which the address of the property pertains.



         (hh)   STREET FRONTAGE.  The total linear dimension of
all property lines which coincide with the edge of an adjoining street
right-of-way.



         (ii)   SWINGING SIGN.  Any sign face which is suspended
at one or more points, but is not rigidly and permanently anchored to a
building, wall, post or other support structure.



         (jj)   TEMPORARY SIGNAGE.  Any signage which is set in
the ground but not permanently set in its own footing or foundation, nor
permanently anchored to a building, wall or other structure.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



         (kk)   TRANSIT BENCH SIGN.  A sign located on a bench
at a designated public stop, in a city public right-of-way.



         (ll)   TRANSIT SHELTER SIGN.  A sign located on a
transit shelter at a designated public transit stop in a city public
right-of-way.



         (mm)   UNAUTHORIZED SIGNAGE.  Any signage, irrespective
of the method of installation, which is erected on property without the
permission of the property owner.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



         (nn)   UNDER-CANOPY SIGN.  Any sign suspended from the
underside of a canopy, roof, covered walkway, porch or cantilever projection
from a building.



         (oo)   VERTICAL CLEARANCE.  The vertical distance
measured from the bottom edge of a sign face to the street grade of the
nearest driving lane.



         (pp)   WALL-MOUNTED SIGN.  Any sign attached to a wall
of a building, whether or not parallel to the wall surface, including any
sign painted on a wall surface.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2001-94, passed 11-20-2001;
Ord. O2003-34, passed 8-6-2003; Ord. O2005-91, passed 10-5-2005; Ord.
O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010; Ord. O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016; Ord. O2017-014,
passed 5-3-2017)



      SITE BUILT. A structure constructed entirely or largely on-site;
that is, built on the site which it is intended to occupy upon its completion
rather than in a factory or similar facility.



(Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



      SOLID WALL OR FENCE.  A vertical barrier consisting of wood,
masonry, metal or other exterior material customarily used in wall or fence
construction, without openings in the material or spaces between members,
other than gates for necessary walks and driveways, which totally and
permanently blocks the horizontal view of any person, object or activity from
any adjoining street or property at ground level. This category shall not
include any barrier into which slats, plantings or other devices must be
inserted in order to achieve a screening effect. Any SOLID WALL OR FENCE as
may be required by this chapter shall be maintained in perpetuity by the
property owner.



      SOUND LEVEL.  The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the
use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network as specified in
American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters
(ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest revision thereof). If the frequency weighting
employed is not indicated, the A-weighting is implied.



      SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument, including a microphone, an
amplifier, readout and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of
sound levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A
meters in the American National Standards Institute Specifications for Sound
Level Meters, S1.4-1971, or the latest revision thereof.



      SPECIALTY FOOD STORE.  A retail store specializing in a specific
type or class of foods such as an appetizer store, bakery, butcher,
delicatessen, fish, gourmet and similar foods.



      SPECIALTY WATER STORE.  A specialty retail business which
consists of no more than one water dispensing unit onsite which sells fresh
bulk water to walk-up and drive up customers from a self contained,
mechanically operated, vending dispenser placed upon portland cement or
asphalt slab.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC).  A statistical
classification standard underlying all establishment-based federal economic
statistics classified by industry, published by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget. The classification covers the
entire field of economic activities and defines industries in accordance with
the composition and structure of the economy. The classification is indicated
by a two to four digit numerical code. Example:  SIC 5932 represents “Used
Merchandise Stores”.



      STOCK COOPERATIVE.  A development in which a corporation is
formed to hold title to improved real property, and in which all of the
shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a
portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation.



(Ord. O2009-55, passed 9-16-2009)



      STORAGE.  The accumulation or keeping of goods, articles,
vehicles, equipment or the like, whether for immediate or future purposes.



      STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL.  The streets defined and classified as
such by the 1982 Yuma Circulation and Engineering Study, prepared by Stephen
George and Associates, and adopted as an amendment to the circulation element
of the General Plan, and its successors.



      STREET, PRIME ARTERIAL.  Those streets defined and classified as
such by the 1982 Yuma Circulation and Engineering Study, prepared by Stephen
George and Associates, and adopted as an amendment to the circulation element
of the General Plan, and its successors.



      STREET FAIR.  A place of commercial activity that consists of
the following elements:



         (a)   Open to the public for the purchase of products,
in an open-air setting, on a public street;



         (b)   Composed of three or more booths, stalls, stands
or spaces allotted to vendors, none of whom occupy the same booth, stall,
stand or spaces on an uninterrupted continuous daily basis.



(Ord. O2013-37, passed 8-7-2013)



      STREETYARD SETBACK.  An open space lying between the street line
and the setback building line. This area may be located on any side of a lot
but is always located adjacent to and parallel to a street.



      STRUCTURE.  Anything that is built, assembled or constructed to
be vertical.



      SUPERMARKET.  A retail establishment primarily selling food as
well as other convenience and household goods. Also known as GROCERY STORE.



      SUPPLEMENTARY DEFINITIONS OF TECHNICAL NOISE OR SOUND TERMS. 
Definitions of technical noise or sound terms not defined herein shall be
obtained from the American National Standard, Acoustical Terminology, S1.1961
(R 1971) or latest revision thereof.



      SWAP MEET.  A retail activity, located on private property, that
generally has a regional draw of customers, characterized by the barter or
sale of merchandise to the general public by two or more vendors, from a
leased or rented stall or booth. The leased or rented stall or booth can be
located under a canopy or other roof structure, in an open-air setting, or in
an enclosed building or structure. This term shall include a flea market,
open-air market or similar commercial retail activity, but shall exclude
farmer’s markets.



      SWIMMING POOL.  A water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, having a depth of 18 inches or more which is
designed, used and maintained for swimming, bathing or similar activity. This
category shall include spas.



      TEMPORARY MOBILE PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY.  A monopole
structure mounted to a chassis with a movable base station that requires no
physical site alterations for installation.



      TRANSIENT FOOD VENDOR. Any person who sells, serves, offers for
sale, or gives away only food from a food vending unit that visits one or
multiple lots of record on a daily basis for no more than three hours per
site per day, changing locations throughout the day to transact with
customers.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



      TRIPOD.  A low impact structure consisting of a three-legged
base (a tripod base height is less than 15% of the total structure height)
that supports a single pole of no greater than a two-inch diameter and less
than 20 feet in height, which supports a low impact, small antenna and is
placed on a roof top.



      UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE.  Per the Federal Telecommunications
Act of 1996, the offering of telecommunications services using duly
authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not
mean the consumer end user reception of direct-to-home satellite services
(see “direct-to-home satellite services” above and as defined in §
303(v) of the Federal Act). Sites dedicated to the distribution of
direct-to-home signal, such as, but not limited, to base stations and
repeater stations, are governed by Article 19 of this chapter.



      VISIBILITY TRIANGLE.  A triangular area formed by two
intersecting curb lines and a line intersecting them at a point 33 feet from
the intersection of the curb lines.



      WALL-MOUNTED.  Anything located on an existing building wall.



      WALL STRAPPING.  The use of straps to support a monopole of a
two-inch diameter or less or lattice structure of a 24-inch diameter, as
circumscribed around the outside of the support poles, or less to wall of a
building for support.



      YARD, FRONT.  An open space lying between the street line upon
which a building or structure fronts and the front wall of said building, and
running entirely across the lot to the two side lot lines.



      YARD, REAR.  The portion of the REAR YARD contiguous to the rear
lot line having at no point a depth less than that required for the rear yard
setback and excluding that area within the required side yard setback.



      YARD, SIDE.  An open space extending along the side line of a
lot between the side line and any building or structure on said lot.



('80 Code, App. A, § 40)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090, passed
12-20-1995; Ord. O96-24, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. O96-35, passed 4-3-1996; Ord.
02000-32, passed 5-17-2000; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2001-77,
passed 9-19-2001; Ord. O2002-08, passed 2-6-2002; Ord. O2003-22, passed
5-21-2003; Ord. O2003-38, passed 8-20-2003; Ord. O2004-52, passed 8-4-2004;
Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; O2012-20, passed 11-7-12; O2012-22, passed
11-21-12)



Article 02 - Administration



§ 154-02.01  Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (A)   Created.  A City Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby
established.



      (1)   Charter reference.  Power to regulate land use for the
public benefit, see Charter Art. III, § 12 and to engage in
intergovernmental agreements, see Charter Art. III, § 13.



      (2)   Statutory reference.  Municipal planning, see A.R.S.
§§ 9-461 et seq. and open space preservation, see A.R.S. §§ 9-464 et seq.



('80 Code, § 23-16)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959)



   (B)   Responsibilities.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be responsible for:



      (1)   Identifying and evaluating the unique factors
influencing the character and location of development within the City;



      (2)   Recommending to the City Council desirable standards for
guiding the development and rehabilitation of various sections of the
community; and,



      (3)   Recommending to the City Council standards for adequate
public services and facilities throughout the City.



('80 Code, § 23-29)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. O2015-023, passed
4-15-2015)



   (C)   Duties.  The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall:



      (1)   Review long term City planning documents and recommend
to the City Council that the City adopt or amend the City Council approved
General Plan;



      (2)   Recommend to the City Council subdivision platting rules
and regulations and amendments thereto;



      (3)   Recommend to the City Council the adoption or amendment
of zoning regulations consistent with the General Plan;



      (4)   Recommend to the City Council an official zoning map of
the City and amendments thereto consistent with the General Plan; and,



      (5)   Review and evaluate proposed redevelopment plans for
conformity with the General Plan and recommend to the City Council adoption
of redevelopment plans consistent with the General Plan.



('80 Code, § 23-30)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. O2015-023, passed
4-15-2015)



   (D)   Powers.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
responsible to and act as an advisory body to the City Council on City
planning and development matters. In the performance of its functions and
duties the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have power to:



      (1)   Require information which shall be furnished within a
reasonable time from other city departments and agencies in relation to its
work; and,



      (2)   Exercise such additional powers as may be necessary to
perform tasks assigned to it by the City Council.



('80 Code, § 23-31)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. O2015-023, passed
4-15-2015)



   (E)   Composition.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
consist of seven members, who shall be electors and real property owners of
the city, who shall be appointed by the Council.



('80 Code, § 23-17, § 23-18, § 23-19)  (Ord. 929, passed 3-4-1964; Ord.
766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. 1796, passed 12-6-1978)



   (F)   Terms of members.  The term of office of the members of the
Commission shall be for five years. Any member whose term expires shall be
eligible for reappointment to another five-year term. If a vacancy on the
Planning and Zoning Commission occurs other than by an expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term. Such appointment shall
be made by the Council. Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will expire on
December 31.



('80 Code, § 23-21)  (Ord. 929, passed 3-4-1964)



   (G)   Organization.



      (1)   Officers.  The Commission each January shall elect a
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the appointive members. The
Planning Director shall serve the Commission as executive secretary.



('80 Code, § 23-23)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959)



      (2)   Meetings.  The City Planning and Zoning Commission
shall meet not less than once each month. Each January, the Commission shall
hold an annual meeting for the review of its activities and accomplishments.



('80 Code, § 23-24)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959)



      (3)   Quorum.  Four members of the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall constitute a quorum for transacting business.



('80 Code, § 23-25)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. 1540, passed
10-6-1976)



      (4)   Voting.  A majority vote of those Planning and Zoning
Commission members present and voting shall be required to take official
action including, but not limited to, the adopting of policy or submitting
recommendations. No member shall be excused from voting except on matters
involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct or a conflict
of interest. In all other cases a failure to vote shall be entered in the
minutes as an affirmative vote.



('80 Code, § 23-26)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. 1540, passed
10-6-1976; Ord. O2015-023, passed 4-15-2015)



      (5)   Official record.  The official records of the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall include its rules and regulations, minutes of
meetings, resolutions and its adopted reports, which shall be deposited with
the Planning Department and which shall be available for public inspection
during customary office hours.



('80 Code, § 23-27)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959)



      (6)   Reports.  The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
submit to the City Council such special reports as may be requested and such
other information as the City Council may desire.



('80 Code, § 23-28)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. O2015-023, passed
4-15-2015)



      (7)   Voice or video appearance. A Planning and Zoning
Commissioner shall have the opportunity to participate by voice or video
during a regularly scheduled meeting subject to the following rules and
regulations:



         (a)   Voice or video participation shall mean the
participation of the Planning and Zoning Commissioner(s) at Planning and
Zoning meetings by voice or video technology where the Planning and Zoning
Commissioner is not physically present at the Planning and Zoning meeting.



         (b)   Voice or video participation shall only apply to
Planning and Zoning meetings held at Yuma City Hall, Yuma. Arizona.



         (c)   A Planning and Zoning Commissioner wishing to
participate through voice or video technology shall contact the Director of
Community Development regarding the need to participate from an off-site
location. Notice shall be provided no later than two business days prior to
the meeting to allow sufficient time to post the information on the agenda
and to prepare the meeting room for such voice or video participation.



         (d)   No more than two Planning and Zoning Commissioners
may participate by voice or video technology at any meeting. Unless approved
by the Planning and Zoning Commission, no Commissioner may participate by
video or voice technology more than twice in any calendar year.



         (e)   When a Planning and Zoning Commissioner is
participating by using voice or video technology at a meeting:



            1.   The meeting facilities shall be arranged to
provide the capability of the public audience to be able to hear such
participating Commissioner. Facilities shall also be provided whereby the
participating Commissioner can hear any comments made by other members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission, by City staff and by the audience in
attendance at the meeting.



            2.   Communications shall be initiated with the
Commissioner prior to the beginning of the Planning and Zoning meeting. The
participating Commissioner will identify him or herself during roll call and
state that he/she is attending the meeting through voice or video
participation.



         (f)   The meeting agenda shall reflect that a Planning
and Zoning Commissioner will be participating through voice or video
technology and voting procedures will remain as required by the City of Yuma
Code (§ 154-02.01).



(Ord. O2017-027, passed 8-16-2017)



   (H)   Removal.  Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission may
be removed by the City Council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office.



('80 Code, § 23-20)  (Ord. 929, passed 3-4-1964; Ord. O2015-023, passed
4-15-2015)



   (I)   Compensation; expenses.  The members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall serve as such without compensation; however, the
Council may allow such expenditures as are necessary for the performance of
their duties.



('80 Code, § 23-22)  (Ord. 929, passed 3-4-1964; Ord. O2010-32, passed
7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-66, passed 1-5-2011)



§ 154-02.02  Hearing Officer.



   (A)   Establishment.  Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.08, the position
of Hearing Officer is hereby established to conduct public hearings on behalf
of the city.



      (1)   Appointment.  The Hearing Officer is appointed by the
City Administrator subject to the approval of the City Council.



      (2)   Qualifications.  The Hearing Officer is appointed on
the basis of a demonstrated ability to perform the duties of the office, such
as training and experience relevant to the conduct of administrative and
adjudicative hearings and knowledge of the principles and practices of land
use planning. The Hearing Officer shall not hold a city elective office
concurrently with this position.



      (3)   Term.  The Hearing Officer serves at the pleasure of
the City Administrator. The City Administrator may designate a qualified
person as a temporary Hearing Officer whenever the Hearing Officer is unable
to perform the duties of the office due to illness, potential conflict of
interest or similar reason.



   (B)   Authority.  The Hearing Officer shall have the following
authority:



      (1)   To hear and decide applications for:



         (a)   Variances;



         (b)   Temporary uses;



         (c)   Expansion of nonconforming uses or structures;



         (d)   Revocation of modification of variances;



         (e)   Conditional use permits for soil remediation, uses
requiring a federal or state permit that are not otherwise listed and the
location of multiple food vending units at a mobile vending site; and



         (f)   Time extension of conditional use permits (only if
there are no changes made to the previously approved CUP).



      (2)   To hear and decide appeals of:



         (a)   Determinations of the Zoning Administrator;



         (b)   Determinations of the Floodplain Administrator;



         (c)   Decisions of the Landscape Committee;



         (d)   Decisions of the Minor Variance Committee; and



         (e)   Denial of any business license by planning staff.



   (C)   Variances.  The Hearing Officer may vary from a development
standard or dimension required by this chapter only if, because of special
circumstances applicable to the property, building or use, including its
size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of
this chapter will deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other
property of the same permitted use in the same zoning district. Any variance
granted by the Hearing Officer is subject to such conditions as will assure
that the authorized variance shall not constitute a grant of special
privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and in the district in which such property is located. The Hearing
Officer has authority to revoke or modify a variance. All variance decisions
from the Hearing Officer are appealable to the Planning and Zoning Commission
for the purposes of A.R.S. § 9-462.06.A.



   (D)   Temporary uses.  The Hearing Officer may approve a request
for a temporary use, as permitted in this chapter. The approval may include
conditions which address site improvements, traffic issues, length of time
for use operation, daily hours of operation, temporary signage or any other
condition deemed necessary for the public safety, health and welfare. All
temporary use decisions are appealable to the City Planning and Zoning
Commission.



   (E)   Expansion of nonconforming uses or structures.  The Hearing
Officer may expand a nonconforming use or structure as allowed in this
chapter and state law, A.R.S. § 9-462.02. All nonconforming use/structure
decisions are appealable to the City Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (F)   Conditional use permits. 



      (1)   The Hearing Officer is responsible for the review and
determination of conditional use permits related to soil remediation, time
extension, and for any use that requires a state or federal permit.



      (2)   The Hearing Officer is responsible for the review and
determination of conditional use permits for the location of multiple food
vending units at a mobile vending site. The Hearing Officer may include
conditions which address site improvements, traffic issues, daily operation
hours or any other conditions deemed necessary for the public safety, health
and welfare.



      (3)   All conditional use permit decisions are appealable to
the City Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (G)   Appeals.



      (1)   The Hearing Officer shall hear all appeals of decisions
made by the following:



         (a)   The Zoning Administrator;



         (b)   The Floodplain Administrator;



         (c)   The Landscape Committee;



         (d)   The Minor Variance Committee; and



         (e)   Business license determinations made by planning
staff.



      (2)   The Hearing Officer shall also hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision in
the enforcement of this chapter or the floodplain regulations set forth in
Chapter 151, or interpretation of the official zoning map made by the Zoning
Administrator.



      (3)   Upon appeal, to reverse or affirm, wholly or partially,
or modify the order, requirement or decision of the Zoning Administrator or
Floodplain Administrator, Landscape Committee, Minor Variance Committee and
planning staff decision related to business licenses, the Hearing Officer has
the authority to make such alternate order, requirement, decision or
determination as necessary, based on the findings of each case.



   (H)   Hearing Officer.  The Hearing Officer shall not be authorized
to:



      (1)   Make any change(s) in the uses permitted in any zoning
district, or make any changes in the terms of this chapter or the floodplain
regulations set forth in Chapter 151. The restriction in this section shall
not affect the authority to grant a variance(s) to a development standard(s)
or a dimension(s) required by this chapter; or



      (2)   Grant a variance(s) if the special circumstances(s)
applicable to the property, building, or use is self-imposed by the property
owner or applicant.



(Ord. O2006-20, passed 3-1-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2011-10, 4-20-2011; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



§ 154-02.03  Zoning Administrator.



   (A)   Establishment.  Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-462.05 the Planning
Director, also known as Director of Planning, or an authorized deputy acting
under his or her direction, shall be the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Duties.  The Zoning Administrator, or his or her authorized
deputy shall be charged with responsibility for enforcement of the zoning
ordinance:



      (1)   Supply information about, and provide interpretations
of, this chapter to the public, city departments and other agencies;



      (2)   Provide advice and assistance to all applicants for
zoning actions;



      (3)   Accomplish all administrative actions required by this
chapter; including receiving applications giving notice of hearings,
preparation of reports and processing appeals;



      (4)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the
erection, construction, moving, reconstruction, conversion, alteration or
addition to any building or structure and the use of any land, building or
premise;



      (5)   Inspect buildings, structures and lands as may be
necessary or desirable for enforcement of this chapter;



      (6)   Determine other permitted uses consistent with the
purpose of each Zoning District; and



(Ord. O2009-28, passed 5-6-2009)



      (7)   Notwithstanding the procedures set forth in §
154-03.04(D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(c) for consideration of a variance
application, the Zoning Administrator may approve a deviation in development
standards and/or dimensional criteria upon the making of the findings
required in § 154-03.04(D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(d), when the following
conditions are satisfied:



         (a)   The application requests a deviation from code not
exceeding a 10% reduction or increase of a development standard and/or
dimension required by the zoning code; and



         (b)   The Zoning Administrator determines that the
request complies with the four findings of fact required by §
154-03.04(D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(d).



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-02.04  Design and Historic Review Commission (DHRC).



   (A)   Establishment.  The Design and Historic Review Commission
(DHRC) is hereby created. The Design and Historic Review Commission is the
merger of the formerly known Design Review Commission and Historic District
Review Commission. The Commission shall consist of an odd number of members
no fewer than five and no more than seven to be appointed by the Mayor and
Council. The Design and Historic Review Commission shall be organized to
conduct business in a manner specified in the Commission bylaws.



(Ord. O97-45, passed 7-2-1997; Ord. O98-44, passed 5-20-1998; Ord. O2007-61,
passed 11-20-2007; Ord. O2008-31, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. O2009-54, passed
10-21-2009)



   (B)   Organization of the Design and Historic Review Commission.



      (1)   Terms.  Members shall serve a term of five years.
Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will expire on December 31. Elections for
positions of Commission Chairperson and Commission Vice-Chairperson shall be
on an annual basis at the first meeting of the calendar year.



      (2)   Meetings.  The Design and Historic Review Commission
shall meet bi-monthly, or at the call of the Chairperson as specified in the
Commission bylaws, to be amended as required.



      (3)   Rules.  The Commission shall adopt rules for the
conduct of its business. The Commission may delegate certain responsibilities
and/or tasks to be performed by a sub-commission or subcommittees of the
Commission.



      (4)   Compensation.  Members shall serve without compensation.



      (5)   Composition.  Appointed member shall meet these
qualifications:



         (a)   All must be residents of the city and should have
a demonstrated interest in the history of this city with a desire to promote
building and site design that is of high aesthetic and functional quality
while in harmony with the surrounding community;



         (b)   At least one member must be an architect,
architectural designer, planner or design professional who demonstrate an
interest in local historic preservation as well as the design, image and
appearance of the community;



         (c)   At least one member must be a general building
contractor or a tradesman in the building construction industry who should
have an interest in historic structures;



         (d)   At least one member must have qualified training
or experience in historic preservation, or be a member of the Rio Colorado
Chapter of the Arizona Historical Society and selected from among three or
more members nominated by the Board of Directors of that chapter;



         (e)   One member must be a member of the City Planning
and Zoning Commission;



         (f)   At least one person who owns property or resides
within a historic district as established under this subchapter;



         (g)   Two members shall be members at-large; and



         (h)   Should no persons be available for appointment
that meet the criteria listed herein, the City Council may select a person
whose background approximates the knowledge and expertise being sought.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O98-44, passed 5-20-1998; Ord. O2007-61, passed 11-20-2007;
Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. O2010-56, passed 11-17-2010)



   (C)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Design and Historic Review
Commission is to promote and protect the Historic and Architectural integrity
of the city within the defined geographical limits of the Aesthetic Overlay
District and the Historic Districts of the city.



   (D)   Duties.  The Commission’s duties are outlined as follows:



      (1)   To promote the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the community and to ensure the harmonious growth and
development of the municipality by encouraging the preservation of historic
places and structures, and advancing aesthetic and functionally well-designed
projects;



      (2)   To designate sites and districts of historical
significances;



      (3)   To provide regulatory oversight regarding exterior
modifications to all historic structures or sites that are listed or eligible
for listing on the National Register of Historic Places and have received the
city’s Historic (H) District Zoning Overlay, as well as projects within the
Aesthetic Overlay District;



      (4)   To review all project design plans within an Aesthetic
Overlay District. Such plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the
Aesthetic Overlay Design Guidelines;



      (5)   To provide regulatory oversight regarding the exterior
appearance of any structure (new construction, renovation or alteration)
within a recognized Historic District or within the Aesthetic Overlay and
areas with specific design requirements;



      (6)   The Commission shall decide whether a permit should be
issued for any demolition, removal, exterior renovation, addition or any
other exterior alteration of any historic structure, historic site or any
property located within an historic district. The Commission’s review of
applications for new construction shall be limited to building size, scale,
exterior elevation, design, color and appearance, to ensure compatibility
with the historic character of the property, neighborhood or environment.
When the local Commission governing the historic district denies an
application or request, the applicant may not legally proceed with any
exterior work, including demolishing or moving a structure, unless the
Commission’s decision is appealed and is set aside or modified by a
superior authority;



      (7)   Review and approval of all private and commercially
oriented development of lands located within the RO Zoning District;



      (8)   Review and approval of all exterior lighting in the Bed
and Breakfast Overlay District;



      (9)   Hear and decide appeals of the City Zoning
Administrator’s decisions on signage and building requirements within the
Historic Park Zoning District; and



      (10)   The Commission shall keep the Mayor and Council
apprised in all matters concerning historic sites and districts. In this
regard it:



         (a)   May recommend to the Mayor and Council acquisition
by the city of structures or easements for maintenance or repair of
structures for their preservation where private preservation is not feasible;
and



         (b)   May initiate and conduct detailed studies and
surveys of buildings, in conjunction with the Rio Colorado Chapter of the
Arizona Historical Society and interested others, the intention of assessing
potential of such buildings, structures or areas for designation as historic
sites or districts.



   (E)   Appeals and variance.



      (1)   Proper maintenance is essential to the longevity of
historic structures. Minor maintenance modifications to properties within an
historic district may be approved or denied by the Zoning Administrator or
the Zoning Administrator’s designee. Denials by the Zoning Administrator or
Zoning Administrator’s designee may be appealed to the Design and Historic
Review Commission. Minor maintenance modifications include the following:



         (a)   Replacement of existing wood or asphalt shingles
with dimensional asphalt shingles provided that the property is not
individually listed on the National Historic Register or a contributing
property within the Brinley Avenue Historic District;



         (b)   Patching or resurfacing of an existing flat roof;



         (c)   Reapplication of applied color to a surface with
applied color (stain or paint);



         (d)   Replacement of an electrical service panel and
associated screening;



         (e)   Replacement of an HVAC unit and associated
screening; and



         (f)   New or replacement fencing or perimeter walls.



         (g)   Investigation of structural and building system
integrity by means of inconspicuous exterior exploration.  Exploration is
limited to one temporary occurrence at a time with a maximum removal of four
square feet of the facade for each such occurrence.  Repair/restoration to
match the surrounding exterior is to be completed within 30 days of
commencement of the exploration.



      (2)   Appeals of the project design decisions of the Design
and Historic Review Commission within an Aesthetic Overlay District shall be
heard by the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Any requests for variances from the development
standards of the underlying zoning district for a project within an Aesthetic
Overlay District shall be considered by the City Hearing Officer.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O98-44, passed 5-20-1998; Ord. O2007-61, passed 11-20-2007;
Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2010-66, passed 1-5-2011; Ord. O2011-16, passed 5-4-2011)



§ 154-02.05  Board of Adjustment.



   (A)   Authority.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have
authority to grant, upon such terms and conditions as it deems necessary, a
variance(s) from those specific restrictions as to area, fences and walls,
frontage dimension on a public or private street, height, landscape plant
material, loading, parking, setbacks, signs, width, yards, general character
and other accessory and incidental restrictions applicable to the appropriate
district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (B)   Duties.



      (1)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be authorized to
hear and decide appeals from an interpretation and/or a decision of the
Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals of the Minor Variance Committee and a decision of the Zoning
Administrator or designee.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996)



      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall consider appeals
pertaining to removal of abandoned signage.



      (4)   The Board shall be authorized to hold a public hearing
to consider granting a variance(s) only when findings of fact are made that
all of the conditions found in § 154-03.04(D)(1) are found to exist.



      (5)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall be authorized to
hold a public hearing to consider the revocation or modification of a
variance(s) previously granted in accordance with the provisions of the
zoning code.



      (6)   The Board of Adjustment may not:



         (a)   Grant a variance to allow a less restrictive use,
or other use not permitted in the applicable district. A variance request
must be compatible with the general purpose and intent of the zoning code and
the General Plan upon which it is based, so that the spirit of the zoning
code and General Plan shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured,
and substantial justice be done, not only to the applicant, but to others who
might be affected by approval of such variance; and



         (b)   The Board shall not approve a variance if it finds
that the special circumstance(s) or condition(s) of the property, building or
use which is claimed to cause a practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship or
inconsistency with the intent of the purpose of the zoning code or General
Plan applies generally throughout the neighborhood or district. In such cases
where variance requests are so general, or recurrent in nature, an amendment
of the zoning code should be considered to provide a general regulation for
such special circumstance rather than the approval of variance requests.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-66, passed
1-5-2011)



§ 154-02.06  Minor Variance Committee.



   (A)   Purpose.  The city shall establish a Minor Variance
Committee, consisting of the Zoning Administrator and two additional members
of the Department of Community Development Staff as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, to act as the hearing officer as provided by A.R.S. §
9-462.06.



   (B)   Duties.



      (1)   The Minor Variance Committee shall have the authority to
grant, upon such terms and conditions it deems necessary, a minor variance(s)
as defined in Article 1 of this chapter.



      (2)   The Minor Variance Committee may, at an open meeting,
approve a minor variance(s) upon the making of the findings required in §
154-03.04(D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(d) of this chapter, when the following
conditions are satisfied:



         (a)   The applicant receives written consent to the
requested minor variance(s), on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator,
from an owner of each property adjacent to the property which is the subject
of the minor variance request, whether or not separated by public
rights-of-way;



         (b)   The application requests a variance not exceeding
a 20% reduction or increase of a development standard or dimension required
by the zoning code; and



         (c)   The Minor Variance Committee determines that the
request complies with the four findings of fact required by §
154-03.04(D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(d).



      (3)   The Minor Variance Committee may not:



         (a)   Grant a variance to allow a less restrictive use
or other use not permitted in the applicable district; and



         (b)   A minor variance request must be compatible with
the general purpose and intent of the zoning code and the General Plan upon
which it is based, so that the spirit of the zoning code and the General Plan
shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice
done not only to the applicant, but to others who might be affected by the
granting of such minor variance(s).



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



Article 03 - Zoning Procedures



§ 154-03.01  Citizen Review Process.



   (A)   Purpose.  To provide appropriate information to adjacent land
owners and other potentially affected citizens of requested zoning map
amendments, conditional use permits, specific plans and subdivisions of land
and allow opportunities to express any issues or concerns that they may have
with the proposal before the public hearing.



(Ord. O2003-66, passed 12-3-2003; Ord. O2005-47, passed 7-6-2005)



   (B)   Notification.  All notifications sent pursuant to §
154-03.02 shall include:



      (1)   The substance and location of the proposal;



      (2)   The purpose or intent of the proposal;



      (3)   Contact information for the staff and the applicant, or
his or her agent, which may include telephone numbers, mailing and e-mail
addresses; and



      (4)   Meeting dates and locations of neighborhood meetings, if
deemed appropriate.



(Ord. O2003-66, passed 12-3-2003; Ord. O2005-47, passed 7-6-2005)



   (C)   Neighborhood meetings.  Following application for zoning map
amendment, conditional use permit, specific plan or preliminary subdivision
of land, a neighborhood meeting or other public input opportunity may be
required. City staff will establish the process and procedures for the
neighborhood meetings. Failure by the applicant to participate in the
neighborhood meeting, will delay the development review process for the
subject application.



(Ord. O2003-66, passed 12-3-2003; Ord. O2005-47, passed 7-6-2005; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.02  Notification for Public Hearings.



   (A)   Zoning amendments (boundaries and/or regulations).



      (1)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a
general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description
of the area affected, shall be given at least 15 days before the hearing by
publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published or
circulated in the city.



      (2)   In proceedings involving an amendment of the zoning map,
additional written notice of the hearing shall be given by mail at least 28
days before the hearing to all owners of property within a radius of 300 feet
of the exterior boundaries of the property being the subject of the
application; using for this purpose the name and address shown on the county
assessment roll.



      (3)   Failure of any property owner to receive said notice
will not invalidate the proceedings.



      (4)   When the property being the subject of the application
abuts unincorporated areas of the county or other municipalities, notice
shall be given to the planning agencies of such governmental units.



      (5)   This requirement for written notice shall not apply to
amendments initiated by the City Council or Planning Commission that, in
effect, adopt a new zoning map for the city, or a large portion thereof.



      (6)   In zoning requests involving one or more of the
following changes to the standards governing land use, additional notice is
required:



         (a)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in the number
of square feet or units that may be developed;



         (b)   A 10% or more increase or reduction in the
allowable height of buildings;



         (c)   An increase or reduction in the allowable number
of stories of buildings;



         (d)   A 10% or more increase or decrease in setback or
open space requirements; and



         (e)   An increase or reduction in permitted uses.



      (7)   In these instances, notice shall be provided to real
property owners in one of three ways:



         (a)   Send a notice of the proposed changes in utility
bills or other mass mailings which are periodically issued;



         (b)   Publish a display ad on the proposed change in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city or town prior to the public
hearing on any such change. The display ad must cover not less than
one-eighth of a full page; or



         (c)   Send a notice by first class mail to all property
owners whose property is directly governed by the proposed change.



      (8)   If notice is provided using the method involving a
display ad or the use of utility bills and other mass mailings, the
municipality shall also send notice by first class mail to all persons who
register their name and address with the municipality as being interested in
receiving such notices. A fee not to exceed $5 per year shall be charged for
providing this service.



   (B)   Variances.



      (1)   A public hearing to consider the requested variance
shall be held by the Board. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall
be given as follows:



         (a)   In at least one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, at least 15 days before the hearing;



         (b)   By posting of notice in conspicuous places on, or
close to, the property; and



         (c)   By mail, or hand delivery, at least seven days
before the hearing, to all owners of property within 300 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the subject property of the request, using the name and address
shown on the county assessment roll.



      (2)   Failure of any property owner to receive said notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (C)   Appeals of the Zoning Administrator and the Minor Variance
Committee.



      (1)   A public hearing shall be held by the Board. Notice of
the time and the place of the hearing shall be given as follows:



         (a)   In at least one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, at least 15 days before the hearing;



         (b)   By posting of notice in conspicuous places on, or
close to, the property; and



         (c)   By mail at least seven days before the hearing to
all owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries
of the subject property of the appeal, using the name and address shown on
the county assessment roll.



      (2)   Failure of any property owner to receive said notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



   (D)   Conditional use permits.



      (1)   A public hearing shall be held by the Commission. Notice
of the time and place of the hearing shall be given as follows:



         (a)   In at least one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city, at least 15 days before the hearing;



         (b)   By posting of notice in conspicuous places on, or
close to, the property; and



         (c)   By mail or hand delivery at least 28 days before
the hearing to all owners of property within 300 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the subject property of the request, using the name and address
shown on the county assessment roll.



      (2)   Failure of any property owner to receive said notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2003-66, passed 12-3-2003; Ord. O2010-32, passed
7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.03  Zoning Amendments.



This chapter may be amended by changing the boundaries of any zoning
district, imposing new regulations or removing, changing or modifying the
regulations previously imposed whenever the public necessity and convenience
and the general welfare require such amendment, by following the procedure of
this section.



   (A)   Amendment of the zoning map.  An amendment of the zoning map
may be initiated by:



      (1)   The City Council;



      (2)   The Planning Commission; and/or



      (3)   One or more owners of property affected by the proposed
amendment.



   (B)   Application for amendment of zoning map.  The application
shall be made on the form provided and shall be accompanied by a
nonreturnable filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City
Ordinance No. 1943, and successors. Said application shall bear the property
owners signatures and addresses, the legal description and land area of each
property included in the application, the total land area represented by the
application, a map of the area and a list of the names and addresses of all
owners of property within a radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of
the property being the subject of the application, using for this purpose the
name and address shown on the county assessment roll.



   (C)   Amendment of the text.  An amendment of the text of this
chapter may be initiated by:



      (1)   The City Council;



      (2)   The Planning Commission; and/or



      (3)   Any resident of or owner of property in the city.



   (D)   Application for amendment of the text.  The application shall
be made on the form provided and shall be accompanied by a nonreturnable
filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Ordinance No.
1943, and successors.



   (E)   Public hearing.  At least one public hearing shall be held by
the Commission. Following the aforesaid hearing, the Planning Commission
shall file a report of its findings and recommendations with respect to the
proposed amendment with the City Council within 30 days of the final public
hearing; the report shall be in writing and shall include the recommendations
for approval, conditional approval or disapproval and shall contain a brief
summary of the reasons for the recommendations. If the Planning Commission
deems it advisable, it may recommend that the area under consideration for
change in classification be enlarged or diminished or be reclassified to a
district other than the district originally initiated.



   (F)   Withdrawal of petition for amendment.  Upon the consent of
the Planning Commission, any petition for an amendment may be withdrawn upon
the written application of a majority of all persons who signed such a
petition. The City Council or the Planning Commission may by resolution
abandon any proceedings for an amendment initiated by its own resolution of
intention, provided that such abandonment may be made only when such
proceedings are before such body for consideration, and provided that any
hearing of which public notice has been given shall be held.



   (G)   Adoption of recommendation.  After the Planning Commission
has held a public hearing, the City Council may adopt the recommendation of
the Planning Commission without holding another public hearing if there is no
objection, request for a public hearing or other protest. A public hearing
shall be held if requested by the party aggrieved or any member of the public
or of the City Council.



   (H)   Notice.  If the City Council holds a public hearing, notice
shall be given in the manner provided in § 154-03.02 of this article.



   (I)   Amendment may be conditioned.  An amendment of the zoning map
may be conditioned, upon:



      (1)   A schedule for development of the specific use or uses
requested. If at the expiration of this period the property has not been
improved for the use for which it was conditionally approved, it shall revert
to its former zoning district classification without further action; and



      (2)   Public dedication of rights-of-way as streets, alleys,
public ways, drainage and public utilities are as reasonably required by, or
related to, the effect of the amendment.



   (J)   Filing of protest by adjacent property owners.



      (1)   If the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the
lots included in a proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the
rear or any side thereof extending 150 feet therefrom, or of those directly
opposite thereto extending 150 feet from the street frontage of the opposite
lots, file a protest in writing against a proposed amendment, it shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members
of the City Council.



      (2)   If any members of the City Council are unable to vote on
such a question because of a conflict of interest, then the required number
of votes for passage of the questions shall be three-fourths of the remaining
membership of the Council, provided that such required number of votes shall
in no event be less than a majority of the full membership of the Council.



   (K)   Resubmittal after denial.  In case a petition for an
amendment is denied by the City Council, said petition shall not be eligible
for resubmittal for one year from date of said denial, unless specifically
stated to be without prejudice. A new petition affecting the same property
must be, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, substantially different
from the petition denied, or conditions must have sufficiently changed for
the new petition to be eligible for consideration within one year from said
date of denial, unless denied without prejudice.



('80 Code, App. A, § 250)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1378, passed
9-4-1974; Ord. 1939, passed 6-18-1980; Ord. 2426, passed 11-2-1988; Ord.
O2003-66, passed 12-3-2003; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.04  Variances and Appeals.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the variance procedure is to allow
for a variation from the strict application of the development standards or
dimension requirements of the zoning code where practical difficulties
unnecessary hardship, or a result inconsistent with the general purposes of
the zoning code would occur from its strict, and literal interpretation, and
enforcement. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall also be authorized to hear
and decide appeals from the decision of the Zoning Administrator and from the
Minor Variance Committee.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (B)   Applications.  A written application shall be submitted to
the Planning and Neighborhood Service Division as follows:



      (1)   On the form provided by the Zoning Administrator and
signed by the property owner;



      (2)   Shall specify the variance(s) or minor variance(s)
requested or specify the grounds of the appeal;



      (3)   Shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Ordinance No. 1943, and
successors;



      (4)   Shall include reasons for granting the application or
for granting the appeal; and



      (5)   Shall include plans and other pertinent information.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (C)   Public hearing.



      (1)   A public hearing to consider the requested variance or
the appeal shall be held by the Board.



      (2)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
given as outlined in § 154-03.02(B) or (C).



   (D)   Zoning Board of Adjustment action.



      (1)   Following the aforesaid hearing, the Board shall grant a
variance(s) only when findings of fact are made that all of the following
conditions exist:



         (a)   There is a special circumstance(s) or
condition(s), applying to the property or building referred to in the
application and which do(es) not apply to most other properties in the
district;



         (b)   That such special circumstance(s) was not created,
or caused, by the property owner or applicant;



         (c)   The granting of the variance(s) is necessary for
the preservation of substantial property rights enjoyed by other property
owners in the vicinity under identical zoning designations; and



         (d)   The granting of the variance shall not be
materially detrimental to any person(s) residing, or working, in the
vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood or to the public health,
safety and general welfare.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2008-55, passed 12-3-2008)



      (2)   Following the aforesaid hearing, the Board shall take
action to either continue consideration, deny or grant an appeal from the
decision of the Zoning Administrator and/or from the Minor Variance Committee.



   (E)   Stay of proceedings.  An appeal stays all proceedings unless
the Zoning Administrator certifies that a stay would cause imminent peril to
life or to property. Upon such certification, proceedings shall not be
stayed, except by restraining order granted by a court of record upon notice
to the Zoning Administrator.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (F)   Expiration and time extensions.



      (1)   Expiration.  In any case where a variance(s) has not
been used within one year after the granting thereof, it shall be null and
void.



      (2)   Time extensions.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment,
however, shall hold a public hearing to consider the granting of a time
extension of no more than one additional year as follows:



         (a)   Upon request by the applicant;



         (b)   When the request is filed with the Planning and
Neighborhood Services Division prior to the expiration date of the original
variance(s) approval;



         (c)   When accompanied by a time extension fee in
accordance with City Ordinance No. 1943, and successors; and



         (d)   Upon determination by the Board that there have
been no changes in the circumstances, or the vicinity of the property, or
use, which would render the previously approved variance(s) inappropriate.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (G)   Revocation or modification of variances.



      (1)   Revocation.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment, shall be
authorized to hold a public hearing to consider the revocation, or
modification, of a variance(s) previously granted in accordance with the
provisions of the zoning code. A written notice of the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing shall be served on the owner of the property for which
the variance was granted by registered mail, return receipt requested, not
less than seven days prior to the date of such hearing. Additional notice
shall be provided as specified in § 154-03.02(B).



      (2)   Findings.  A variance(s) may be revoked, or modified,
if, from the facts presented at the public hearing, or by investigation, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment makes an affirmative determination on any one or
more of the following findings:



         (a)   The variance(s) approval was obtained by fraud;



         (b)   The variance(s) granted is being exercised
contrary to the conditions of approval of such variance(s), or in violation
of any applicable law, license, ordinance, permit or regulation; and/or



         (c)   The use for which the variance(s) approval was
granted is being, or has been, exercised as to be detrimental to the public
health or safety, or so as to constitute a nuisance.



      (3)   Appeal of revocation.  Each decision by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment to revoke variance(s) shall be by a majority of the
membership of the Board present and voting. Any person may appeal the
revocation in writing to the Planning and Neighborhood Services Division,
including any required appeal fee, within 30 days of the decision of the
Board of Zoning Adjustment. The appeal shall be forwarded to the City
Council. The City Council may, after a public hearing, affirm, reverse or
modify the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (H)   Minor variances.  The purpose of the minor variance procedure
is to allow for a maximum 20% variation from a development standard or
dimension requirement of the zoning code where a practical difficulty,
unnecessary hardship, or a result inconsistent with the general purposes of
the zoning code would occur from its strict, and literal interpretation, and
enforcement.



      (1)   Open meeting.  Notwithstanding the procedures set forth
in divisions (D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(c) above for consideration of a
variance application, the Minor Variance Committee may, at an open meeting,
approve a minor variance(s) upon the making of the findings required in
divisions (D)(1)(a) through (d) above, when the conditions outlined in §
154-02.06(B)(2) are satisfied.



      (2)   Zoning Administrator.  Notwithstanding the procedures
set forth in divisions (D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(c) above for consideration of
a variance application, the Zoning Administrator may approve a deviation in
development standards and/or dimensional criteria upon the making of the
findings required in divisions (D)(1)(a) through (D)(1)(d) above, when the
conditions outlined in § 154-02.03(B)(7) are satisfied.



      (3)   Appeal.  In the event the Minor Variance Committee
approves, denies or approves with conditions an application for a minor
variance(s) filed pursuant to these regulations, any person may appeal that
decision in writing to the Planning and Neighborhood Services Division,
including any required appeal fee, within 30 days of the decision of the
Minor Variance Committee, and request that the minor variance be placed on
the agenda of the next available, regularly scheduled Zoning Board of
Adjustment meeting. Such applications shall be acted on by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as specified in division (D) above.



('80 Code, App. A, § 211)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2006-39, passed 6-21-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed
7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.05  Conditional Use Permits.



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose for the conditional use permit
procedure is to allow approval of uses which are deemed to possess location,
use, building or traffic characteristics of such unique and special form as
to make impractical or undesirable, their automatic inclusion as permitted
uses in certain districts. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
authority to grant approval for conditional uses, under the procedures herein
stated. In granting a conditional use permit; certain safeguards may be
required, and certain conditions established to accomplish to following:



      (1)   To protect the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare;



      (2)   To assure that the purposes of the zoning code shall be
maintained with respect to the particular conditional use on the particular
requested site;



      (3)   To consider the location, use, building, traffic
characteristics and environmental impact(s) of the proposed use; and



      (4)   To consider existing and potential uses with the general
area in which the requested conditional use is proposed.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (B)   Conditions of approval.  The conditions of approval required
by the Planning and Zoning Commission in granting a conditional use permit
may include, but are not limited to, provisions concerning access,
aesthetics, appearance, area, driveways, environmental attenuation, general
character, height, hours of operation, lighting, loading, neighborhood
compatibility; noise attenuation, on- and off-site improvements, open spaces,
operating hours, parking, prevention of vandalism or graffiti, revocation
dates, security of persons and property, setbacks, signs, site plan, size,
street right-of-way dedication, time limits for commencing construction or
use authorization, use, walls, yards and any other conditions the Planning
and Zoning Commission may deem appropriate and necessary to carry out the
purpose(s) of the zoning code.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (C)   Exceptions; approval or denial.  In granting a conditional
use permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be authorized to hear
and decide applications for an exception(s) as follows:



      (1)   When filed concurrently with a conditional use permit
application;



      (2)   As authorized by § 154-03.04(A) as a variance to the
zoning code; and



      (3)   Provided the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make
the four findings of fact required by § 154-03.04(D)(1) of the zoning code.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (D)   Types of conditional uses.  The Planning and Zoning
Commission may grant a conditional use permit in accordance with the
procedures stated in the zoning code for any of the following uses:



      (1)   Any use listed as a conditional use in any district;



      (2)   A temporary and revocable use of property on an
undeveloped parcel(s) for a maximum period of 12 months; provided, such use
be of a true temporary nature, does not require the erection of substantial
buildings or improvements and shall be subject to the applicant furnishing
satisfactory assurance of complete removal of such buildings or improvements
at the expiration of the permit approval; and



      (3)   Any hazardous material environmental remediation
program, project or facility proposed to exceed a ten-day period for property
in any district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (E)   Application.  A written application shall be submitted to the
Planning and Neighborhood Services Division as follows:



      (1)   On the form provided by the Zoning Administrator and
signed by the property owner;



      (2)   Shall specify the conditional use requested;



      (3)   Shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in
accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Ordinance No. 1943, and
successors;



      (4)   Shall include reasons for granting the application; and



      (5)   Shall include plans and other pertinent information.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (F)   Public hearing.  A public hearing shall be held by the
Commission. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given as
outlined in § 154-03.02(D).



   (G)   Planning and Zoning Commission action.



      (1)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
authority to hear and decide applications for conditional use permits.
However, when specified by the zoning code that the City Council shall have
the final authority to decide applications for conditional use permits, the
decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be advisory to the City
Council.



      (2)   In order to approve an application for a conditional use
permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a finding that each of
the following questions can be answered affirmatively.



         (a)   Is the Planning and Zoning Commission, or the City
Council, authorized under the zoning code to grant the conditional use permit
described in the application?



         (b)   Will the establishment, maintenance and/or
operation of the requested conditional use, under the circumstances of the
particular case, not be detrimental to the health, safety; peace, morals,
comfort or general welfare of persons residing, or working, in the vicinity
or such proposed use, or be detrimental or injurious, to the value of
property in the vicinity, or to the general welfare of the city?



         (c)   Are the provisions for ingress, egress and traffic
circulation, and adjacent public streets adequate to meet the needs of the
requested conditional use?



         (d)   Are the provisions for building(s) and parking
facility setbacks adequate to provide a transition from, and protection to,
existing and contemplated residential development?



         (e)   Are the height and bulk of the proposed buildings
and structures compatible with the general character of development in the
vicinity of the requested conditional use?



         (f)   Have provisions been made to attenuate noise
levels and provide for adequate site and security lighting?



         (g)   Has the site plan for the proposed conditional
use, including, but not limited to landscaping, fencing and screen walls
and/or planting, CPTED strategies (Crime Prevention Through Environmental
Design) and anti-graffiti strategies been adequately provided to achieve
compatibility with adjoining areas?



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995)



   (H)   Expiration and time extensions.



      (1)   Expiration.  In any case where a conditional use permit
has not been used within one year after the granting thereof, it shall be
null and void.



      (2)   Time extensions.  The Commission, the Hearing Officer,
or in the case of City Council approval, the Council, shall hold a public
hearing to consider the granting of a time extension of no more than one
additional year as follows:



         (a)   Upon request by the applicant;



         (b)   When the request is filed in writing with the
Planning and Neighborhood Services Division prior to the expiration date of
the original conditional use permit approval;



         (c)   When accompanied by a time extension fee in
accordance with City Ordinance No. 1943, and successors; and



         (d)   Upon determination by the Commission, the Hearing
Officer, or in the case of City Council approval, the Council, that there
have been no changes in the circumstances, or the vicinity of the property or
use, which would render the previously approved conditional use permit
inappropriate.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2011-10, passed 4-20-2011)



   (I)   Revocation or modification of conditional use permits.



      (1)   Revocation.  The Planning and Zoning Commission, shall
be authorized to hold a public hearing to consider the revocation or
modification of a conditional use permit previously granted in accordance
with the provisions of the zoning code. A written notice of the date, time,
place and purpose of the hearing shall be served on the owner of the property
for which the conditional permit use was granted by registered mail return
receipt requested, not less than seven days prior to the date of such
hearing. Additional notice shall be provided as specified in § 154-03.02(D).



      (2)   Findings.  A conditional use permit may be revoked, or
modified, if, from the facts presented at the public hearing, or by
investigation, the Planning and Zoning Commission makes an affirmative
determination on any one or more of the following findings:



         (a)   The conditional use permit was obtained by fraud;



         (b)   The conditional use permit is being exercised
contrary to the conditions of approval of such conditional use permit, or in
violation of any applicable law, license, ordinance, permit or regulation;
and/or



         (c)   The use for which the conditional use permit was
granted is being, or has been, exercised as to be detrimental to the public
health, or safety, or so as to constitute a nuisance.



      (3)   Appeal of revocation.  Each decision by the Planning
and Zoning Commission to revoke a conditional use permit shall be by a
majority of the membership of the Commission present and voting. Any person
may appeal in writing to the Planning and Neighborhood Services Division,
including any required appeal fee, within 30 days of the revocation
determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal shall be
forwarded to the City Council. The City Council may, after a public hearing,
affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission.



('80 Code, App. A, § 215)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-090,
passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.06  Protected Development Rights.



   (A)   Protected development right plan approvals.  The City Council
shall consider for approval protected development right plans submitted in
accordance with A.R.S. §§ 9-1201 through 9-1205, as amended, and the
procedures set forth in this section of the City Code.



      (1)   Protected development right plan.  A city-approved
development plan or subdivision plat, which at a minimum, describes with a
reasonable degree of certainty:



         (a)   The proposed uses of the site;



         (b)   The boundaries of the site;



         (c)   Significant topographical and other natural
features affecting development of the site;



         (d)   The number of dwelling units or other structures;
and



         (e)   The location of all existing and proposed
utilities and a provision for other infrastructure on the site, including
water, sewers, roads and pedestrian walkways.



      (2)   Phased development.  For purposes of consideration and
approval of protected development right plans, a phased development is a
master planned development which:



         (a)   Consists of at least 40 acres depicted on a single
master subdivision plat for a residential development;



         (b)   Consists of at least 20 acres depicted on a single
master planned subdivision plat or development plan for a nonresidential
development;



         (c)   Is the subject of newly adopted planned unit
development (PUD); or



         (d)   The City Council have identified as a phased
development for purposes of protected development rights.



      (3)   A plan or subdivision plat for other than a phased
development.  A plan or subdivision plat for other than a phased development
may be considered a protected development right plan only if, in addition to
the foregoing requirements, it describes with a reasonable degree of
certainty the square footage, height and general location of proposed
buildings, structures and other improvements and provides the final site
development approval needed for issuance of a building permit.



(Ord. O2005-47, passed 7-6-2005)



   (B)   Grant of protected development right.  A protected
development right shall be granted upon approval by the City Council of a
plan identified at the time it is submitted as a protected development right
plan.



   (C)   Effective date of protected development right.  A protected
development right shall be deemed established with respect to a property on
the effective date of City Council approval of a protected development right
plan.



   (D)   Duration of protected development right.  The duration of the
protected development right shall be three years for a non-phased development
and five years for a phased development, with a single two year extension
permitted at the discretion of the City Council in either event.



   (E)   Modification of development plan expiration dates. A
development plan that has been designated a protected development right plan
shall expire upon termination of the protected development right. If a
building permit has been issued before the date of termination of a protected
development right, the protected development right remains valid until the
building permit expires, but in no event for longer than one year.



   (F)   Conditions or variance.  A protected development right plan
approved with conditions, or stipulation that a variance be obtained, does
not confer a protected development right until the conditions are met or the
necessary variance is obtained.



   (G)   Health and welfare exception.  The protected development
right shall not be applicable to matters of health and welfare, as set forth
by either the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Arizona
Department of Environmental Quality/Department of Health Services.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.07  Plan of Development (PSC Zoning District).



   (A)   Filing of plan of develop.  The owners or their agents shall
file with the Planning Director a plan of development to be approved by the
City Council upon review and report by the Planning Commission. The plan of
development shall include a site plan illustrating the proposed size and
location of all buildings and structures, parking areas, landscaped areas and
traffic circulation, street improvement, water, sewer and drainage plans and
a schedule of development. A market feasibility study, landscaping plans and
architectural elevations may be required if necessary to ensure that the
purpose of the PSC Zoning District will be accomplished.



   (B)   Filing fee.  A nonreturnable filing fee in accordance with
the fee schedule adopted by City Ordinance No. 1943, and successors, shall be
required for review of a plan of development.



   (C)   Recommendations of  Planning Commission.  The
recommendations of the Planning Commission shall include the reasons for
approval or disapproval of the plan of development, and if recommended for
approval, evidence demonstrating the following specific purposes of the PSC
Zoning District will be accomplished:



      (1)   The completed project will function as an inter-related
and coordinated whole such successfully provides interplay among individual
commercial establishments and separation of vehicular and pedestrian
circulation;



      (2)   Adequate and safe ingress and egress, internal traffic
circulation and off-street parking will be provided;



      (3)   There will be adequate landscaping or screening,
architectural unity, sign control and drainage facilities to preserve and
protect surrounding residential areas and general community character; and



      (4)   Construction of the project will commence, and the
entire project will be completed within a reasonable period of time.



   (D)   Approved plan of development.  An approved plan of
development shall be binding upon the property owner, his or her agents,
their successors or assignees. No building permit shall be issued for any
building or structure not in accord with the plan of development. The
construction, location, use or operation of all land and structures within
the site shall conform to all conditions and limitations set forth in the
plan of development. No structure, use or other element of an approved plan
of the development shall be eliminated, altered or provided in another manner
unless an amendment is approved. Amendments shall be processed in the same
manner as the initial plan of development for a shopping center.



('80 Code, App. A, § 100)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1627, passed
7-6-1977; Ord. 1939, passed 6-18-1980; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995)



   (E)   Time limit.  In the event that a plan of development is not
submitted within two years from the effective date of the ordinance
establishing the PSC Zoning District on a specific property, or construction
of a shopping center does not commence within one year of final approval of a
plan of development, the property shall revert to its former zoning district
classification without further action. In such event county zoning
classification existing prior to establishment of the PSC Zoning District,
the property shall revert to the Residence “A” Zoning District. The
Planning Commission may, upon request and for good cause, extend time limits
prescribed herein for successive periods of up to six months.



('80 Code, App. A, § 100)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1627, passed
7-6-1977; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.08  Design Review Procedure.



   (A)   Submittal and approval.  The project design plan, for any
project within an Aesthetic Overlay District, shall be submitted and approved
by the Design and Historic Review Commission (DHRC) prior to the issuance of
any construction or development permits.



   (B)   Fee.  The project design plan shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee and shall provide adequate information for the Design and
Historic Review Commission (DHRC) to determine whether the proposed project
will meet the ordinance requirements of the district.



   (C)   Project design plan.  The following minimum information shall
be provided on all project design plans:



      (1)   Location map.  Including area within one-half mile of
the subject lot including adjacent zoning districts, with north arrow
indicator;



      (2)   Proposed project design plan.  Location, identification
and dimension of the following existing and proposed data, to a distance of
100 feet outside the subject lot unless otherwise stated to include the
following:



         (a)   Topographic contours, at a minimum interval of one
foot vertical to two feet horizontal (existing and proposed);



         (b)   Property lines (existing and proposed), with
dimensions and north arrow indicator;



         (c)   Buildings and structures:



            1.   Use and square footage of each building;



            2.   Horizontal dimensions;



            3.   Building elevations;



            4.   Indicate required front, side, rear and
street yard setbacks; and



            5.   Location, height and material of all existing
and proposed walls or fences.



         (d)   Streets, alleys, driveways, paths, bikeways and
rights-of-way;



         (e)   Easements, stating dimension and nature (both
existing and proposed, aboveground and underground);



         (f)   Walls and fences (existing and proposed),
including height, location and material;



         (g)   Parking facilities, including bicycle racks:



            1.   Proposed driveways (showing points of ingress
and egress), islands and planters; and



            2.   Calculations indicating number of spaces for
each use as required by the zoning code.



         (h)   Lighting (exterior) showing location, type and
height in accordance with the Aesthetic Overlay District, Aesthetic Overlay
Design Guidelines and Article 18 of this chapter; and



         (i)   Conceptual landscaping plan, indicating general
location and type of plantings.



   (D)   Plan sheet.  An 11 inch by 17 inch reduction of each plan
sheet if submittal information is not submitted digitally.



   (E)   Legend.  A legend shall be included, indicating the following:



      (1)   Name of project/development;



      (2)   Location of project/development by street address;



      (3)   Name and mailing address of developer/owner;



      (4)   Name and mailing address of engineer/architect or agent;



      (5)   Date of plan preparation;



      (6)   North arrow indicator;



      (7)   Scale of not less than one-inch equals 40, 50, 60, 100
or 200 feet to the inch, as deemed appropriate for each application;



      (8)   Project summary, indicating the scope and nature of
project (if applicable, the project design plan shall include information on
how it is coordinated with the overall Master Plan for the development); and



      (9)   An inventory of the uses proposed, including floor areas
for each use.



   (F)   Phasing plan.  If the proposed project is to be constructed
in phases, a phasing plan for subsequent phases shall be provided. The
following minimum information shall be provided on all phasing plans:



      (1)   Legal description of all properties, gross acreage of
the entire project, and gross acreage of each property;



      (2)   A phasing plan at an appropriate scale indicating:



         (a)   Locations of buildings and structures;



         (b)   Parking facilities;



         (c)   Vehicle, pedestrian and bicycle circulation;



         (d)   Locations of adjacent arterial and major collector
streets; and



         (e)   Retention, open space and recreational areas.



      (3)   A table of the proposed uses including gross floor areas
for each use; and



      (4)   Location and timing of phasing within the development.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2008-31, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009;
Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.09  Historic Designation Establishment Procedure.



   (A)   An application for designating a building, structure, area or
object as an historic site shall be filed with the Community Development
Department.



   (B)   Within 90 days of the date of filing of the application, the
Commission shall hold a public hearing and render a decision on the
application, unless an extension of time is authorized in writing by both the
Commission and the applicant. Notice of the time and place of the hearing,
including a general explanation of the application and a description of the
building, structure or object or the area sought to be included within the
district, shall be given by the Zoning Administrator at least 15 days before
the hearing. Said notice shall include the time and place of a second public
hearing, to be held within a reasonable time thereafter, by the Planning and
Zoning Commission pursuant to requirements for amending the zoning map.



      (1)   The notice shall be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation, published or circulated within the city;
or, if there is none, upon an application for designation of an historic
district by posting notice in at least ten places within the area to be
included in the district and, upon either application, in at least ten public
places other than at the building, structure or object within the area.



      (2)   Notice of hearing on the application for designation of
an area as an historic district shall be mailed to the owner of each parcel
of real property within the proposed district, and to all owners of property
within 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the proposed district,
addressed to the owner in the name shown and at the address shown in the
assessment parcel records of the County Assessor as of the date of filing the
application. Failure of any property owner to receive said notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings.



      (3)   Notice of hearing on the application for designation of
a building, structure or object as an historic site shall be mailed to the
owner of that building, structure or object and to all owners of property
within a radius of 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject
property, addressed to the owner in the name shown and at the address shown
in the assessment parcel records of the County Assessor as of the date of
filing the application. Failure of any property owner to receive said notice
shall not invalidate the proceedings.



      (4)   Additional notice may be required by the Commission
under its rules.



   (C)   The Community Development Department shall provide
administrative support for the Commission upon any application.



   (D)   (1)   The Commission’s decision shall be made at a public
hearing to recommend one of the following:



         (a)   Adoption of an ordinance creating the historic
site or district;



         (b)   A district of lesser size than sought by the
application but within the boundaries described in the application; or



         (c)   Denial of the application.



      (2)   After its announcement, the decision shall be put in
writing, with the reasons for the recommendation, and transmitted to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for review/recommendation, and then forwarded
to the Mayor and Council for the final decision.



   (E)   Written objection of the Commission’s decision may be filed
with the City Clerk by any adult resident of the city within ten days
following the date of the public hearing at which the decision was made. In
the event written objection is so filed, a public hearing shall be held
before the City Council prior to action being taken on the Commission’s
recommendation, with notice of the hearing.



   (F)   An historic site or district shall be identified upon the
official zoning map of the city with the symbol “H” immediately following
the zoning district name; no modification of underlying zone or permitted use
shall thereby be affected.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-03.10  Land Use Waiver (AD Overlay Zone).



   (A)   If a property owner desires to develop a parcel of land with a
use that is not permitted within the airport noise and accident potential
zone in which the property is located, the owner may file an application for
a land use waiver in accordance with procedures established in § 154-03.03
of this chapter.



   (B)   Waivers may be granted after public hearings by the Planning
Commission and City Council, and upon a specific finding by the Council that
the purpose of the Airport District and the zoning ordinance is preserved.



   (C)   Applications shall be filed with the Planning Division, and
shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan, a detailed description of the
proposed uses and their relationship to adjacent property. Applications shall
be submitted under one of the two following provisions.



      (1)   Submission of a test report.



         (a)   The test report to be prepared under the
supervision of a registered engineer in Arizona in accordance with accepted
day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurements. Such test
report shall establish the Ldn level for the requested land use as permitted
by this Airport District; or



         (b)   At the option of the applicant, the applicant
shall provide an accurate survey map for the petitioned property and
financial assurance in a form approved by the city. Said assurance being for
the sole purpose to reimburse the city for the actual cost of hiring a
registered engineer to conduct the test report.



      (2)   Submission of an application, report and plans. 
Submission of an application, report and plans which provide the following:



         (a)   A statement acknowledging and not challenging the
noise level as indicated by the airport noise and accident potential zone
map; and



         (b)   Documentation that the permitted uses within the
specific noise zone and/or APZ Zone are not reasonable uses of the property
because of one of the following conditions:



            1.   The permitted uses would have a detrimental
effect upon adjacent property;



            2.   There are special circumstances applicable to
the property  including, but not limited to, size, shape, topography,
adjacent development, street access, utilities and other development
constraints; and



            3.   A land use waiver, shall not be granted if
the conditions which created the detrimental effect upon adjacent property or
the special circumstances were established by the property owner after the
adoption of the Airport District.



   (D)   A land use waiver shall not be granted for residential uses
within the APZ-1, APZ-2 and clear zones.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



Article 04 - Zoning Districts, Maps and Annexation



§ 154-04.01  Zoning Districts Established.



   (A)   Classifications.  For the purpose of this chapter, the city
is hereby divided into zoning districts and overlay districts as follows:



      (1)   Rural and low density residential zoning districts:



         (a)   Agriculture District (AG);



         (b)   Suburban Ranch District (SR-1, 2, 3, 4);



         (c)   Residential Estate District (RE-12, 18, 35);



         (d)   Low Density Residential (R-1-6, 8, 12, 20, 40); and



         (e)   Low Density Single-Family Residential District
(R-l-5).



      (2)   Multiple-family residential zoning districts:



         (a)   Medium Density Residential District (R-2);



         (b)   Medium Density Single-Family Residential District
(R-2-5); and



         (c)   High Density Residential District (R-3).



      (3)   Manufactured housing and recreational vehicle zoning
districts:



         (a)   Manufactured Housing Subdivision District (MHS);



         (b)   Recreational Vehicle Subdivision District (RVS);



         (c)   Manufactured Housing Park District (MHP); and



         (d)   Residence-Manufactured Housing District (R-MH-6,
8, 10, 12, 20).



      (4)   Commercial zoning districts:



         (a)   Transitional District (TR);



         (b)   Planned Shopping Center District (PSC);



         (c)   Limited Commercial District (B-1);



         (d)   General Commercial District (B-2); and



         (e)   Business Park District (BP).



      (5)   Industrial zoning districts:



         (a)   Industrial Park District (I-P);



         (b)   Light Industrial District (L-I); and



         (c)   Heavy Industrial District (H-I).



      (6)   Old Town District (OT);



      (7)   Historic Park District (HP);



      (8)   Military Reservation District (MR);



      (9)   Recreation and Open Space District (RO); and



      (10)   Overlay zoning districts:



         (a)   Aesthetic (AO);



         (b)   AutoCenter (ACO);



         (c)   Bed and Breakfast (BB);



         (d)   Historic (H);



         (e)   Airport District (AD);



         (f)   Public (P);



         (g)   Planned Unit Development (PUD); and



         (h)   Smart Growth Overlay (SGO).



   (B)   Specific plans.



      (1)   Generally.  The city has adopted the following specific
plans.



      (2)   Cielo Verde Specific Plan (CVSP).  That certain
document known as the Cielo Verde Specific Plan, three copies of which are on
file in the office of the City Clerk, which document was made a public record
by Resolution No. R2001-30 of the city, is hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part hereof as if fully set out in this section; or as may be amended.
See Appendix A: Cielo Verde Specific Plan.



(Ord. O2001-53, passed 6-20-2001; Ord. O2007-53, passed 10-3-2007; Ord.
O2010-12, passed 2-3-2010; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-45,
passed 9-1-2010; Ord. O2010-46, passed 9-1-2010)



§ 154-04.02  Boundaries and Areas.



   (A)   Zoning map.  The boundaries and areas of these districts are
hereby established as indicated by means of lines, symbols and figures
expressing distance in feet and otherwise on the zoning map dated September
2, 1952, signed by the Mayor and City Clerk, which accompanies this chapter
and is hereby referred to, and adopted as the official zoning map of the City
of Yuma, Arizona and ordered filed in the office of the City Clerk of said
city.



   (B)   Indicated boundary lines.  The indicated boundary lines are
intended generally to follow existing property lines or as may be otherwise
indicated on the zoning map. A boundary shown on the zoning map which follows
a street, alley, railroad line or other right-of-way shall be construed as
following the centerline of the street or railroad right-of-way upon adoption
of the zoning change. If subsequent to the establishment of the boundary, the
centerline of the right-of-way is moved as a result of its widening or a
minor re-alignment, the boundary shall be construed as being moved with the
centerline only if the centerline is moved no more than 25 feet. If in
conflict with prior or surrounding zoning changes, the Zoning Administrator
would be the determining person.



(Ord. O2010-10, passed 2-3-2010)



   (C)   Determination of doubtful lines.  In case of doubt or
disagreement concerning the exact location of a district boundary line, the
determination shall lie with the Board of Adjustment as herein provided in
Article 3.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-04.03  Repealed.



§ 154-04.04   General Plan.



   (A)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations
to the City Council for growth, development and beautification of the City in
accordance with A.R.S. § 9-461 et seq. and with the general purpose of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development
of the area of jurisdiction.



   (B)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of
the General Plan as a whole, or by successive actions approve separate parts
of the General Plan corresponding with functional divisions of subject
matter, and from time to time, amend, extend or add to the General Plan.
Before approval of the Plan or any part, amendment, extension or addition
thereto the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold public hearings in
accordance with A.R.S. § 9-461 et seq.



   (C)   After approval of the General Plan, or any part thereof, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall submit the General Plan recommendations
to the City Council for its consideration and adoption.



   (D)   Upon adoption of the General Plan, or any part thereof, by the
City Council, the General Plan shall be the official guide to the Planning
and Zoning Commission and to all City departments and agencies for
development of the area of jurisdiction.



('80 Code, § 23-32)  (Ord. 766, passed 1-20-1959; Ord. O2010-32, passed
7-7-2010; Ord. O2015-023, passed 4-15-2015)



Statutory reference:



   Comprehensive plan, see A.R.S. §§ 9-461.05 through 9-461.07



§ 154-04.05  Annexed Areas.



   (A)   Zoning classification.



      (1)   Areas annexed into the city shall, upon the date that
said annexation becomes effective, be zoned to the most similar city zoning
classification which permits densities and uses no greater than those
permitted by the county immediately before annexation, provided that:



         (a)   The zoning district for the annexed area conforms
to the land use designation for the area as identified in the General Plan;



         (b)   No subdivision, lot split or lot tie is pending or
planned for the area;



         (c)   No change of use is pending or planned for the
area;



         (d)   No establishment of a new use is pending or
planned for the area; and



         (e)   No expansion of an existing use is pending or
planned for the area, excepting therefrom a residential subdivision in its
entirety.



      (2)   The city zoning classification for areas annexed into
the city shall, for those areas conforming to all the criteria specified in
divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(e) above, be designated in the ordinance
annexing the area.



      (3)   All other areas annexed to the city not meeting the
criteria specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(e) above shall, upon
the date that said annexation becomes effective, be zoned Agriculture
District (AG). These areas shall be rezoned in accordance with the process
and procedures as specified in A.R.S. § 9-462 pursuant to city ordinances.
The rezoning of such areas may be conditioned upon the provision of adequate
rights-of-way, avigation easements, median disclosure statements, deposits in
lieu of construction for public improvements or other conditions related to
the impact of the development of the area upon public services or facilities.



      (4)   Should the property owner enter into a development
agreement with the city and that agreement adequately addresses the
aforementioned impact of development issues, the annexed area may be then
zoned as provided for in division (A)(1) above.



      (5)   The rezoning application fee will be waived for a period
of six months following the effective date of annexation for annexed areas
that are rezoned in accordance with division (A)(3) above.



   (B)   Building permits.



      (1)   County building permits issued for structures not
completed and in areas that are annexed will be transferred to the Division
of Building Safety. An inspection shall be made of the construction progress
and a record started at the effective date of annexation. Further inspections
shall conform to the building plans for which the permit was issued by the
county.



      (2)   County building permits issued in the annexed areas
shall become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit
is not commenced within 60 days of the effective date of annexation.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   Any use or activity conducted contrary to county zoning
regulations at the effective date of annexation and not constituting a
nonconforming use under the county zoning regulations shall not be considered
a continuance thereof shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



      (2)   Any use, activity or structure, that is existing at the
effective date of annexation under a county permit with a time limit imposed,
shall not be a nonconforming use hereunder, but may continue for the extent
of the time limit.



('80 Code, App. A, § 20)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1730, passed
4-19-1983; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. O95-040, passed 9-5-1995; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2001-48,
passed 6-6-2001; Ord. O2001-53, passed 6-20-2001; Ord. O2010-32, passed
7-7-2010)



Article 05 - Rural and Low Density Residential Zoning Districts



§ 154-05.01  Agriculture District (AG).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of this zoning district is to
conserve and protect farms and other open land uses, foster orderly growth in
rural and outlying areas, and prevent urban and agricultural land use
conflicts. The primary purpose of requiring large minimum lots is to
discourage small lot or residential subdivisions where public facilities such
as water, sewage disposal, schools, parks and playgrounds, and governmental
services such as police and fire protection or trash collection are not
available or could not reasonably be made available in the immediate future.



('80 Code, App. A, § 50)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One single-family dwelling unit on any lot or parcel;



      (2)   Aviaries, earthworm farms and apiaries; providing
buildings, pens or hives are not closer than 200 feet from any property line;



      (3)   Commercial breeding, raising and feeding of horses,
cattle, sheep, swine or goats; provided that pens, buildings, corrals and
yards, excluding open pastures, are not closer than 200 feet to any property
line;



      (4)   Corrals for keeping of horses;



      (5)   Dairies, poultry, bird and egg farms; provided that
pens, buildings and enclosures are not closer than 200 feet to any property
line;



      (6)   Grazing and harvesting of field, tree or bush crops
including flowers;



      (7)   Hydroponic nurseries and greenhouses only for the
propagation, cultivation and wholesale distribution of plants produced on the
premises;



      (8)   Public riding stables, private riding academies and
boarding stables, provided the building housing animals are set back from all
lot lines a distance of not less than 200 feet;



      (9)   Public utility buildings and facilities, when necessary
for service to the surrounding territory; provided that no public business
offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained therein;



      (10)   Self-storage facilities shall be permitted for the
keeping of household items or personal belongings, and for the purposes of
dead storage, but in no event shall self-storage facilities be used for
retail sales business conducted on the premises, nor as a distribution point
for products or materials. Such self-storage facilities as permitted herein
shall be subject to the following development standards which shall be in
addition to the development standards specified by this subchapter:



         (a)   The minimum required site area shall be two acres;



         (b)   All storage shall be within an enclosed building;



         (c)   No activity shall occur other than the loading or
unloading of household or personal belongings and for the purposes of dead
storage, as specified herein and such activity shall be screened from
adjoining property by a minimum six foot high solid wall or fence;



         (d)   All parking and loading/unloading areas within the
site shall be paved in the manner specified by Article 16 of this chapter;



         (e)   Parking/access drives shall be a minimum width of
24 feet, except where access is provided to cubicles on both sides of
parking/access drives, in which case a minimum width of 32 feet shall be
required. Only direct outdoor access shall be provided to individual storage
cubicles;



         (f)   Any outdoor lighting as may be provided shall not
cast any shadow or glare upon adjoining streets or property;



         (g)   In no event shall any access, other than for
emergency purposes only, be provided through any residential neighborhood or
residential zoning district; and



         (h)   No toxic, hazardous or flammable materials shall
be stored within such self storage facilities, as permitted by this
subchapter.



      (11)   Child day care services, small;



      (12)   Residential care facility, small;



      (13)   Nursing and personal care, small; and



      (14)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 50)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2232, passed
10-1-1984; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incident to any use permitted by this subchapter such as servant quarters,
private garages, as hereinafter provided, or private work shops; provided
that none shall be conducted for gain or that no accessory building shall be
inhabited by any one other than those employed by the owner or tenant of the
premises;



      (2)   Home occupations;



      (3)   Roadside stands offering for sale only farm products
produced on the premises;



      (4)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only.



         (a)   Wall strapping of a personal wireless
communications facility is not permitted.



         (b)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



      (5)   Accessory dwelling units.



('80 Code, App. A, § 50)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1564, passed
12-1-1976; Ord. 1568, passed 12-15-1976; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000;
Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and submittal
of a site plan to and approval thereof by the Planning Commission in
accordance with § 154-03.05(G)(2):



      (1)   Animal husbandry services, including veterinarian,
animal hospital, kennels and poultry hatchery services;



      (2)   Buildings or permanent structures for agricultural
processing, including cotton ginning and compressing, grist milling services,
corn shelling, packing services and other similar uses;



      (3)   Cemetery, crematory or mausoleum;



      (4)   Chemical and fertilizer storage and transfer facilities;



      (5)   Development or extraction of earth products, sand, rock,
soil and gravel;



      (6)   Hospitals and institutions of an educational, religious,
charitable or philanthropic nature, homes for the aged, nursing homes and
convalescent homes;



      (7)   Plant nurseries, where plants are grown on or brought to
the premises and maintained there for the purpose of retail sales from said
premises. Such other additional products shall be permitted to be sold from
the premises as are customarily incidental to the operation of a plant
nursery;



      (8)   Private clubs and fraternal organizations, excluding
such uses for which the chief activity is a service customarily conducted as
a business;



      (9)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (10)   Child day care services, large; and



      (11)   Large composting site.



('80 Code, App. A, § 50)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2523, passed
6-5-1991; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2019-001, passed 1-16-2019)



   (E)   Property development standards.  In addition to regulations
and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the following
minimum property development standards apply to all land and buildings in the
AG District.



      (1)   Lot area.  Each lot shall have a minimum lot area of
not less than 20 gross acres, except as provided herein. For the purpose of
calculating gross acres, adjacent dedicated half-width right-of-way may be
included.



      (2)   Lot width.  All lots shall have a minimum width of 660
feet; adjacent dedicated one-half width right-of-way may be included in the
calculations of lot width.



      (3)   Preexisting developed lots.  If a parcel or a lot of
record in separate ownership has less width or area than herein required, and
has been lawfully established and recorded prior to the date of passage of
this chapter, such lot may be used for any purpose permitted in this district
subject to height, yard and setback requirements of this subchapter, and all
applicable regulations in other sections of this chapter.



      (4)   Setbacks.  All buildings shall be set back a minimum 40
feet from any public street right-of-way line, and a minimum of 20 feet from
any side or rear property line.



      (5)   Walls and fences.  Any wall or fence as may be erected
along any street line, side property line or rear property line, whether to
meet the requirements of this chapter or provided voluntarily, shall comply
with the minimum requirements for unobstructed traffic visibility as
specified in this chapter.



      (6)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 50)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2232, passed
10-1-1984; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010) 
Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-05.02  Suburban Ranch Districts (SR-1, SR-2, SR-3 and SR-4).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of these districts is to
enable semi-rural residential and agricultural uses to be maintained without
impairment from industrial, commercial or higher density residential
development. The primary purpose of requiring large minimum lots is to assure
adequate area for residents to keep a limited number of farm animals or
horses, or to engage in agriculture without adversely affecting the use and
enjoyment of nearby residential properties.



('80 Code, App. A, § 60)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  The allowed residential density of the
Suburban Ranch Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate General
Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning Conformity Matrix.



('80 Code, App. A, § 60)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One single-family dwelling;



      (2)   Farms, truck gardens and the raising of poultry, rabbits
and other small farm animals for domestic use. The keeping of horses and
other large animals for domestic use shall be limited to one large animal per
each 10,000 square feet of side and rear yard area. Any building or shade for
the animals shall be at least 100 feet from any other existing or potential
dwelling on adjacent lots;



(Ord. O2009-29, passed 10-7-2009)



      (3)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools;



      (4)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreation use;



      (5)   Residential care facility, small (SIC 8361);



      (6)   Child care services, small (SIC 8351); and



      (7)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 60)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to any use permitted by this subchapter such as
barns, private stables, sheds, servant or guest quarters without kitchen
facilities, private garages, swimming pools or private work shops, provided
that none shall be conducted for gain. No accessory building shall be
inhabited by anyone other than those employed by the owner or tenant of the
premises;



      (2)   Home occupations;



      (3)   Corrals, buildings, enclosures and other structures for
the keeping of animals and livestock;



      (4)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (5)   Accessory dwelling units.



('80 Code, App. A, § 60)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002;
Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Animal husbandry services, including veterinarian,
animal hospital, kennels and poultry hatchery services;



      (2)   Cemetery, crematory or mausoleum;



      (3)   Public riding stables, private riding academies and
boarding on a minimum of five acres;



      (4)   Public and quasi-public utility buildings and facilities
when necessary for service to the surrounding territory, provided that no
public business offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained
therein. Electric substations must be enclosed within a wall or fence
adequate to prohibit passage of persons and to provide screening from public
view;



      (5)   Child day care services, large (SIC 8351); day care for
six or more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (§ 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the Arizona
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under the state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care service; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter, including, but not limited to,
setback and coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening
structures and materials to hold at reasonable levels the impact on
surrounding uses, and hours of operation.



      (6)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities.



('80 Code, App. A, § 60)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the Suburban Ranch Districts as may be designated on the
official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The following is the list of minimum lot
sizes for each of the four Suburban Ranch Districts:



         (a)   Suburban Ranch-4 (SR-4) District.  Four-acre
minimum lot size required;



         (b)   Suburban Ranch-3 (SR-3) District.  Three-acre
minimum lot size required;



         (c)   Suburban Ranch-2 (SR-2) District.  Two-acre
minimum lot size required; and



         (d)   Suburban Ranch-1 (SR-1) District.  One-acre
minimum lot size required.



      (2)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width for each of the four
Suburban Ranch Districts shall be 120 feet.



      (3)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage for each of the
four Suburban Ranch Districts shall be 15% of the lot area. The first 600
square feet of covered parking shall not count against the maximum lot
coverage.



      (4)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks for the four Suburban Ranch Districts:



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty-five feet;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setback.  Ten feet;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty-five feet; and



         (d)   Minimum street side yard setback.  Twenty-five
feet.



      (5)   Building height.  The maximum building height in the
four Suburban Ranch Districts shall be 40 feet.



      (6)   Landscape and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



      (7)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be
provided in the manner set forth in Article 16 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 60)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2006-39, passed 6-21-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010;
Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010; Ord. O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty,
see § 154-999



§ 154-05.03  Residential Estate Districts (RE-12, RE-18 and RE-35).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of these districts is to
provide for, conserve and protect single-family residential development where
relatively large lots are suitable and appropriate, taking into consideration
topographic, soil and drainage limitations, availability of public utilities
and services at reasonable public costs and over-all community needs for a
variety of housing types and life styles.



('80 Code, App. A, § 70)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (B)   Applicability. The allowed residential density of the
Residential Estates Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate
General Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning
Conformity Matrix.



('80 Code, App. A, § 70)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One single-family dwelling;



      (2)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools;



      (3)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreational uses;



      (4)   Residential care facility, small (SIC 8361);



      (5)   Child day care services, small (SIC 8351); and



      (6)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 70)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to any use permitted by this subchapter such as
swimming pools, servant or guest quarters without kitchen facilities, private
garages; as hereinafter provided, or private work shops; provided that none
shall be conducted for gain or that no accessory building shall be inhabited
by anyone other than those employed by the owner or tenant of the premises;



      (2)   Home occupations;



      (3)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (4)   In the RE-18 and RE-35 Districts only, pergolas or
semi-covered structures are allowed to encroach within the rear yard setback
area 10% of the rear yard setback area. The pergola or semi-covered structure
must maintain a minimum ten-foot setback including overhangs from the rear
yard property line. No structure may be built within any designated public
utility easement that exists along any property line.



      (5)   In the RE-12 District only, accessory buildings, uses
and structures are subject to the criteria specified in § 154-15.15 of this
chapter.



      (6)   Accessory dwelling units.



('80 Code, App. A, § 70)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002;
Ord. O2004-49, passed 8-4-2004; Ord. O2014-29, passed 10-1-2014; Ord.
O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Cemetery, crematory or mausoleum;



      (2)   Public and quasi-public utility buildings and facilities
when necessary for service to the surrounding territory, provided that no
public business offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained
therein. Electric substations must be enclosed within a wall or fence
adequate to prohibit passage of persons and to provide screening from public
view;



      (3)   Child day care services, large.  Day care for six or
more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (see § 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day service; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity to this chapter including, but not limited to,
setback and coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening
structures and materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact on
surrounding uses, and hours of operation.



      (4)   Religious institutions including related building and
activities.



('80 Code, App. A, § 70)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the residential estate districts as may be designated on the
official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The following is the list of minimum lot
sizes for each of the three residential estate districts:



         (a)   Residential Estate-35 (RE-35) District. 
Thirty-five thousand square foot minimum lot size required;



         (b)   Residential Estate-18 (RE-18) District.  Eighteen
thousand square foot minimum lot size required; and



         (c)   Residential Estate-12 (RE-12) District.  Twelve
thousand square foot minimum lot size required.



      (2)   Lot widths.  The following is the list of minimum lot
widths for each of the three residential estate districts:



         (a)   Residential Estate-35 (RE-35) District.  One
hundred forty-five feet;



         (b)   Residential Estate-18 (RE-18) District.  One
hundred feet; and



         (c)   Residential Estate-12 (RE-12) District.  Eighty
feet.



      (3)   Lot coverage.  The following is the list of maximum lot
coverage for each of the three residential estate districts:



         (a)   Residential Estate-35 (RE-35) District.  Twenty
percent;



         (b)   Residential Estate-18 (RE-18) District. 
Twenty-five percent;



         (c)   Residential Estate-12 (RE-12) District.  Thirty
percent; and



         (d)   Exception.  The first 600 square feet of covered
parking shall be permitted in addition to the maximum lot coverage percentage
listed above.



      (4)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks for the three residential estate districts:



         (a)   Residential Estate-35 (RE-35) District.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback.  Thirty-five
feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback.  Twenty feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback.  Thirty feet,
except division (D)(4) above; and



            4.   Minimum street side yard setback. 
Twenty-five feet.



         (b)   Residential Estate-18 (RE-18) District.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback.  Thirty feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback.  Fifteen feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty-five
feet, except division (D)(4) above; and



            4.   Minimum street side yard setback.  Twenty
feet.



         (c)   Residential Estate-12 (RE-12) District.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty-five
feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback.  Ten feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty feet,
except division (D)(4) above;



            4.   Minimum street side yard setback.  Fifteen
feet;



            5.   Building heights.  The maximum building
height in the three residential estate districts shall be 30 feet;



            6.   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and
irrigation shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this
chapter; and



            7.   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 16 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 70)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2004-49, passed 8-4-2004; Ord. O2006-39, passed 6-21-2006;
Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010; Ord.
O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-05.04  Low Density Residential Districts (R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-12,
R-1-20 and R-1-40).



   (A)   Purpose.  Within any low density residential districts, no
buildings, structures or premises shall be used, and no building or
structures shall be erected, which is intended or designed to be used in
whole or in part for any industrial, manufacturing, trade or commercial
purpose, except as permitted in this subchapter, or for any other purpose
than the following specified uses.



('80 Code, App. A, § 71)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  The allowed residential density of the Low
Density Residential Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate
General Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning
Conformity Matrix.



('80 Code, App. A, § 71)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One single-family dwelling;



      (2)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small) (SIC 7021);



      (3)   Residential care facility, small (SIC 8361);



      (4)   Child day care services, small;



      (5)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreation uses;



      (6)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools;



      (7)   In the R-1-40 District only, farms, truck gardens and
the raising of poultry, rabbits and other small farm animals for domestic
use. The keeping of horses and other large farm animals for domestic use
shall be limited to one large animal per each 10,000 square feet of side and
rear yard area. Any building or shade for the animals shall be at least 100
feet from any other existing or potential dwelling on adjacent lots; and



      (8)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 71)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2009-29, passed 10-7-2009; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015;
Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incident to any use permitted by this subchapter such as swimming pools,
servant and guest quarters without kitchen facilities, private garages, as
hereinafter provided, or private work shops, provided that none shall be
conducted for gain or that no accessory buildings shall be inhabited by
anyone other than those employed by the owner or tenant of the premises, and
further provided, that in the event such accessory structure or building is
used in whole or in part for living quarters, same shall be set back at least
ten feet from the rear lot line of any lot;



      (2)   Home occupations;



      (3)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (4)   In the R-1-6, R-1-8 and R-1-12 Districts only, accessory
buildings, uses and structures are subject to the criteria specified in §
154-15.15 of this chapter.



      (5)   Accessory dwelling units.



('80 Code, App. A, § 71)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-08, passed 2-6-2002;
Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2014-29, passed 10-1-2014; Ord.
O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Child day care service, large:  Day care for six or
more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (see § 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care service; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter; including, but not limited to,
setback and coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening
structures and materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact on
surrounding uses, and hours of operation.



      (2)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (3)   Membership-based lodging (SIC 7014);



      (4)   Cemetery, crematory or mausoleum; and



      (5)   Public and quasi-public utility buildings and facilities
when necessary for service to the surrounding territory, provided that no
public business offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained
therein. Electric substations must be enclosed within a wall or fence
adequate to prohibit passage of persons and to provide screening from public
view.



('80 Code, App. A, § 71)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the five Low Density Residential Districts as may be designated
on the official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The following is the list of minimum lot
sizes for each of the five Low Density Residential (R-1) Districts:



         (a)   Low Density Residential-40 (R-1-40) District. 
Forty thousand square foot minimum lot size;



         (b)   Low Density Residential-20 (R-1-20) District. 
Twenty thousand square foot minimum lot size;



         (c)   Low Density Residential-12 (R-1-12) District. 
Twelve thousand square foot minimum lot size;



         (d)   Low Density Residential-8 (R-1-8) District. 
Eight thousand square foot minimum lot size; and



         (e)   Low Density Residential-6 (R-1-6) District.  Six
thousand square foot minimum lot size.



      (2)   Lot widths.  The following is the list of minimum lot
widths for each of the five Low Density Residential (R-1) Districts:



         (a)   Low Density Residential-40 (R-1-40) District. 
One hundred feet;



         (b)   Low Density Residential-20 (R-1-20) District. 
One hundred feet;



         (c)   Low Density Residential-12 (R-1-12) District. 
Eighty feet;



         (d)   Low Density Residential-8 (R-1-8) District. 
Seventy feet; and



         (e)   Low Density Residential-6 (R-1-6) District. 
Fifty feet.



      (3)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage for the R-1-40,
R-1-20, R-1-12, R-1-8 and the R-1-6 Districts shall be 35% of the lot area.
The first 600 square feet of covered parking shall be permitted in addition
to the maximum lot coverage percentage listed above.



      (4)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks for the five Low Density Residential (R-1) Districts:



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty feet;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setback.  Seven feet;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty feet (reduced
to ten feet in the R-1-6 District); and



         (d)   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet.



      (5)   Building heights.  The maximum building height in the
five Low Density Residential (R-1) Districts shall be 40 feet.



      (6)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



      (7)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be
provided in the manner set forth in Article 16 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 71)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2006-39, passed 6-21-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010;
Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010; Ord. O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty,
see § 154-999



§ 154-05.05  Low Density Single-Family Residential District (R-1-5).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-1-5 District is to provide a
smaller lot size for single-family housing products while keeping the
integrity of single-family detached home neighborhoods. This is accomplished
by maintaining well-established, consistent development practices such as
standard single-family zone setbacks, so these smaller units on smaller lots
still maintain the character and integrity of existing single-family
neighborhoods in the city.



   (B)   Applicability.  The allowed residential density of the Low
Density Residential Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate
General Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning
Conformity Matrix.



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   A single-family subdivision with lots containing at
least 5,000 square feet and meeting the density requirement of one
4.9-dwelling units per acre;



      (2)   Child day care services, small (SIC 8351);



      (3)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreational uses;



      (4)   Community garden; and



      (5)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small).



(Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to any use permitted by this subchapter such as
swimming pools, garages, laundry rooms and public recreation areas and
structures, subject to the criteria as specified in § 154-15.15 of this
chapter;



      (2)   Home occupations. Any home occupation that does not
require customers or employees to come to the home, with the exception of
child day care services, small and piano/music lessons; and



      (3)   Personal auto repair for the resident of the home only.



(Ord. O2014-29, passed 10-1-2014)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Child day care services, large; and



      (2)   Any home occupation that allows customers or employees
to come to the home, except as otherwise permitted by division (D)(2) above.



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the Low Density Single-Family Residential (R-1-5) District as
may be designated on the official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The minimum lot size in the Low Density
Single-Family Residential (R-1-5) District shall be 5,000 square feet.



      (2)   Density.  The maximum density in the Low Density
Single-Family Residential (R-l-5) District shall be one unit per 5,000 square
feet of land (meeting the density as identified in the General Plan),
provided all other development standards in this zoning district are met.



      (3)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width in the Low Density
Single-Family Residential (R-1-5) District shall be 50 feet.



      (4)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage in the Low
Density Single-Family Residential (R-1-5) District shall be 35% of the lot
area. The required 400 square feet of enclosed garage shall not count against
the maximum lot coverage percentage listed above.



      (5)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks in the Low Density Single-Family Residential (R-l-5) District:



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty feet; garages
can be placed separately from the dwelling unit on the lot;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setbacks.  Five feet, clear of
equipment and any other structures and/or appurtenances on one side; nine
feet on the other side;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback.  Ten feet, except for
detached garage;



         (d)   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet; and



         (e)   Block walls.  The side and rear yards shall have
six foot solid block walls on the property lines. The actual location of the
beginning of the six foot side yard wall shall be determined based on the
house plan built, starting from some appropriate point (as determined by the
Zoning Administrator) along the side yard property line next to the house,
with the wall continuing and adjoining the rear property line wall.



      (6)   Garages.  Garages can be attached or detached from the
dwelling unit. If attached, the minimum front yard garage setback shall be 20
feet. If garages are detached from the unit, they can be placed anywhere from
the minimum 20 feet front yard setback to a minimum rear yard setback of
three feet.



      (7)   Building heights.  The maximum building height in the
Low Density Single- Family Residential (R-l-5) District shall be 40 feet.



      (8)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Each lot in the Low
Density Single-Family Residential (R-l-5) District shall have a minimum of
one 15-gallon street tree and accompanying underground irrigation system.



      (9)   Off-street parking.  Each single-family dwelling shall
have a two-car garage for parking cars and household storage. In addition to
the two-car garage, each single-family dwelling shall have a paved driveway
capable of providing parking for two cars.



      (10)   Stormwater retention basins.  Stormwater retention
shall occur on a larger scale, with basins planned to accommodate a minimum
of one-quarter section (160 acres) of adjacent surrounding land. The basins
shall be planned, when possible, to align with the locations identified for
neighborhood parks in the General Plan. For infill projects, projects less
than 160 acres or projects that are constrained by physical barriers such as
rail lines, elevated freeways and irrigation canals, smaller basins may be
allowed on a case-by-case basis upon approval of the Zoning Administrator.



      (11)   R-1-5 as infill.  When a parcel of land is zoned R-1-5
and is next to any existing single-family development, the larger side yard
setback shall be adjacent to the existing single-family development. When the
rear yard of any R-1-5 lot abuts any existing single-family development or
developed parcels, the rear yard setback for the R-1-5 lots shall be
increased to mirror the setbacks of the zoning of the adjacent parcels (for
example: if an R-1-5 zone abuts the rear of an R-1-6 zone, the rear yard
setback shall be ten feet. If an R-1-5 zone abuts the rear of an R-1-8 zone,
the rear yard setback shall be 20 feet).



(Ord. O2010-45, passed 9-1-2010; Ord. O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty,
see § 154-999



Article 06 - Manufactured Housing and Recreational Vehicle Zoning Districts



§ 154-06.01  Residence-Manufactured Housing District (R-MH).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the Residence-Manufactured
Housing District (R-MH) is to provide for a mixture of site-built and
manufactured housing in those residential areas wherein such mixture is
deemed appropriate and compatible. In order to ensure visual compatibility
between these housing types, and to eliminate negative perceptions which may
otherwise have a negative impact upon property values, it is intended that
all dwellings meet specific architectural criteria in addition to property
development standards.



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983)



   (B)   Applicability and general requirements.



      (1)   The Residence-Manufactured Housing District may be
applied for or initiated within existing developed areas of the city, as well
as in new development areas, subject to the requirements of § 154-03.03 of
this chapter.



      (2)   The Residence-Manufactured Housing District shall be the
only district specified by this chapter wherein the mixture of site-built
residential dwellings with manufactured housing shall be permitted. Only
those dwelling units, including additions, which meet the standards and
criteria specified herein, shall be permitted within the
Residence-Manufactured Housing District.



      (3)   Any manufactured housing unit proposed for installation
within the Residence-Manufactured Housing District shall be affixed with
either of the following:



         (a)   A decal certifying that the dwelling unit has been
inspected and constructed in accordance with the requirements of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in effect at the
date of manufacture wherein such date shall not have been prior to June 15,
1976; or



         (b)   A State of Arizona insignia of approval as defined
by the A.R.S. § 41-2142, and its successors.



      (4)   The installation or construction of any dwelling unit,
including any addition or modification thereto, proposed to accommodate any
use as permitted herein, shall be subject to approval of a permit from the
City Building Official or his or her designated representative. Such approval
shall ensure that such installation, construction and occupancy shall be in
accordance with all applicable building code requirements as may be specified
by federal, state or local law.



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One dwelling unit for single-family residency, whether
site-built or manufactured, on any lot or parcel of land;



      (2)   Home occupations, subject to the performance criteria as
specified in § 154-15.08 of this chapter;



      (3)   Accessory uses; any use of a building or structure which
is clearly incidental to a principal use permitted in this subchapter, for
purposes of private storage of household items, vehicle parking, laundry,
recreational facilities or a manager’s office for multiple dwellings;



      (4)   Child day care services, small;



      (5)   Residential care facility, small;



      (6)   Nursing and personal care, small;



      (7)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted;



      (8)   Community garden; and



      (9)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small).



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord.
O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015; Ord. O2017-026,
passed 8-16-2017)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   Multiple dwellings for residential occupancy, whether
site-built or manufactured, subject to the lot area requirements of the High
Density Residential (R-3) Zoning District as specified in § 154-15.04 of
this chapter;



      (2)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (3)   Temporary subdivision sales offices and model homes,
both of which shall be subject to the following:



         (a)   All such facilities shall be located within and
used exclusively for selling property within the subdivision;



         (b)   Prior to any residential occupancy of a dwelling
unit used as a temporary office or model home, such dwelling shall be
restored to comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter, and
other city regulations governing residential occupancies; and



         (c)   A time limit shall be specified by the Planning
and Zoning Commission as part of any approval granted, by which time such
facilities shall be removed. Such time limit may be extended upon application
and approval by the Commission.



      (4)   Child day care services, large; day care for six or more
children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (§ 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily found in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care service, large; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter, including, but not limited to, setback and
coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening structures and
materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact of surrounding uses, and
hours of operation.



      (5)   Rooming and boarding houses, (large).



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2523, passed
6-5-1991; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O95-040, passed 9-5-1995; Ord.
O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (E)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the Residence-Manufactured Housing District as may be designated
on the official zoning map.



      (1)   Area.  Each parcel of land used for a
Residence-Manufactured Housing District subdivision shall have a minimum of
ten acres.



      (2)   Lot size and density.  The following is the table of
minimum lot sizes and maximum densities for each of the five
Residence-Manufactured Housing Districts:



 

Residence-Manufactured Housing Districts
 
Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.)
 
Maximum Density


Residence-Manufactured Housing-6 (R-MH-6) District
 
6,000
 
6 du/ac


Residence-Manufactured Housing-8 (R-MH-8) District
 
8,000
 
5 du/ac


Residence-Manufactured Housing-10 (R-MH-10) District
 
10,000
 
4 du/ac


Residence-Manufactured Housing-12 (R-MH-12) District
 
12,000
 
3 du/ac


Residence-Manufactured Housing-20 (R-MH-20) District
 
20,000
 
2 du/ac



 



      (3)   Lot widths.  The minimum lot widths for each of the
five Residence-Manufactured Housing Districts is:



         (a)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-6 (R-MH-6)
District.  Fifty feet;



         (b)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-8 (R-MH-8)
District.  Fifty-five feet;



         (c)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-10 (R-MH-10)
District. Sixty feet;



         (d)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-12 (R-MH-12)
District. Seventy-five feet;



         (e)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-20 (R-MH-20)
District. One hundred feet; and



         (f)   Irregularly shaped lots.  In cases of irregularly
shaped lots, the minimum width shall be measured 20 feet back from the front
property line.



      (4)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage for each of the
five Residence-Manufactured Housing Districts is:



         (a)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-6 (R-MH-6)
District.  Thirty-five percent;



         (b)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-8 (R-MH-8)
District.  Thirty-five percent;



         (c)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-10 (R-MH-10)
District.  Thirty-five percent;



         (d)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-12 (R-MH-12)
District.  Thirty percent; and



         (e)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-20 (R-MH-20)
District.  Twenty-five percent.



      (5)   Yards.  The minimum yard setbacks for the five
Residence-Manufactured Housing Districts is:



         (a)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-6, -8, -10
((R-MH-6), (R-MH-8), (R-MH-10)) Districts.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback.  Seven feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty feet;
reduced to ten feet in the R-MH-6 District; and



            4.   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet.



         (b)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-12 (R-MH-12)
District.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty-five
feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback.  Ten feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty feet; and



            4.   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet.



         (c)   Residence-Manufactured Housing-20 (R-MH-20)
District.



            1.   Minimum front yard setback.  Thirty feet;



            2.   Minimum side yard setback.  Twenty-five feet;



            3.   Minimum rear yard setback.  Twenty feet; and



            4.   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet.



         (d)   Lot frontage.  Where a lot has double frontage,
the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. When a lot has
frontage on a street opposite from another residential zoning district, there
shall be a front yard equal to the required front yard setback of the
adjoining residential zoning district.



         (e)   Side yard setbacks.  Side yard setbacks shall be
applied to awnings, canopies, carports and patio covers as well as to any
site built or manufactured housing.



      (6)   Depth.  Each lot shall have a minimum depth of 80 feet.



      (7)   Height regulations.  No principal building shall exceed
20 feet in height and no accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.



      (8)   Streets.  Streets shall be designed to the standards
established in Chapter 153 and shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer.



      (9)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be
provided in the manner set forth in Article 16 of this chapter.



      (10)   Walkways.  Walks shall be provided adjacent to
dedicated streets and shall be reviewed and approved by the City’s Engineer.



      (11)   Illumination.  Adequate lighting shall be provided for
all streets.



      (12)   Storm drainage.  Proper surface storm drainage will be
provided and the drainage plans will be reviewed and approved by the City’s
Engineer.



      (13)   Utilities.  Electricity, city water and city sewer
shall be provided to each lot; no aboveground utility lines shall be
permitted.



      (14)   Fire hydrants.  Approved fire hydrants shall be
located at intervals of 500 feet as approved by the Fire Department and the
City’s Engineer.



      (15)   Recreational vehicles.  The location of recreational
vehicles on a residence-manufactured housing lot shall be prohibited for
human occupancy as a residence.



      (16)   Accessory structures.  All accessory structures shall
comply with the minimum setback requirements as specified herein, except that
any detached structure which serves as a garage or storage building and not
containing living quarters may be located no closer than seven feet to a side
or rear property line within a rear quarter of any lot or parcel classified
within the Residence-Manufactured Housing District, subject to applicable
requirements of the city building code.



      (17)   Lot size in R-MH district.  Any lot legally of record
within an existing R-MH district, as of November 3, 2001, which is less than
the minimum 6,000 square foot lot size specified herein may be developed with
one single-family residence, whether site-built or manufactured; provided,
however, that this provision shall not exempt such lot from compliance with
all other standards and criteria as specified herein.



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord. O2001-83, passed 10-3-2001) 
Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Exterior appearance criteria.  The installation or
construction of any dwelling unit within the Residence-Manufactured Housing
District, whether site-built or manufactured, shall comply with the following
minimum criteria.



      (1)   Width of dwelling unit.  The minimum horizontal
dimension of the dwelling unit as measured from outside faces of exterior
walls shall be 24 feet.



      (2)   Roof treatment.



         (a)   The roof shall be designed to achieve either a
slope measuring not less than three feet vertical rise for each 12 feet
horizontal run, or have a roof parapet, mansard shape or other similar
roofline treatment which screens the roof from any street view. Rounded roof
surfaces shall be prohibited.



         (b)   In the event that the minimum slope is provided,
the roof shall be covered with a roofing material commonly used in site-built
residential construction, other than metal. For any minimum slope roof or
greater, an overhang of 16 inches or greater shall also be provided as an
integral part of the roof structure.



      (3)   Exterior building materials.  The exterior building
facade including the trim, doors, windows, roof fascias and the like, shall
consist of wood, stucco, horizontal siding, brick, masonry veneer or other
facsimile of a building material commonly used in site-built residential
construction; provided, however, that metal siding, other than aluminum lap
siding, shall be prohibited. Patio covers and detached storage buildings
shall be exempt from this requirement.



      (4)   Installation.  The dwelling unit shall be set upon a
permanent foundation or footing for the purpose of a permanent installation.
Such installation shall render the dwelling no more portable than if it were
constructed totally on site.



         (a)   The dwelling unit shall be permanently set upon
the foundation wherein the exterior facade material of the dwelling shall be
extended to a level not greater than six inches above the adjacent ground
level within three feet of the building line.



         (b)   All exterior walls shall be solid and continuous
to ground level.



      (5)   Accessory structures. In such cases where an open
carport or patio cover is attached to one side of the dwelling unit and is
visible from the street, no additional covered patio or open carport shall be
attached to the opposite side of the dwelling, other than a covered entry not
to exceed 60 square feet in area.



      (6)   Running gear.  Any device used to transport a dwelling
to the site of installation, including the hitch, wheels, axles or other
devices used primarily for transport other than the chassis, shall be
detached from the dwelling as part of the installation procedure.



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (G)   Plans submittal.  Any application for a permit for
installing, constructing or adding onto any dwelling unit within the
Residence-Manufactured Housing District, shall be accompanied by a site plan
and building elevations for review by the Department of Development Services
to determine compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.



      (1)   The site plan required shall be drawn to scale with
complete dimensions of the lot or parcel upon which the dwelling is to be
installed or constructed, dimensions of the dwelling on the property, the
finished floor level and all setbacks from the property lines.



      (2)   The building elevations required shall illustrate the
style of facade for the dwelling unit and any attached accessory structures
as viewed from all four directions, and the type of building materials used
for the exterior finish of walls, roof and the trim. The exterior elevation
plans shall be sufficiently detailed to illustrate conformance with the
required roof slopes, roofline treatments, overhangs and building height.



('80 Code, App. A, § 74)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010)



§ 154-06.02  Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District (RVS).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision
District is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare within
the district by providing accommodation of existing recreation vehicle
subdivisions developed in the county which may be subsequently annexed to the
city, and to provide orderly development of new subdivisions accommodating
recreational vehicles and manufactured homes, together with schools, parks
and other related uses, in a suitable residential environment. Recreation
vehicles and manufactured homes on individual lots within recreation vehicle
subdivisions are permitted, provided they meet the minimum requirements of
this district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 75)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-021, passed
6-27-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  Should portions of the Recreation Vehicle
Subdivision District conflict with other provisions of the city zoning
ordinance or the City General Plan, the more restrictive provision shall
apply. It is the intent of the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District that
each use conform to the development standards established for this zoning
district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 75)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-021, passed
6-27-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.  The following principal uses are
permitted in the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District subject to
compliance with the development standards listed below:



      (1)   Recreation vehicle subdivisions;



      (2)   One single-family residence per parcel limited to either
a recreation vehicle, park model or manufactured home. However, if a parcel
is at least 6,000 square feet in area, the property owner may have one
additional recreational vehicle. One site-built dwelling may be built on a
legally created lot containing a minimum of 6,000 square feet, only if
recorded with the county prior to July 1, 1995, and located within a
recreation vehicle subdivision;



      (3)   Home occupations as defined in § 154-01.07;



      (4)   Uses customarily accessory to the above uses such as
covered porches, garages and carports, storage sheds, private swimming pools,
walls and fences and parking subject to the provisions found in the
appropriate sections of the code;



      (5)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted; and



      (6)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 75)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-021, passed
6-27-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002;
Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   Public schools, hospitals, small and large nursing and
personal care facilities, small and large residential care facilities,
churches and institutions of an educational, charitable or philanthropic
nature;



      (2)   Golf courses, community swimming pools and other
recreational or community facilities;



      (3)   Public parks or facilities; and



      (4)   Utility installations.



('80 Code, App. A, § 75)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-021, passed
6-27-1995)



   (E)   Property development standards.



      (1)   To meet the purpose of this district, all uses within
the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District on legally created lots recorded
with the county prior to July 1, 1995 shall comply with the following minimum
development standards.



         (a)   Minimum parcel sizes.  The following are the
minimum parcel sizes for various uses in the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision
District:



            1.   Recreation vehicle, park model or
manufactured home lot size.  Two thousand four hundred square feet;



            2.   Site-built residence lot size.  Six thousand
square feet; and



            3.   Conditional use lot size.  As approved by
the conditional use permit.



         (b)   Minimum lot widths and setbacks.  The following
are the minimum lot widths and minimum setbacks for all principal buildings
in the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District:



            1.   Recreation vehicle, park model or
manufactured home lot width. Forty feet;



            2.   Recreation vehicle, park model or
manufactured home front yard setback.  Ten feet;



            3.   Side yard setback.  Seven feet;



            4.   Rear yard setback.  Ten feet;



            5.   Street side setback.  Ten feet; and



            6.   Setback between dwellings.  Fourteen feet.



         (c)   Building heights.  No structure in the Recreation
Vehicle Subdivision District shall exceed 20 feet in height except as
provided in § 154-15.03 of this chapter. Accessory structures shall not
exceed 15 feet in height.



         (d)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage for all
principal and accessory buildings in the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision
District is 50%.



      (2)   Minimum parcel sizes and setbacks.  To meet the purpose
of this district, all uses within the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District
on legally created lots recorded with the county after June 30, 1995, shall
comply with the development standards listed in divisions (E)(1)(a),
(E)(1)(b) and (E)(1)(c) of this section above, as well as with the following
additional development standards.



         (a)   The following are the minimum parcel sizes and
setbacks for various uses in the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District:



            1.   Minimum area for a recreation vehicle
subdivision. Three acres minimum;



            2.   Minimum public street setback to subdivision
boundary wall or nonresidential building.  Twenty feet;



            3.   Minimum setback to adjacent residential or
agriculture district.  Twenty feet; and



            4.   Conditional uses.  As approved by
conditional use permit.



         (b)   Private streets.  Any private streets within the
Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District shall have a minimum width of 24 feet
as measured edge-to-edge, exclusive of curbing, and shall conform with city
standards for paving. All street corners shall have a minimum turn radius of
25 feet.



         (c)   Off-street parking.  One parking space, as
defined in Article 16 of this chapter, shall be provided for each parcel for
a recreation vehicle subdivision use, and shall not be located within any
public or private drive or street or other accessway. Said parking shall be
paved with a durable, dust-free surface, and shall be located within either
50 feet of the residential use being served, or within a common parking area.
No parking space shall be located within the minimum street setback as
specified herein. A minimum of one visitor parking space shall be provided
for each five recreation vehicle subdivision parcels. All other uses shall
provide off-street parking as required by Article 16 of this chapter.



         (d)   Lighting.  Minimum lighting within the range of
one-tenth to two-tenths footcandles shall be provided for all streets, walks
and service facility areas within the recreation vehicle subdivision
development.



         (e)   Stormwater drainage.  Surface stormwater drainage
shall be provided in conformance with Chapter 192 of this code, and with any
master drainage plan as may be adopted by the city. All drainage plans shall
be subject to review and approval by the City Engineer.



         (f)   Utilities.  At a minimum, the following utilities
shall be provided to each recreation vehicle subdivision parcel: 
electricity, telephone, city water and city sewer (or city-approved
alternative common wastewater collection and treatment system); easements
shall be provided as required. All utilities shall be placed underground.



         (g)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be located at
intervals of 500 feet, subject to review and approval by the Fire Department
and the City Engineer. No recreation vehicle or manufactured home or other
building shall be located more than 250 feet from any fire hydrant.



         (h)   Walls and fences.  Exterior boundaries of any
recreation vehicle subdivision use shall be bounded by a masonry wall with a
height of six feet as measured from the exterior of the recreation vehicle
subdivision. The required boundary wall shall be placed behind any street
yard setbacks and visibility triangles. Fences not exceeding six feet in
height may be provided within the interior of any recreation vehicle
subdivision provided that no fence higher than 30 inches is located within a
street setback or visibility triangle.



         (i)   Landscaping.  Street yard setbacks to the
boundary walls, setbacks between the Recreation Vehicle Subdivision District
and adjacent residential or agriculture districts, stormwater detention
basins, and any common recreational facilities shall be landscaped in
accordance with the Article 20 of this chapter.



         (j)   Recreational areas.  In addition to whatever area
may be provided for recreation on individual recreation vehicle subdivision
parcels, there shall be provided for recreation vehicle subdivision uses a
developed area or areas, devoted to recreational purposes consisting of at
least 5% of the gross site area, and shall be maintained by a property
owners’ association.



         (k)   Service facilities.  Service facilities for
recreation vehicle subdivision use may be provided in conjunction with or in
addition to recreation facilities; provided, however, that the service
facilities shall be in addition to the minimum area required for recreational
uses and as follows:



            1.   Sanitary facilities shall be provided as
required by Chapter 8, Article 5, Section Rd-8-543, and its successors, of
the Arizona Department of Health Services Rules and Regulations;



            2.   Washroom and laundry room facilities shall be
provided within an enclosed structure(s);



            3.   One dwelling unit or manufactured home may be
provided for use of the subdivision manager. Said building may also include a
management office; provided, however, that it shall be limited to the
management activities of the subdivision; and



            4.   Refuse collection areas shall be provided to
accommodate front-load container-type pickup, and shall be approved by the
Department of Public Works.



         (l)   Management.  A property owners’ association
shall be established for any recreation vehicle subdivision use. The property
owners association shall be responsible for the management and maintenance of
all private streets, landscaping, private utilities and common area
facilities as specified herein, and/or provided in addition to these minimum
development standards.



         (m)   Procedure for processing recreation vehicle
subdivisions.



            1.   A recreation vehicle subdivision shall be
processed as required in Chapter 153 of this title. A detailed development
plan shall be prepared in conjunction with the preliminary subdivision plat
and shall identify the location of all streets, recreation vehicle or
manufactured home unit spaces, recreational areas, parking lots, service
facility areas and any permanent structure(s) that may be provided for use of
property owners. Said development plan shall be sufficiently detailed to
illustrate full compliance with all development standards as specified herein.



            2.   Articles of incorporation for the property
owners’ association, including management rules and conditions, covenants
and restrictions, shall be submitted for review and approval by the city.



         (n)   Waivers.  Upon receipt of a written request, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend a waiver be granted from a
particular development standard(s); provided, however, that the Commission
makes a specific finding that some other amenity or amenities or development
feature is being provided in lieu of the standard(s) being waived and that
such waiver is not contrary to the purpose, spirit and intent of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 75)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-021, passed
6-27-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-06.03  Manufactured Housing Subdivision District (MHS).



   (A)   Purpose.  This district is intended to accommodate
manufactured homes, together with schools, parks and other services, in a
suitable residential environment. Manufactured homes on individual lots
within manufactured home subdivisions are permitted, provided they meet the
minimum requirements of this district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Manufactured home subdivisions;



      (2)   Public schools, parks and recreation facilities;



      (3)   Crop and tree farming;



      (4)   Child day care services, small;



      (5)   Residential care facility, small; and



      (6)   Nursing and personal care, small.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2687, passed
1-4-1995)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in manufactured
home subdivisions such as vestibule, carport, garage, storage or recreation
facilities, and joint boat and trailer storage areas;



      (2)   Home occupation;



      (3)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities in accordance with Article 19 herein are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted; and



      (4)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord.
O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and submittal
of a site plan to and approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with
§ 154-03.05:



      (1)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (2)   Private schools;



      (3)   Child day care services, large.  Day care for six or
more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (§ 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily found in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care services, large; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter, including, but not limited to, setback and
coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening structures and
materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact of surrounding uses and
hours of operation.



      (4)   Private parks, recreation areas and facilities; and



      (5)   Rooming and boarding houses.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2356, passed
5-6-1987; Ord. 2523, passed 6-5-1991; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995)



   (E)   Property development standards.  Each parcel of land used for
a manufactured home subdivision and individually owned lots within a
subdivision shall comply with the following minimum regulations.



      (1)   Area.



         (a)   Each parcel of land used for a manufactured home
subdivision shall have a minimum of three acres.



         (b)   In manufactured home subdivisions there shall be a
minimum lot area of 4,000 square feet per manufactured home lot.



      (2)   Dimensions.



         (a)   Width.  Each manufactured home lot shall have a
minimum width of 50 feet. In cases of irregularly shaped lots, the minimum
width shall be measured 20 feet back from the front property line.



         (b)   Depth.  Each manufactured home lot shall have a
minimum depth of 80 feet.



      (3)   Minimum setbacks.



         (a)   Front yard.  Ten feet. Where a manufactured home
lot has double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on both
streets. When a manufactured home lot has frontage on a street opposite from
another residential zoning district, there shall be a front yard equal to the
required front yard setback of the adjoining residential zoning district;



         (b)   Side yard.  Seven feet from interior lot lines
and ten feet from side street lot lines; and



         (c)   Rear yard.  Seven feet.



      (4)   Height regulations.  No principal building shall exceed
20 feet in height and no accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.



      (5)   Maximum coverage.  The maximum permitted coverage by
the manufactured home unit and accessory buildings shall not exceed 45% of
the manufactured home lot, excluding the first two carports up to 400 square
feet.



      (6)   Streets.  Streets shall be designed to the standards
established in Chapter 153 and shall be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer.



      (7)   Off-street parking.  Two parking spaces shall be
provided for each manufactured home lot and shall not be provided within the
minimum setback requirements for the manufactured home lot.



      (8)   Walkways.  Walks shall be provided adjacent to
dedicated streets and shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.



      (9)   Illumination.  Adequate lighting shall be provided for
all streets.



      (10)   Storm drainage.  Proper surface storm drainage will be
provided and the drainage plans will be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer.



      (11)   Utilities.  Electricity, city water and city sewer
shall be provided to each manufactured home lot; no aboveground utility lines
shall be permitted.



      (12)   Fire hydrants.  Approved fire hydrants shall be
located at intervals of 500 feet as approved by the Fire Department and City
Engineer.



      (13)   Fences.



         (a)   Exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall be
bounded with a masonry wall having a minimum height of four feet and a
maximum height of six feet; and



         (b)   Fences shall be permitted along any lot line;
provided, however, that no fences more than six feet will be permitted on
side and rear lot lines and no more than four feet within the minimum front
yard.



      (14)   Recreational vehicles.  The location of recreational
vehicles on a manufactured home lot shall be prohibited for human occupancy
as a residence.



      (15)   Procedures for manufactured home subdivision.  A
manufactured home subdivision plat shall be processed as provided in Chapter
153 after request and approval of the MH Zoning District. In complying with
the regulations of Chapter 153, the words “building” and “structure”
may be interpreted to mean “manufactured home”.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Other requirements for manufactured home subdivisions.



      (1)   Tie downs.  All manufactured homes in manufactured home
subdivisions shall be anchored to comply with the wind and seismic standards
as adopted by the city.



      (2)   There shall be not more than one manufactured home per
each manufactured home lot.



      (3)   All manufactured homes shall be equipped with toilet,
bath and kitchen facilities and shall be connected to sanitary sewer. Water,
electrical and telephone service shall be provided.



      (4)   All manufactured homes shall be recessed with the frame
to grade level or have solid skirting to the ground on all sides.



      (5)   Placement of a manufactured home on an approved lot and
the connection of utilities thereto shall be subject to a permit from and
inspection by the authority having jurisdiction. A site plan shall be
submitted showing the lot which is to be used for the installation and the
location of utility hookups and setbacks to be observed. Any alterations or
additions on said manufactured home lot shall be subject to the same
requirements.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952)  Penalty, see §
154-999



   (G)   Waivers.  Upon receipt of a written request, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend that a waiver be granted from a particular
development standard or standards; provided, however, that the Commission
makes a specific finding that some other amenity or amenities or development
feature is being provided in lieu of the standard or standards being waived
and that such waiver is not contrary to the purpose of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 80)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2109, passed
2-2-1983; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O97-23, passed 9-3-1997; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010)



§ 154-06.04  Manufactured Housing Park District (MHP).



   (A)   Purpose.  This district is intended to accommodate
manufactured homes and recreational vehicles, together with schools, parks
and other services, in a suitable residential environment. Manufactured homes
and recreational vehicles on a parcel of land under one ownership and/or
management established as a manufactured home park, a recreational vehicle
park and a recreational vehicle cooperative (or combination thereof) are
permitted, provided they meet the minimum requirements of this district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Manufactured home parks;



      (2)   Recreational vehicle parks;



      (3)   Recreational vehicle cooperatives;



      (4)   Crop and tree farming;



      (5)   Public schools, parks and recreation facilities;



      (6)   Child day care services, small;



      (7)   Residential care facility, small;



      (8)   Nursing and personal care facility, small; and



      (9)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997; Ord. 2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in manufactured
home parks such as vestibule, carport, garage, storage or recreation
facilities and joint boat and trailer storage areas;



      (2)   Overflow recreational vehicle parking (dry camps), not
to exceed 20% of the total number of manufactured home and recreational
vehicle spaces, and not to exceed 50 spaces (whichever is less);



      (3)   Home occupations; and



      (4)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities in accordance with Article 19 herein are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and submittal
of a site plan to and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
accordance with § 154-03.05:



      (1)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (2)   Private schools;



      (3)   Child day care services, large.  Day care for six or
more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications § 154-03.05;



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health and Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily found in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care services, large; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter, including, but not limited to,
setback and coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening
structures and materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact of
surrounding uses, and hours of operation.



      (4)   Private parks, recreation areas and facilities; and



      (5)   Rooming and boarding houses.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997)



   (E)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Land area.  The minimum area of land used for a
manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park and recreational vehicle
cooperative (or combination thereof) shall be three acres. A lot, parcel or
tract of land less than three acres may be rezoned if it adjoins an existing
Manufactured Housing Park (MHP) District.



      (2)   Space sizes and density.



         (a)   Manufactured home park.



            1.   Minimum area.  In manufactured home parks
there shall be a minimum area of 2,800 square feet per manufactured home
space.



            2.   Width.  Each manufactured home space shall
have a minimum width of 40 feet. In cases of irregularly shaped lots, the
minimum width shall be measured 20 feet back from the front property line.



            3.   Depth.  Each manufactured home space shall
have a minimum depth of 70 feet.



         (b)   Recreational vehicle park and recreational vehicle
cooperative.



            1.   Minimum area.  In recreational vehicle parks
and cooperatives, there shall be a minimum area of 1,000 square feet per
recreational vehicle space.



            2.   Maximum allowable density.  The maximum
allowable density for an area of land developed as a recreational vehicle
park or recreational vehicle cooperative shall be 18 units per acre.



            3.   Width.  Each recreational vehicle space
shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.



            4.   Depth.  Each recreational vehicle space
shall have a minimum depth of 40 feet; provided, however, that for any space
within the park which is to accommodate an RV unit greater than 32 feet in
length, the minimum space depth shall be increased to 48 feet.



            5.   Minimum interior dimensions of the unit
space.  In such event as the unit space is oriented at an angle from the
street which is other than perpendicular, or is provided in trapezoidal
fashion or other geometric shape, the minimum interior dimensions of said
unit space shall be not less than the minimum specified herein. No part of
any recreational vehicle may extend beyond the limits of the designated unit
space.



      (3)   Streets.  Park roadways shall have a minimum width of
32 feet between curbs and be paved with asphaltic concrete or equivalent. All
street corners shall have a minimum turn radius of 25 feet.



      (4)   Dry camps.  If provided, overflow recreational vehicle
parking (dry camps) shall be located in areas with a minimum gravel or ABC
surface for access and parking.



      (5)   Off-street parking.



         (a)   For manufactured housing parks.  Two parking
spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space; at least one space
shall not be provided within the minimum setback requirements for the
manufactured home space.



         (b)   For recreational vehicle parks and recreational
vehicle cooperatives.  One parking space, as defined in this chapter, shall
be provided for each recreational vehicle unit space, and shall not be
located within any private drive or other accessway. Said parking shall be
paved with a durable, dust-free surface and shall be located within either 50
feet of the recreational vehicle unit space being served, or within a common
parking area located no more than 300 feet from the recreational vehicle. No
parking space shall be located within the minimum street setback as specified
herein. A minimum of one visitor parking space shall be provided for each
five recreational vehicle spaces occupied by a permanently sited unit.



      (6)   Fences.  Exterior boundaries of the manufactured home
park, recreational vehicle park and recreational vehicle cooperative shall be
bounded by a six foot high masonry wall. Fences having a maximum height of
six feet may be permitted on manufactured home space boundary lines except
that no fence higher than three feet shall be permitted within the minimum
front yard. The minimum traffic visibility requirements specified in the
zoning code shall be complied with for all streets, driveways and other
points of access located within or along the perimeter of the project.



      (7)   Service facilities.



         (a)   Utilities.  Electricity, city water and city
sewer shall be provided to each manufactured home space or recreational
vehicle space. No aboveground utility lines shall be permitted, except for
connections between recreational vehicles and park model recreation vehicles
and their service outlets. All utility lines shall be privately maintained,
except for any fire line as may be required by the City Fire Department. The
location of all easements for public services and utilities, including
purposes and any limitations of such easements shall be illustrated on the
site plan.



         (b)   Fire hydrants.  Approved fire hydrants shall be
located at intervals of 500 feet as approved by the City Fire Department and
City Engineer.



         (c)   Washroom and laundry room facilities.  If
provided, washroom and laundry room facilities shall be located within an
enclosed structure or structures.



         (d)   Park manager or cooperative.  One dwelling unit
or manufactured home will be permitted for the use of the park manager or
cooperative; such building may also include a management office.



         (e)   Refuse collection areas.  Refuse collection areas
shall be provided and screened from public view as approved by the Department
of Public Works.



      (8)   Recreation areas.  In addition to the space devoted to
individual recreation on individual manufactured home and recreational
vehicle sites, there shall be provided a developed area, or areas, devoted to
open space and recreational purposes consisting of at least 5% of the gross
park or cooperation area, and will be provided and maintained by the park
operator or cooperative association.



      (9)   Illumination.  Minimum lighting of two-tenths
footcandles shall be provided for all streets, walks and service facility
areas within the development.



      (10)   Storm drainage.  Proper surface storm drainage shall
be provided subject to approval by the City Engineer.



      (11)   Management.  The park manager or cooperative
association shall be responsible for the management and maintenance of all
private streets and facilities as specified herein.



      (12)   Procedure for recreational vehicle cooperatives.



         (a)   For the purposes of this subchapter, a
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE COOPERATIVE shall be a cooperative within the definition
of “subdivision” as defined by Chapter 153. A recreational vehicle
cooperative shall be processed as required in Chapter 153 after establishment
of the Manufactured Housing Park (MHP) District. Said plat shall be prepared
as a block recording and shall not designate any private streets, drives,
recreational vehicle unit space or other exclusive use areas; but shall
indicate any utility easements as may be required. The plat submittal shall
include the articles of incorporation for the cooperative, the cooperative
management rules and the covenants, conditions and restrictions.



         (b)   A detailed development plan shall be prepared in
conjunction with the preliminary plat and shall identify the location of all
streets, recreational vehicle unit spaces, recreational areas, parking lots,
service facility areas and any permanent structure that may be provided for
future use of members, including covered carports, covered patios and storage
buildings. Said development plans shall be sufficiently detailed to
illustrate full compliance with all development standards as specified herein.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Placement standards.



      (1)   Permit.  Placement of a manufactured home at an
approved location, and the connection of utilities thereto, shall be subject
to a permit from and inspection by the authority having jurisdiction. A site
plan shall be submitted showing the space which is to be used for the
installation, and a plot plan shall be submitted of the space showing the
location of utility hookups and setbacks to be observed. Any alterations or
additions on said manufactured home space shall be subject to the same
requirements.



      (2)   Site plan.  Placement of a park model recreational
vehicle at an approved location shall be subject to a permit from, and
inspection by, the authority having jurisdiction. A site plan shall be
submitted showing the space which is to be used for the installation, and a
plot plan shall be submitted of the space showing the location of utility
hookups and setbacks to be observed. Any alterations or additions on said
manufactured home space shall be subject to the same requirements.
Alterations, including awnings, patio covers, room additions, shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction codes of the city.



      (3)   Separation and setbacks.



         (a)   All manufactured homes, recreational vehicles and
buildings shall be set back from the periphery of the park or cooperative as
follows:



            1.   Front yard.  Ten feet. Where manufactured
home park has double frontage, the required front yard shall be provided on
both streets;



            2.   Side yard.  Seven feet; and



            3.   Rear yard.  Seven feet.



         (b)   There shall be a minimum distance of six feet
between the leading edge of any two manufactured homes or recreational
vehicle units or their accessory structures. This minimum setback shall be
maintained free of all awnings (fixed or temporary). This minimum setback
shall be measured perpendicularly to the alignment of the manufactured home
or recreational vehicle unit to provide a consistent setback between building
envelopes.



         (c)   There shall be a minimum distance of three feet
from an interior public or private street to the leading edge of any
manufactured home, recreational vehicle or structure.



      (4)   Height regulations.  No principal building shall exceed
20 feet in height and no accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height.



      (5)   Visibility triangle requirements.  All structures
located at the corner of public streets shall comply with the visibility
triangle requirements of the zoning code.



      (6)   Tie downs.  All manufactured homes and park model
recreational vehicles in manufactured home or recreational vehicle parks
shall be anchored to comply with the wind and seismic standards as adopted by
the city.



      (7)   Location.  There shall be not more than one
manufactured home per each manufactured home space. The location of
recreational vehicles on a manufactured home space for human occupancy is
permitted provided it is the only occupied unit on the space, and also
provided that the unit is self-contained or that restrooms and shower
facilities are provided.



      (8)   Facilities.  All manufactured homes shall be equipped
with toilet, bath and kitchen facilities and shall be connected to a sanitary
sewer. Water, electrical and telephone service shall be provided.



      (9)   Recessed or skirting.  All manufactured homes shall be
recessed with the frame to grade level or have solid skirting to the ground
on all sides.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997; Ord. O2000-73, passed 10-18-2000)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (G)   Waivers.  The Zoning Board of Adjustment may hear and decide
applications for variances from a particular development standard or
standards, pursuant to § 154-03.04.



('80 Code, App. A, § 85)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O97-23, passed
9-3-1997)



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010)



Article 07 - Multiple-Family Residential Zoning Districts



§ 154-07.01  Medium Density Residential District (R-2).



   (A)   Purpose.  Within any Medium Density Residential District no
building, structure or premises shall be used, and no building or structure
shall be erected, which is intended to be designed or used, in whole or in
part, for any industrial, manufacturing, trade or commercial purpose, except
as permitted in this subchapter, or for any other than the following purposes.



('80 Code, App. A, § 72)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  The allowed residential density of the Medium
Density Residential Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate
General Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning
Conformity Matrix.



('80 Code, App. A, § 72)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One single-family dwelling on a lot containing at least
6,000 square feet;



      (2)   One two-family dwelling on a lot containing at least
8,000 square feet;



      (3)   Two single-family dwellings on one lot containing at
least 8,000 square feet, provided, that such dwelling or dwellings conform in
all respects to the setback, side line, density area and lot coverage
requirements as provided in this chapter for single-family dwelling units in
this district;



      (4)   Small lot single-family subdivision(s)  (lots
containing at least 4,500 square feet and less than 6,000 square feet minimum
area per lot), provided that:



         (a)   No more than 72 small lots shall be established
within each one-quarter section of land (160 acres);



         (b)   Common area landscaping and amenities shall be
provided for small lot subdivisions; and



         (c)   A home owner’s association shall be established
for each small lot subdivision for the maintenance of the common area
landscaping and amenities.



      (5)   Multi-family dwellings with a maximum density of 12
dwelling units per acre;



      (6)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools;



      (7)   Child day care services, small (SIC 8351);



      (8)   Residential care facility, small (SIC 8361);



      (9)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small) (SIC 7021);



      (10)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreational uses; and



      (11)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 72)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2004-33, passed 6-16-2004; Ord. 2015-021, passed 4-15-2015;
Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to any use permitted by this chapter such as
swimming pools, private carports and garages, laundry rooms and common
recreation buildings and areas; provided that none shall be operated for use
by the general public for gain and subject to the criteria as specified in §
154-15.15 of this chapter;



      (2)   Home occupations;



      (3)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (4)   Accessory dwelling units.



('80 Code, App. A, § 72)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002;
Ord. O2014-29, passed 10-1-2014; Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Child day care services, large; day care for six or more
children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (see § 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care service; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter, including, but not limited to,
setback and coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening
structures and materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact on
surrounding uses, and hours of operation.



      (2)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (3)   Membership-based lodging (SIC 7041);



      (4)   Cemetery, crematory or mausoleum;



      (5)   Public and quasi-public utility buildings and facilities
when necessary for service to the surrounding territory, provided that no
public business offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained
therein. Electric substations must be enclosed within a wall or fence
adequate to prohibit passage of persons and to provide screening from public
view;



      (6)   University or college; and



      (7)   Rooming and boarding houses, (large).



('80 Code, App. A, § 72)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the Medium Density Residential District as may be designated on
the official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The minimum lot size in the Medium Density
Residential (R-2) District shall be 4,500 square feet.



      (2)   Density.  The maximum density in the Medium Density
Residential (R-2) District shall be one unit per 4,000 square feet of land.



      (3)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width in the Medium Density
Residential (R-2) District shall be 50 feet.



      (4)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage in the Medium
Density Residential (R-2) District shall be 35% of the lot area. The first
600 square feet of covered parking shall be permitted in addition to the
maximum lot coverage percentage listed above.



      (5)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks in the Medium Density Residential (R-2) District:



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty feet;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setback.  Seven feet;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback.  Ten feet; and



         (d)   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet.



      (6)   Building heights.  The maximum building height in the
Medium Density Residential (R-2) District shall be 40 feet. The building
height for multi-family structures shall be reduced to 20 feet (one story
maximum) when located within 60 feet of adjacent parcels zoned Agriculture,
Suburban Ranch, Residential Estate or Low Density Residential. Single-family
structures are exempt from the 20 foot height limit.



      (7)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



      (8)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be
provided in the manner set forth in Article 16 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 72)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2004-33, passed 6-16-2004; Ord. O2006-39, passed 6-21-2006;
Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010 ;Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010; Ord.
O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-07.02  Medium Density Single-Family Residential District (R-2-5).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the R-2-5 District is to provide
additional housing styles and development types in the medium density
multiple-family zoning district. The R-2-5 is a zone of single-family housing
units in a more compact form, with smaller setbacks, more lot coverage,
staggered front yard setbacks and a requirement to provide stormwater
retention/open space on a larger scale, encouraging one larger basin and
fewer small retention basins.



   (B)   Applicability.  The allowed residential density of the Medium
Density Residential Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate
General Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning
Conformity Matrix.



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   A single-family subdivision with lots containing at
least 5,000 square feet and meeting the density requirement of five to12.9
dwelling units/acre;



      (2)   Child day care services, small (SIC 8351);



      (3)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreational uses;



      (4)   Community garden; and



      (5)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small).



(Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to any use permitted by this chapter such as
swimming pools, garages, laundry rooms and public recreation areas and
structures, subject to the criteria as specified in § 154-15.15 of this
chapter;



      (2)   Home occupations; any home occupation that does not
require customers or employees to come to the home, with the exception of
child day care services, small and piano/music lessons; and



      (3)   Personal auto repair for the resident of the home only.



(Ord. O2014-29, passed 10-1-2014)



   (E)   Conditional uses.  Child day care services, large.



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the Medium Density Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District as
may be designated on the official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The minimum lot size in the Medium Density
Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District shall be 5,000 square feet. If
more than one lot is being developed, the average net lot size for all lots
(excluding any retention basin lot) shall be 5,000 square feet, as determined
by the Zoning Administrator.



      (2)   Density.  The maximum density in the Medium Density
Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District shall be one unit per 5,000 square
feet of land (meeting the density as identified in the General Plan),
provided all other development standards in this zoning district are met.



      (3)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width in the Medium Density
Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District shall be 50 feet. On cul-de-sac
lots, the lot width may be reduced to 40 feet, as measured at the front yard
setback line.



      (4)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage in the Medium
Density Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District shall be 45% of the lot
area. The required 400 square feet of enclosed garage shall not count against
the maximum lot coverage percentage listed above.



      (5)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks in the Medium Density Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District.



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback.  Minimum front yard
setback of 15 feet, with a range of staggered front yard setbacks between 15
and 20 feet, with a maximum of 50% of the lots having a 15-foot setback.
Garages can be placed separately from the dwelling unit on the lot;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setbacks.  Five feet, clear of
equipment and any other structures and/or appurtenances on one side, nine
feet on the other side;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback.  Ten feet, (except for
detached garage);



         (d)   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet; and



         (e)   Walls.  The side and rear yards shall have six
foot solid block walls on the property lines. The actual location of the
beginning of the six foot side yard wall shall be determined based on the
house plan built, starting from some appropriate point (as determined by the
Zoning Administrator) along the side yard property line next to the house,
with the wall continuing and adjoining the rear property line wall.



      (6)   Garages.  Garages can be attached or detached from the
dwelling unit. If attached, the minimum front yard garage setback shall be 15
feet and must comply with the staggered front yard setback in division
(F)(5)(a) above. If garages are detached from the unit, they can be placed
anywhere from the minimum 15 feet front yard setback (complying with division
(F)(5)(a) above) to a minimum rear yard setback of three feet.



      (7)   Building heights.  The maximum building height in the
Medium Density Single- Family Residential (R-2-5) District shall be 40 feet.



      (8)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Each lot in the Medium
Density Single-Family Residential (R-2-5) District shall have a minimum of
one 15-gallon street tree and accompanying underground irrigation system.



      (9)   Off-street parking.  Each single-family dwelling shall
have a two-car garage for parking cars and household storage. In addition to
the two-car garage, each single-family dwelling shall have a paved driveway
capable of providing parking for two cars.



      (10)   Stormwater retention basins.  When an R-2-5
subdivision is planned, the stormwater retention shall occur on a larger
scale, with basins planned to accommodate a minimum of one-quarter section
(160 acres) of adjacent surrounding land. The basins shall be planned, when
possible, to align with the locations identified for neighborhood parks in
the General Plan. For infill projects, projects less than 160 acres, or
projects that are constrained by physical barriers such as rail lines,
elevated freeways and irrigation canals, smaller basins may be allowed on a
case-by-case basis upon approval of the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. O2010-46, passed 9-1-2010; Ord. O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty,
see § 154-999



§ 154-07.03  High Density Residential District (R-3).



   (A)   Purpose.  Within any High Density Residential (R-3) District,
no building, structure or premises shall be used and no building or structure
shall be erected, which is intended or designed to be used, in whole or in
part, for any use except as permitted in this section.



('80 Code, App. A, § 73)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  The allowed residential density of the High
Density Residential Districts shall be in conformance with the appropriate
General Plan Land Use Designation and in compliance with the Zoning
Conformity Matrix.



('80 Code, App. A, § 73)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   One single-family dwelling;



      (2)   One two-family dwelling;



      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings, attached or detached;



      (4)   Child day care services, small (SIC 8351);



      (5)   Residential care facility, small (SIC 8361);



      (6)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small) (SIC 7021);



      (7)   Public and private elementary and secondary schools;



      (8)   Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds and
recreational uses; and



      (9)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 73)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures customarily
incidental and subordinate to any use permitted by this subchapter such as
swimming pools, private carports and garages, laundry rooms and common
recreation buildings and areas; provided that none shall be operated for use
by the general public for gain and subject to the criteria as specified in §
154-15.15 of this chapter;



      (2)   Home occupations; and



      (3)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. Wall
strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not permitted.



         (a)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (b)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (4)   Accessory dwelling units.



('80 Code, App. A, § 73)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002;
Ord. O2013-29, passed 10-1-2014; Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Art gallery or museum;



      (2)   Cemetery, crematory or mausoleum;



      (3)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (4)   Child day care services, large;  day care for six or
more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (see § 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with a self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care service; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in conformity with this chapter, including, but not limited to,
setback and coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening
structures and materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact on
surrounding uses, and hours of operation.



      (5)   Public and quasi-public utility buildings and facilities
when necessary for service to the surrounding territory, provided that no
public business offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained
therein. Electric substations must be enclosed within a wall or fence
adequate to prohibit passage of persons;



      (6)   Hospital or sanitarium;



      (7)   Motels or tourist facilities;



      (8)   University or college;



      (9)   Membership-based lodging (SIC 7014); and



      (10)   Rooming and boarding houses, (large).



('80 Code, App. A, § 73)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the High Density Residential District as may be designated on
the official zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The minimum lot size in the High Density
Residential (R-3) District shall be 6,000 square feet.



      (2)   Density.  The maximum density in the High Density
Residential (R-3) District shall be 2,000 square feet of lot area for each
one dwelling unit.



      (3)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width in the High Density
Residential (R-3) District shall be 50 feet.



      (4)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage in the High
Density Residential District shall be 35% of the lot area. An additional 5%
lot coverage is permitted for common recreation buildings. The covered
parking provided shall be permitted in addition to the maximum lot coverage
percentages listed above, provided that the total lot coverage does not
exceed 50% of the lot area.



      (5)   Yards.  The following is the list of minimum yard
setbacks for the High Density Residential (R-3) District:



         (a)   Minimum front yard setback.  Twenty feet;



         (b)   Minimum side yard setback.  Seven feet;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard setback.  Ten feet; and



         (d)   Minimum street side yard setback.  Ten feet.



      (6)   Building heights.  Except as provided in § 154-15.03,
the maximum building height shall be 40 feet. The maximum building height
shall be reduced to 20 feet (one story maximum) for all land located within
60 feet of a lot in an Agriculture, Suburban Ranch, Residential Estate or Low
Density Residential District.



      (7)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



      (8)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking shall be
provided in the manner set forth in Article 16 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 73)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-040, passed
9-5-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-46, passed 9-1-2010;
Ord. O2010-63, passed 12-1-2010; Ord. O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010)  Penalty,
see § 154-999



Article 08 - Commercial Zoning Districts



§ 154-08.01  Transitional District (TR).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the Transitional District
(TR) is to provide a transition between the low density residential areas and
nonresidential uses and facilities. Through relatively strict development
standards, locational requirements and use restrictions, this district is to
act as a buffer between major traffic carriers and residential areas or
between commercial and industrial uses and residential areas. Within these
buffer areas, the intention is to provide for office, clerical and personal
services uses which are characterized by a low or infrequent volume of direct
daily customer contact and little or no storage or exchange of products or
foods on site. As a secondary purpose, the Transitional District may also
accommodate residential land uses either as independent activities, or in
conjunction with professional services wherein a resident environment is
desirable.



('80 Code, App. A, § 90)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2071, passed
5-5-1982)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   General offices, including banks and other financial
establishments without drive-in facilities; medical and dental offices and
clinics and facilities providing health care therapeutic services, other than
hospitals;



      (2)   Shops and salons providing services for personal
grooming and apparel;



      (3)   Child care facilities, including church-related
facilities;



      (4)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (5)   One single-family dwelling; one two-family dwelling;



      (6)   Child day care services, small;



      (7)   Individual and family social services;



      (8)   Residential care facility, small;



      (9)   Rooming and boarding houses, (small);



      (10)   Offices and clinics; medical;



      (11)   Nursing and personal care, small;



      (12)   Medical and dental labs;



      (13)   Home health services;



      (14)   Miscellaneous health and allied services; and



      (15)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 90)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2071, passed
5-5-1982; Ord. 2523, passed 6-5-1991; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2015-021,
passed 4-15-2015; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Retail sales and storage of goods, merchandise or
materials, wherein such activities are clearly incidental to the principal
use; provided, however, that the total area devoted to any or all of these
activities shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the principal use,
and further provided that vehicular delivery of such items from the premises
to the customer shall be prohibited. No exterior signing or other indication
of such activities shall be permitted;



      (2)   Display and demonstration of product samples which are
not offered for sale from the premises;



      (3)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. A
roof-mounted personal wireless communications facility is permitted on a
commercial building or a mixed-use building which is primarily nonresidential
(75% of the use is nonresidential).



         (a)   Wall strapping of a personal wireless
communications facility is not permitted.



         (b)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (c)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (4)   Accessory dwelling units.



(Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  Any one of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission (see § 154-03.05):



      (1)   Any facility for group assembly of clubs and
organizations; group teaching of the arts, vocations or physical training;
public display or exhibition of the arts, literature or similar items;



      (2)   Multi-family dwellings;



      (3)   Hospitals, excluding animal hospitals;



      (4)   Parking lots, only as an accessory activity to a
principal use allowed within an adjacent business or industrial zoning
district, subject to the provisions of Article 16 of this chapter;



      (5)   Other uses that meet the purpose and development
standards as specified herein;



      (6)   Child day care services, large; child day care for six
or more children is permitted upon compliance with the following:



(Ord. O2008-33, passed 8-6-2008)



         (a)   The seven standard criteria for reviewing
conditional use applications (§ 154-03.05(G)(2));



         (b)   The facility must be licensed by the State
Department of Health Services;



         (c)   There shall be no swimming pool on the site,
unless the pool is in compliance with the current adopted Pool Safety Codes
per the Arizona Revised Statutes;



         (d)   Any outside play area shall be enclosed by a five
foot high solid wall or fence with self-latching gate;



         (e)   There shall be no structural additions or
equipment not customarily in a residential dwelling, excepting those
modifications required under state licensing, building code or fire code
regulations pertaining to this class of child day care services, large; and



         (f)   In granting any conditional use permit, the
Planning Commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this chapter, including but not limited to setback and
coverage requirements, off-street parking and screening structures and
materials to hold to reasonable levels the impact of surrounding uses, and
hours of operation.



      (7)   Job training and vocational rehabilitation services;



      (8)   Residential care facility, large;



      (9)   Membership-based lodging;



      (10)   Miscellaneous social services;



      (11)   Nursing and personal care, large;



      (12)   Specialty water store;



      (13)   Mortuaries, crematory, funeral parlors, or
columbariums; and



      (14)   Rooming and boarding houses, (large).



('80 Code, App. A, § 90)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2071, passed
5-5-1982; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2000-32, passed 5-17-2000; Ord.
O2013-02, passed 1-16-2013; Ord. O2017-026, passed 8-16-2017)



   (E)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area and location.



         (a)   The minimum area for the Transitional District
shall be one acre. A lot, parcel or tract of land less than one acre may be
considered for rezoning if it adjoins an existing transitional, business or
industrial zoning district, and meets the minimum lot area requirements as
specified herein.



         (b)   The minimum lot area within the Transitional
District shall be 9,000 square feet; provided however, that existing lots of
record classified within a business zoning district prior to the effective
date of this chapter may be exempt from this requirement. Residential uses,
including multi-family units, shall provide a minimum of 3,600 square feet of
lot area per residential unit.



         (c)   The location of any Transitional District shall be
restricted to property which either has direct access to and frontage on a
major or minor arterial street as classified by the transportation element of
the General Plan, or is contiguous to an existing business or industrial
zoning district for a minimum length of 250 feet.



      (2)   Building requirements.



         (a)   Any use allowed herein, including accessory
activities other than parking, shall take place within an enclosed building.



         (b)   Maximum lot coverage including all covered
structures shall not exceed 50%.



         (c)   Maximum building height shall not exceed three
stories or 40 feet, subject to the exceptions as specified in § 154-15.03 of
this chapter.



      (3)   Yards.



         (a)   All buildings, including accessory structures
shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any public or private street
right-of-way line. A minimum setback of 20 feet shall also be provided from
any side or rear property line shared with a residential zoning district,
except landscaping for such required setback(s) may be reduced to five feet
in width when the transitional property is developed with buildings and/or
structures containing no more than 5,000 square feet gross enclosed floor
area.



         (b)   Required yards fronting on a public or private
street shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter and
shall not be used for parking, loading or product display.



      (4)   Parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided as
specified in Article 16 of this chapter.



      (5)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
arranged and located as to direct the light away from any public or private
street right-of-way or adjoining residential district.



      (6)   Signage.  Signage for purposes of identifying any use
permitted herein may be provided on the same premises as the use being
served, and shall be clearly incidental to such use. All signage shall comply
with the following minimum standards.



         (a)   The maximum area of all signage shall be in
accordance with the dimensions specified within Table No. 5 - Standards and
Criteria for Permanent On-Site Signing, contained within Article 17 of this
chapter.



         (b)   Signage less than three feet in height may be
located within the minimum 20-foot setback from any public or private street
right-of-way; signage greater than three feet in height shall be subject to
the height and setback requirements specified in this section. Any sign
location shall be subject to the traffic visibility requirements of this
chapter, which shall apply to all driveways and corner lot locations. The
upper limit of any sign face shall not extend above the roof line of any
building on the property.



         (c)   Sign illumination may be direct or indirect
lighting; provided, however, there shall be no glare to adjoining property or
streets. Flashing signs, rotating beacons, portable or moving signs shall be
prohibited.



         (d)   Signage shall be limited to identification
purposes only and shall not include any picture, trademark, symbol, structure
or other configuration other than the letters comprising the permitted
subject matter.



         (e)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the placing of a
temporary real estate sales or rental sign not exceeding three square feet in
area within any required yard.



('80 Code, App. A, § 90)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2071, passed
5-5-1982; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord. O96-24, passed 3-6-1996; Ord.
O2000-55, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2004-52, passed 8-4-2004; Ord. O2010-09,
passed 2-3-2010; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-63, passed
12-1-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-08.02  Planned Shopping Center District (PSC).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the Planned Shopping
Center (PSC) Zoning District is to provide for and encourage well designed
and attractive retail shopping facilities on adequate sites in suitable
facilities and appropriate locations which will serve the commercial needs of
the surrounding neighborhood and the community. Shopping centers are
permitted in accordance with an approved plan of development demonstrating
that this purpose has been accomplished.



('80 Code, App. A, § 100)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1627, passed
7-6-1977; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Retail sales of merchandise and services, recreational
facilities, parking areas and other facilities customarily considered as
shopping center uses;



      (2)   Promotional events, herein defined as an event
consisting of productions, displays or exhibitions provided for the purpose
of attracting persons to a shopping center. Outside promotional events such
as circuses, carnivals and outdoor concerts are not permitted on shopping
center sites having less than ten acres of net site area;



      (3)   Uses permitted on the site pursuant to zoning district
regulations in effect prior to establishment of the PSC Zoning District as an
alternative only if the site is not developed as a shopping center;



      (4)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (5)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. A
roof-mounted personal wireless communication facility is permitted on a
commercial building or a mixed-use building which is primarily nonresidential
(75% of the use is nonresidential).



         (a)   Wall strapping of a personal wireless
communications facility is not permitted.



         (b)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (c)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted; and



      (6)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 100)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1627, passed
7-6-1977; Ord. 2523, passed 6-5-1991; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2015-021,
passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Seasonal itinerant vendors of specific products
associated with certain civic, patriotic and/or religious holidays/events.



         (a)   No sale or display of products or goods may occur
in any street right-of-way, visibility triangle, required retention areas or
drive aisles.



         (b)   Seasonal itinerant vendors cannot be located in
any parking areas required for permanent onsite use(s).



         (c)   Seasonal itinerant vendors must provide paved
parking for their customers' use.



         (d)   All temporary structures related to the itinerant
use must pass a building inspection prior to being utilized for business.



         (e)   A business license must be obtained prior to
scheduling a temporary structure inspection.



         (f)   No bells, chimes, microphones, loudspeakers,
amplified music, strobe lights, or any other audible or visual distraction
are allowed as part of the itinerant operation.



         (g)   A seasonal itinerant vendor is allowed one banner,
not to exceed 32 square feet. The banner must be attached to the seasonal
itinerant vendor's temporary structure.



      (2)   Food truck.



(Ord. O2013-28, passed 5-15-2013; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (D)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Multiple food trucks on one property.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (E)   Procedural regulations.  The PSC Zoning District may be
established and made a part of the zoning district maps pursuant to §
154-03.03 of this chapter prior to approval of a plan of development.
However, before building permits can be issued, a plan of development shall
be submitted and approved in accordance with § 154-03.07 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (F)   Property development standards.  The following minimum
standards shall apply to all property developed within the PSC Zoning
District.



      (1)   Lot area.  The minimum size of the site shall be four
acres.



      (2)   Setbacks.  All buildings shall be located a distance of
not less than 25 feet from any boundary of the site on which it is located;
and all buildings shall be located a distance of not less than 60 feet from
any adjacent property within a residential zoning district.



      (3)   Lot coverage.  Maximum lot coverage, excluding covered
or enclosed walkways, parking and mall area, shall not exceed 25% of the net
site area. Under no circumstances shall total lot coverage exceed 25% of the
net site area.



      (4)   Parking requirements.  Parking shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of Article 16 of this chapter.



      (5)   Loading and unloading regulations.  Off-street loading
regulations are as provided in Article 16 of this chapter.



      (6)   Height.  No building or structure shall exceed a height
of 40 feet.



      (7)   Landscaping and screening.



         (a)   Where the boundary of a planned shopping center
abuts property or a public alley within a residential zoning district, a six
foot solid wall shall be provided. A four foot solid wall shall be provided
along all other boundaries of the shopping center site. The four foot solid
wall requirement may be waived if landscaping plans, which provide for the
establishment and maintenance of a minimum ten foot wide landscaped buffer
area and which will effectively screen the shopping center buildings and
parking areas from surrounding properties, are included in the approved plan
of development.



         (b)   Permitted outdoor uses shall be enclosed within a
wall or fence of such material construction, and height so as to conceal all
operations conducted within such wall or fence, except that customer parking,
service station operations, sidewalk cafes and promotional events are
excluded from this requirement.



         (c)   Any part of the shopping center site not used for
buildings or other structures, parking, loading and access ways, pedestrian
walks shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



(Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988)



      (8)   Detached buildings.  No more than one detached
building, herein defined as a building entirely separated from other
buildings by vehicular traffic way and unrelated to the core of the center,
shall be permitted for each 40,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area.
Detached buildings may only include service stations, banks, restaurants,
photo drops, liquor stores, plant nurseries and medical offices.



('80 Code, App. A, § 100)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1627, passed
7-6-1977; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord.
O2006-15, passed 2-1-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2013-28,
passed 5-15-2013; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-08.03  Limited Commercial District (B-1).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the Limited Commercial
(B-1) District is to provide for the business and retail uses which primarily
serve the everyday shopping needs for residents of the community. The
development standards and use restrictions specified for this district are
intended to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential districts, while
promoting an aesthetically pleasing image along major street frontages. It is
also intended that residential uses be provided in conjunction with permitted
commercial uses only, thereby minimizing encroachment from noncommercial
activities within the district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 110)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2096, passed
11-3-1982; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Any nonresidential use permitted within the Transitional
(TR) District as either a principal use or conditional use;



      (2)   Retail sales of goods, materials and merchandise,
provided, however, that any outdoor sales, exterior storage, collection
center, warehouse activity or any itinerant use not in conjunction with an
established use as permitted herein, shall be prohibited;



      (3)   Repair shops and services for household items, excluding
repair of vehicles or heavy machinery;



      (4)   Restaurants, whether indoor or outdoor, and excluding
any form of commercial recreation, amusement or live entertainment;



      (5)   Adult oriented businesses as listed below; provided,
however, that such uses shall comply with Article 15 of this chapter:



         (a)   Adult bookstore;



         (b)   Adult video store; and



         (c)   Escort agency.



      (6)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (7)   Grocery stores, neighborhood grocery stores, convenience
markets and specialty food and beverage stores, provided that neither motor
fuel sales nor a drive through facility are located on the same lot;



      (8)   Child day care services, small;



      (9)   Child day care services, large;



      (10)   Individual and family social services;



      (11)   Job training and vocational rehabilitation services;



      (12)   Residential care facility, small;



      (13)   Residential care facility, large;



      (14)   Membership-based lodging;



      (15)   Miscellaneous social services;



      (16)   Offices and clinics; medical;



      (17)   Nursing and personal care, small;



      (18)   Medical and dental labs;



      (19)   Home health care services;



      (20)   Miscellaneous health and allied services; and



      (21)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 110)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2523, passed
6-5-1991; Ord. 2579, passed 7-15-1992; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2015-021,
passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Fabrication or assembly of such goods and materials
which are sold on the premises; provided, however, such activity is clearly
incidental to a principal retail or service use as permitted herein; and
further provided that the area devoted to such fabrication or assembly shall
not exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the principal use;



      (2)   Single- and two-family dwellings in conjunction with an
established business activity. They shall be located within the same building
or lot and may be owner-occupied or a rental unit. These may not be
freestanding buildings for a solely residential use except as a conditional
use;



      (3)   Sidewalk sales and promotional events which are
temporary and clearly incidental to any principal use permitted herein;
provided, however, that such activity does not displace any required parking
or landscaped area as specified by this chapter;



      (4)   Cocktail lounge incidental to a restaurant; provided,
however, that the area devoted to such activity shall not exceed 40% of the
gross floor area where the public is served; and



      (5)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only. A
roof-mounted personal wireless communication facility is permitted on a
commercial building or a mixed use building which is primarily nonresidential
(75% of the use is nonresidential).



         (a)   Wall strapping of a personal wireless
communications facility is not permitted.



         (b)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



         (c)   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



      (6)   Seasonal itinerant vendors of specific products
associated with certain civic, patriotic and/or religious holidays/events.



         (a)   No sale or display of products or goods may occur
in any street right-of-way, visibility triangle, required retention areas or
drive aisles.



         (b)   Seasonal itinerant vendors cannot be located in
any parking areas required for permanent onsite use(s).



         (c)   Seasonal itinerant vendors must provide paved
parking for their customers' use.



         (d)   All temporary structures related to the itinerant
use must pass a building inspection prior to being utilized for business.



         (e)   A business license must be obtained prior to
scheduling a temporary structure inspection.



         (f)   No bells, chimes, microphones, loudspeakers,
amplified music, strobe lights, or any other audible or visual distraction
are allowed as part of the itinerant operation.



         (g)   A seasonal itinerant vendor is allowed one banner,
not to exceed 32 square feet. The banner must be attached to the seasonal
itinerant vendor's temporary structure.



      (7)   Food truck.



(Ord. O2013-28, passed 5-15-2013; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (D)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Food truck.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (E)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use, upon application and approval
by the Planning and Zoning Commission (see § 154-03.05):



      (1)   Drive-through facility for any restaurant, bank, retail
store or service business provided, however, that such uses shall only have a
minimum of 150 feet of street frontage on any one street, have a minimum lot
area of 22,500 square feet, and shall provide a traffic impact study prepared
in accordance with the city’s adopted standards and guidelines for traffic
impact studies;



      (2)   Fabrication or assembly of goods or materials directly
related to a principal use as permitted herein, which exceeds 10% of the
gross floor area of the principal use; provided, however, that in no event
shall the fabrication activity exceed 40% of the gross floor area;



      (3)   Motor fuel sales (retail), provided, however, that such
uses shall only be located on arterial streets as classified by the
transportation element of the General Plan (as amended), have a minimum of
150 feet of frontage on any one street, have a minimum lot area of 22,500
square feet, and shall provide a traffic impact study prepared by an engineer
which shall be reviewed by the City Engineer;



      (4)   Cocktail lounge or bar.  Live entertainment in
conjunction with a restaurant, cocktail lounge or bar;



      (5)   Parking lots as a primary activity on any lot or parcel
of land for vehicles not exceeding a weight-carrying capacity of two and
one-half tons;



      (6)   Single- and two-family dwellings which are not located
within the same building or lot as an established business activity.  They
may be owner-occupied or a rental unit;



      (7)   Adult cabaret; provided, however, that such use shall
comply with Article 15 of this chapter;



      (8)   Nursing and personal care, large;



      (9)   Hospitals;



      (10)   Private and charter educational facilities; and



      (11)   Self-storage for the warehousing of household or
personal belongings, subject to the following requirements which shall be in
addition to the development standards specified by this subchapter:



         (a)   The minimum site area shall be 30,000 square feet;



         (b)   All storage shall be within an enclosed building;



         (c)   No activity shall occur other than the loading and
unloading of items, and such activity shall be screened from adjacent
property and street rights-of-way by a minimum six-foot high solid wall or
fence;



         (d)   All parking, loading/unloading area and access
drives shall be paved as specified in Article 16 of this chapter;



         (e)   Parking/access drives shall be a minimum width of
24 feet, except where access is provided to cubicles on both sides of the
parking/access drives, in which case a minimum drive of 32 feet shall be
required; and



         (f)   When only indoor access is provided to the
individual storage cubicles, the one on-site loading/unloading area of 12
feet in width by 24 feet in length with a minimum vertical clearance of 14
feet shall be required for each 25 cubicles.



      (12)   Farmers market, subject to the following requirements
which shall be in addition to the development standards specified by this
subchapter:



         (a)   There shall be no displacement of required parking
spaces;



         (b)   All parking, loading/unloading areas and access
aisles shall be paved as specified in Article 16 of this chapter;



         (c)   No activity or signage shall occur within the
landscaping or retention areas;



         (d)   A Site Plan and Traffic Control Plan shall be
submitted to, and approved by, the Department of Community Development;



         (e)   Vendors and patrons shall have permitted access to
permanently constructed restrooms within 500 feet. A letter granting this
permission shall be submitted with the Site Plan and Traffic Control Plan to
the Department of Community Development.



         (f)   Hours of operation are limited to the hours
between sunrise and sunset;



         (g)   Trash receptacles shall be provided during each
event;



         (h)   The property shall be free and clear of litter
and/or trash at the end of each event;



         (i)   Any high noise activity, such as amplified
auctioneering, entertainment, or woodworking, must occur within an enclosed
building.



      (13)   Mortuaries, crematory, funeral parlors, or columbariums.



      (14)   Multiple food trucks on one property.



('80 Code, App. A, § 110)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2579, passed
7-15-1992; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O96-55, passed 6-5-1996; Ord.
O2003-40, passed 9-3-2003; Ord. O2004-71, passed 12-1-2004; O2012-22, passed
11-21-2012; Ord. O2013-02, passed 1-16-2013; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (F)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area and location.



         (a)   The minimum area for the Limited Commercial
District shall be one acre. Any lot, parcel or tract of land less than one
acre may be considered for rezoning if it adjoins an existing Transitional,
Business or Industrial Zoning District, and meets the minimum lot area
requirement as specified herein.



         (b)   The minimum lot area within the Limited Commercial
District shall be 9,000 square feet; provided, however, that any existing lot
of record classified within a business zoning district prior to the effective
date of this chapter may be exempt from this requirement.



         (c)   The location of any Limited Commercial (B-1)
District shall be restricted to property which has access to and frontage on
a collector or an arterial street as classified by the City General Plan, as
amended, or property which is contiguous to a commercial zoning district
which meets this requirement.



      (2)   Building requirements.



         (a)   Any use allowed herein, other than outdoor
restaurants, retail sales of motor fuels, sidewalk sales and promotional
events, seasonal itinerant vendor sales, and off-street parking, shall take
place within an enclosed building.



         (b)   Maximum building height shall not exceed three
stories or 40 feet, subject to the exceptions as specified in § 154-15.03 of
this chapter.



      (3)   Yards.



         (a)   All buildings, including any accessory structures,
shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any public or private street
right-of-way line; provided, however, such setbacks shall be increased to a
minimum of 20 feet for any lot or parcel located within the same block on the
same street as a residential zoning district.



         (b)   A minimum landscaped building and parking setback
of 20 feet shall be required from any side or rear property line shared with
a residential zoning district, except such required setback(s) may be reduced
to five feet in width when the commercial property is developed with
buildings and/or structures containing no more than 5,000 square feet gross
enclosed floor area.



         (c)   Any required yard fronting on a public or private
street right-of-way shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this
chapter and shall not be used for parking, loading, maneuvering aisle or
product display.



      (4)   Noise limitations.  Refer to the noise limitation
standards delineated in Article 15; § 154-15.11 herein.



      (5)   Screening.  Any lot located adjacent to a residential
zoning district shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high masonry wall.
The location of any wall or fence, whether provided to meet the requirements
of this chapter or provided voluntarily, shall comply with any required
street yard setback specified herein.



      (6)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in the manner specified in Article 16 of this chapter.



      (7)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
arranged and located as to direct the light away from any public or private
street right-of-way or adjoining residential district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 110)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2687, passed
1-4-1995; Ord. O96-24, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. O96-55, passed 6-5-1996; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2013-28, passed 5-15-2013; Ord. O2014-20,
passed 8-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-08.04  General Commercial District (B-2).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the General Commercial
(B-2) District is to provide for a wide range of business commercial
activities, including all retail sales, tourist and highway-oriented
facilities, service businesses, entertainment and commercial recreation uses
which serve the entire urbanized area. It is also intended that such business
activities be protected from incompatible uses by restricting new residential
activities and prohibiting new industrial activities as principal uses within
the district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 111)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2096, passed
11-3-1982; Ord. 2504, passed 9-17-1990; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Any use allowed within the Limited Commercial (B-1)
District as either a principal or conditional use, other than drive-through
facilities, motor fuel sales (retail) and convenience markets;



      (2)   Retail sale, rental or repair of goods, materials and
equipment, including wholesale activities; provided, however, that any items
wholesaled shall also be available for retail to the general public. Any
warehousing, distributorship, collection center, storage yard or itinerant
use not in conjunction with an established use as permitted herein, shall be
prohibited;



      (3)   Any business providing a service or installing a product
for individuals, households or other businesses;



      (4)   Other commercial uses such as restaurants, cocktail
lounges, tourist lodging, passenger terminal facilities, indoor theaters and
any form of commercial recreation or entertainment conducted wholly within an
enclosed building;



      (5)   Parking lots as a primary activity on any lot or parcel
of land for vehicles not exceeding a weight-carrying capacity of two and
one-half tons; provided, however, that any storage or maintenance of vehicles
exceeding a weight-carrying capacity of two and one-half tons other than as
an activity which is accessory to any use permitted within an adjacent
business zoning district shall be considered an industrial use and shall be
prohibited;



      (6)   Adult oriented businesses as listed below; provided,
however, that such uses shall comply with § 154-15.10 of this chapter:



         (a)   Adult arcade;



         (b)   Adult bookstore;



         (c)   Adult cabaret;



         (d)   Adult motel;



         (e)   Adult motion picture theater;



         (f)   Adult theater;



         (g)   Adult video store;



         (h)   Escort agency;



         (i)   Nude model studio; and



         (j)   Sexual encounter center.



      (7)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (8)   Grocery stores, neighborhood grocery stores, convenience
markets and specialty food and beverage stores provided that neither motor
fuel sales nor drive through facility are located on the same lot;



      (9)   Child day care services, small;



      (10)   Child day care services, large;



      (11)   Individual and family social services;



      (12)   Job training and vocational rehabilitation services;



      (13)   Residential care facility, small;



      (14)   Residential care facility, large;



      (15)   Membership-based lodging;



      (16)   Miscellaneous social services;



      (17)   Offices and clinics; medical;



      (18)   Nursing and personal care, small;



      (19)   Nursing and personal care, large;



      (20)   Hospitals;



      (21)   Medical and dental labs;



      (22)   Home health care services;



      (23)   Miscellaneous health and allied services;



      (24)   Single- and two-family dwellings which are located in
an established Historic (H) District or which are on the national, state or
local register;



      (25)   Self-storage for the warehousing of household or
personal belongings, subject to the following requirements which shall be in
addition to the development standards specified by this chapter:



         (a)   The minimum site area shall be 30,000 square feet;



         (b)   All storage shall be within an enclosed building;



         (c)   No activity shall occur other than the loading and
unloading of items, and such activity shall be screened from adjacent
property and street rights-of-way by a minimum six-foot high solid wall or
fence;



         (d)   All parking, loading/unloading area and access
drives shall be paved as specified in Article 16 of this chapter;



         (e)   Parking/access drives shall be a minimum width of
24 feet, except where access is provided to cubicles on both sides of the
parking/access drives, in which case a minimum drive of 32 feet shall be
required; and



         (f)   When only indoor access is provided to the
individual storage cubicles, the one on-site loading/unloading area of 12
feet in width by 24 feet in length with a minimum vertical clearance of 14
feet shall be required for each 25 cubicles.



      (26)   Seasonal itinerant vendors of specific products
associated with certain civic, patriotic and/or religious holidays/events.



         (a)   No sale or display of products or goods may occur
in any street right-of-way, visibility triangle, required retention areas or
drive aisles.



         (b)   Seasonal itinerant vendors cannot be located in
any parking areas required for permanent onsite use(s).



         (c)   Seasonal itinerant vendors must provide paved
parking for their customers' use.



         (d)   All temporary structures related to the itinerant
use must pass a building inspection prior to being utilized for business.



         (e)   A business license must be obtained prior to
scheduling a temporary structure inspection.



         (f)   No bells, chimes, microphones, loudspeakers,
amplified music, strobe lights, or any other audible or visual distraction
are allowed as part of the itinerant operation.



         (g)   A seasonal itinerant vendor is allowed one banner,
not to exceed 32 square feet. The banner must be attached to the seasonal
itinerant vendor's temporary structure.



      (27)   Food truck; and



      (28)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 111)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2523, passed
6-5-1991; Ord. 2579, passed 7-15-1992; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2002-64,
passed 11-26-2002; Ord. O2004-71, passed 12-1-2004; Ord. O2013-28, passed
5-15-2013; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Fabrication, assembly or craftsmanship of such goods and
materials which are sold on the premises; provided, however, that such
activity is clearly incidental and essential to a principal retail or service
use as provided herein; and further provided that the area devoted to such
activity shall not exceed 40% of the gross floor area of the principal use.
Any other manner of fabrication, manufacturing, processing or other type of
industrial activity shall be prohibited;



      (2)   Single- and two-family dwellings in conjunction with an
established business activity. They shall be located within the same building
or lot and may be owner-occupied or a rental unit. These may not be
freestanding buildings for a solely residential use; and



      (3)   Roof-mounted, wall-mounted and concealed/disguised
personal wireless communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19
herein, are permitted as an accessory use for a legally established principal
use. Wall strapping is permitted for poles that are two inches or less in
diameter and lattice towers that are less than 24 inches in diameter as
circumscribed around the outside of the support poles.



         (a)   The use of lattice tower structures for personal
wireless communication facilities is permitted.



         (b)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



      (4)   Farmers Market, subject to the following requirements
which shall be in addition to the development standards specified by this
subchapter:



         (a)   There shall be no displacement of required parking
spaces;



         (b)   All parking, loading/unloading areas and access
aisles shall be paved as specified in Article 16 of this chapter;



         (c)   No activity or signage shall occur within the
landscaping or retention areas;



         (d)   A Site Plan and Traffic Control Plan shall be
submitted to, and approved by, the Department of Community Development;



         (e)   Vendors and patrons shall have permitted access to
permanently constructed restrooms within 500 feet. A letter granting this
permission shall be submitted with the Site Plan and Traffic Control Plan to
the Department of Community Development.



         (f)   Hours of operation are limited to the hours
between sunrise and sunset;



         (g)   Trash receptacles shall be provided during each
event;



         (h)   The property shall be free and clear of litter
and/or trash at the end of each event;



         (i)   Any high noise activity, such as amplified
auctioneering, entertainment, or woodworking, must occur within an enclosed
building.



         (j)   Limited to operating a maximum of 72 calendar days
per year.



      (5)   Food truck.



(Ord. O2012-22, passed 11-21-2012; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (D)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Food truck.



   (E)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use, upon application and approval
by the Planning and Zoning Commission (see § 154-03.05).



      (1)   Drive-through facility for any restaurant, banks, retail
store or service business provided, however, that such uses shall only have a
minimum of 150 feet of street frontage on any one street, have a minimum lot
area of 22,500 square feet, and shall provide a traffic impact study prepared
in accordance with the city’s adopted standards and guidelines for traffic
impact studies;



      (2)   Any form of commercial recreation, entertainment or
spectator event conducted outdoors;



      (3)   Convenience markets, provided, however, that such uses
shall only be located on arterial streets as classified by the transportation
element of the General Plan as amended, have a minimum of 150 feet of street
frontage on any one street, have a minimum lot area of 22,500 square feet and
shall provide a traffic impact study prepared by an engineer which shall be
reviewed by the City Engineer;



      (4)   Motor fuel sales (retail), provided, however, that such
uses shall only be located on arterial streets as classified by the
transportation element of the General Plan (as amended), have a minimum of
150 feet of street frontage on any one street, have a minimum lot area of
22,500 square feet and shall provide a traffic impact study prepared by an
engineer which shall be reviewed by the City Engineer;



      (5)   Multi-family dwellings in conjunction with established
business activities;



      (6)   Any retail sale of new automobiles located outside an
established AutoCenter Overlay District;



      (7)   Swap meets;



      (8)   Private and charter educational facilities;



      (9)   Junior colleges, colleges, universities, and
professional schools (2012 NAICS 611210 and 611310);



      (10)   Farmers market, subject to the following requirements
which shall be in addition to the development standards specified by this
subchapter:



         (a)   There shall be no displacement of required parking
spaces;



         (b)   All parking, loading/unloading areas and access
aisles shall be paved as specified in Article 16 of this chapter;



         (c)   No activity or signage shall occur within the
landscaping or retention areas;



         (d)   A Site Plan and Traffic Control Plan shall be
submitted to, and approved by, the Department of Community Development;



         (e)   Vendors and patrons shall have permitted access to
permanently constructed restrooms within 500 feet. A letter granting this
permission shall be submitted with the Site Plan and Traffic Control Plan to
the Department of Community Development.



         (f)   Hours of operation are limited to the hours
between sunrise and sunset;



         (g)   Trash receptacles shall be provided during each
event;



         (h)   The property shall be free and clear of litter
and/or trash at the end of each event;



         (i)   Any high noise activity, such as amplified
auctioneering, entertainment, or woodworking, must occur within an enclosed
building.



      (11)   Mortuaries, crematory, funeral parlors, and
columbariums.



      (12)   Multiple food trucks on one property.



('80 Code, App. A, § 111)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2504, passed
9-17-1990; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O96-55, passed 6-5-1996; Ord.
O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2001-77, passed 9-19-2001; Ord. O2002-64,
passed 11-26-2002; Ord. O2003-40, passed 9-3-2003; Ord. O2004-71, passed
12-1-2004; Ord. O2012-22, passed 11-21-2012; Ord. O2013-02, passed 1-16-2013;
Ord. O2013-39, passed 5-15-2013; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (F)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area and location.



         (a)   The minimum area for the General Commercial
District shall be eight acres. Any lot, parcel or tract of land less than
eight acres may be considered for rezoning if it adjoins an existing General
Commercial or Industrial Zoning District, and meets the minimum lot area
requirements as specified herein.



         (b)   The minimum lot area within the General Commercial
District shall be 12,000 square feet; provided, however, that any lot, parcel
or tract of land meeting this minimum area and developed as a unit wherein
common parking and points of access guaranteed by recorded agreement, may
then be further divided into lots or parcels which are less than this minimum
specified area, in conformance with Chapter 153 of this title.



         (c)   The location of any General Commercial (B-2)
District shall be restricted to property which has access to and frontage on
a collector or an arterial street as classified by the General Plan, as
amended, or property which is contiguous to a commercial zoning district
which meets this requirement.



      (2)   Building heights.  The maximum building height shall
not exceed five stories or 75 feet, subject to the exceptions as specified in
§ 154-15.03 of this chapter.



      (3)   Yards.



         (a)   All buildings, including any accessory structures
shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any public or private street
right-of-way line; provided, however, such setbacks shall be increased to a
minimum of 20 feet for any lot or parcel located within the same block on the
same street as a residential zoning district.



         (b)   A minimum landscaped building and parking setback
of 20 feet shall be required from any side or rear property line shared with
a residential zoning district, except such required setback(s) may be reduced
to five feet in width when the commercial property is developed with
buildings and/or structures containing no more than 5,000 square feet gross
floor area.



         (c)   Any required yard fronting on a public nor private
street right-of-way shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this
chapter and shall not be used for parking, loading, maneuvering aisle or
product display.



      (4)   Noise limitations.  Refer to the noise limitation
standards delineated in § 154-15.11 herein.



      (5)   Screening.  Any lot located adjacent to a residential
zoning district shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high masonry wall.
The location of any wall or fence, whether provided to meet the requirements
of this chapter or provided voluntarily, shall comply with any required
street yard setback specified herein. In addition, for any use wherein
vehicles, machinery or equipment is serviced or repaired, all service bays
shall be oriented in such fashion that the door openings shall not be visible
from any adjoining street, and further, that any yard area where such items
may be kept awaiting repair, shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high
solid wall.



      (6)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in the manner specified in Article 16 of this chapter.



      (7)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
arranged and located as to direct the light away from any public or private
street right-of-way or adjoining residential district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 111)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2687, passed
1-4-1995; Ord. O96-24, passed 3-6-1996; Ord. O96-55, passed 6-5-1996; Ord.
O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2014-20,
passed 8-27-2014)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-08.05  Business Park District (BP).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the Business Park District
is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare within the
district by:



      (1)   Creating a cohesive, identifiable visual character in a
business park setting through the use of high quality design treatments,
architectural features and aesthetics;



      (2)   Ensuring that proposed development incorporates high
quality materials, high standards of construction and design compatibility
with the character of existing development in the vicinity;



      (3)   Requiring site development which best utilizes the
district’s location, surroundings and visibility from public roads and
areas;



      (4)   Minimizing conflicts between pedestrians and
automobiles, creating parking areas which are unobtrusive, and which maintain
efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation;



      (5)   Providing for convenient and safe pedestrian and bicycle
access to and within all development in the district;



      (6)   Providing landscaping which enhances both on-site and
off-site development; and



      (7)   Providing a consistent and cohesive design element that
enhances the land uses by applying the Aesthetic Overlay (AO) District in
conjunction with the Business Park District.



('80 Code, App. A, § 112)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2001-76, passed 9-19-2001)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Manufacturing.  Assembly or fabrication of materials or
substances that does not involve intensive mechanical or chemical
transformation or processing of said materials or substances;



      (2)   Communications.



         (a)   Telephone communications;



         (b)   Telegraph and other message communications;



         (c)   Radio and television broadcasting stations;



         (d)   Cable and other pay television services;



         (e)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal
wireless communication facilities in accordance with Article 19 herein are
permitted as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses
only. A roof-mounted personal wireless communication facility is permitted on
a commercial building or a mixed-use building which is primarily
nonresidential (75% of the use is nonresidential).



            1.   Wall strapping of a personal wireless
communications facility is not permitted.



            2.   Personal wireless communication facilities
are not permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses.



            3.   The use of lattice tower structures for any
personal wireless communication facility is not permitted.



         (f)   Communications services, not elsewhere classified.



      (3)   Wholesale trade.  Except the following:



         (a)   Uses requiring exterior trade or storage; and



         (b)   Trade and distribution of beer, wine and distilled
alcoholic beverages.



      (4)   Retail trade.  Retail trade shall be permitted outside
the 70 db noise contour. Retail uses within 500 feet of a residential
district requires a conditional use permit;



      (5)   Services.



         (a)   Auxiliary establishments, such as central
administrative offices, as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, 1987;



         (b)   Business services;



         (c)   Medical and dental laboratories;



         (d)   Legal services;



         (e)   Child day care services;



         (f)   Motion picture production, distribution and allied
services;



         (g)   Research, development and testing services;



         (h)   Junior colleges (SIC 6112);



         (i)   Colleges, universities and professional schools
(SIC 6113);



         (j)   Business schools and computer and management
training (SIC 6114);



         (k)   Technical and trade schools (SIC 6115); and



         (l)   Other schools and instruction (SIC 6116).



      (6)   Exterior trade and storage.  Exterior trade and storage
of goods, products and materials is prohibited;



      (7)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 112)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2001-76, passed 9-19-2001;
Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2003-01, passed 1-15-2003; Ord.
O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and submittal
of a site plan to an approval thereof by the Planning Commission (see §
154-03.07):



      (1)   Retail trade.  Retail trade that is located within 500
feet of any residential district; and



      (2)   Eating and drinking places.  Eating places, except
drive-through facilities.



('80 Code, App. A, § 112)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2001-76, passed 9-19-2001)



   (D)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area and location.



         (a)   Minimum district area:.  Thirty acres for the
Business Park District;



         (b)   Minimum lot area.  Twenty thousand square feet
within the Business Park District;



         (c)   Location of any Business Park District.  Shall be
restricted to lots which have direct access to or frontage on a collector or
higher classification of street as classified by the circulation element of
the General Plan, as amended; and



         (d)   Aesthetic Overlay District.  All properties zoned
or identified in the General Plan as Business Park (BP) shall be subject to
the requirements of the Aesthetic Overlay District.



      (2)   Building heights.  No building or structure height
shall exceed 75 feet.



      (3)   Lot coverage.  No building(s) on any lot shall occupy
over 60% of the area of said lot.



      (4)   Setback building line.



         (a)   Street setback building line.  All buildings and
structures shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any public or private
street right-of-way line. Parking areas, loading areas and driveways shall be
setback a minimum of 15 feet from any public or private street right-of-way
line.



         (b)   Interior side setback building line.  All
buildings and structures (including parking areas, loading areas and
driveways) shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any side property
line. If attached buildings are proposed, no setback from the attached side
is required.



         (c)   Rear setback building line.  All buildings and
structures (including parking areas, loading areas and driveways) shall be
set back a minimum of ten feet from any rear property line.



         (d)   Landscaping.  Any required yard, and a minimum of
5% of off-street parking lots containing 20 or more spaces shall be
landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



         (e)   Parking structures.  Covered parking structures
shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from any public street right-of-way
line.



      (5)   Screening.  Any lot line located adjacent to a
residential zoning district shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high
masonry wall. The location of any wall or fence, whether provided to meet the
requirements of this code or provided voluntarily, shall be constructed on
the interior side and rear lot lines, and shall comply with any required
street yard setbacks or visibility triangles as specified herein.



      (6)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in the manner specified in Article 16 of this chapter.



      (7)   Lighting.



         (a)   All exterior lighting fixtures shall be arranged
and located so as to minimize off-site illumination and direct the light away
from any public or private street right-of-way; or from any adjoining
residential district.



         (b)   All exterior lighting shall be approved as
required in the Aesthetic Overlay District. Lighting shall be in accordance
with Article 18 of this chapter.



      (8)   Landscaping.  All landscaping shall be in accordance
with Article 20 of this chapter.



      (9)   Signs.  All signs shall be in accordance with the
Aesthetic Overlay District and Article 17 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 112)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2001-76, passed 9-19-2001; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010) 
Penalty, see § 154-999



Article 09 - Industrial Zoning Districts



§ 154-09.01  Industrial Park District (I-P).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purposes of the Industrial Park (I-P)
Zoning District are to accommodate office, research, fabrication and
processing activities in a campus setting; to provide employment
opportunities in close proximity to residential areas; and to minimize
conflicts with neighboring land uses.



('80 Code, App. A, § 120)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Business, industrial or scientific research centers;
product development and testing laboratories; training centers;



      (2)   Assembling or fabrication of products or articles;
provided, however, that such production does not involve transforming any
material from a raw or natural state to a form suitable for fabrication;



      (3)   General offices, including medical offices and
laboratories;



      (4)   New freestanding monopoles or lattice towers and
replacements (see § 154-19.04) are permitted as principal use that is not
within 300 feet of a residential use or zone, arterial street, state or
federal highway, a designated scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified
in the transportation element of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future
or existing park area as identified in the parks and recreation element of
the City of Yuma General Plan; and



      (5)   Community garden.



(Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Retail sales which are clearly incidental to the
principal use; provided, however, that the area devoted to the retail
activity shall not exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the principal use;



      (2)   Storage activities which are clearly incidental to the
principal use, provided, however, that the area devoted to storage shall not
exceed 40% of the gross floor area of the principal use;



      (3)   Attached living quarters for a caretaker, watchperson or
operator employed on the premises and may include the immediate family;



      (4)   New freestanding monopoles or lattice towers and
replacements (see § 154-19.04) are permitted as an accessory use to a
legally established industrial use that is not within 300 feet of a
residential use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway, a
designated scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified in the
transportation element of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future or
existing park area as identified in the parks and recreation element of the
City of Yuma General Plan;



      (5)   Roof-mounted, wall-mounted and concealed/disguised
personal wireless communication facilities in accordance with Article 19
herein are permitted as an accessory use for a legally established principal
use. Wall strapping is permitted for poles that are two inches or less in
diameter and lattice towers that are less than 24 inches in diameter as
circumscribed around the outside of the support poles;



      (6)   Temporary (see § 154-19.05) placement of a mobile
monopole unit is permitted for the purposes of network capacity testing and
siting;



      (7)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses;



      (8)   The use of lattice tower structures for personal
wireless communication facilities is permitted; and



      (9)   Food truck.



('80 Code, App. A, § 120)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord.
O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (D)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Food truck.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (E)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   Any use permitted herein within 300 feet from any
residential zoning district shall be subject to the conditional use
requirements of this chapter;



      (2)   Retail sales directly related to the principal use which
exceed 10% of the gross floor area of the principal use, provided however,
that in no event shall the retail activity exceed 25% of the gross floor area;



      (3)   Wholesale distributors and supply;



      (4)   Detached living quarters for a caretaker, watchperson or
operator employed on the premises, and may include the immediate family;



      (5)   Trade schools, training centers and other educational
facilities where on-premises living accommodations are to be provided;



      (6)   Restaurants; provided however, that drive-in carry-out
facilities shall be prohibited;



      (7)   Hospitals, convalescent homes, other health care
facilities; provided however, that residential family care or group
facilities shall be prohibited;



      (8)   Animal hospitals, including provisions for boarding and
lodging; provided however, there shall be no outdoor kennels and that all
animal facilities shall be within an enclosed building;



      (9)   Any use which requires a state or federal agency permit,
license or other type of certification for the use or handling of dangerous
materials;



      (10)   Any freestanding monopole or lattice tower (see §
154-19.04) that meets the principal or accessory use criteria for this
industrial zoning district but is located within 300 feet of any residential
use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway, a designated
scenic/historic or gateway route (as identified in the transportation element
of the City of Yuma General Plan), or a future or existing park area as
identified in the parks and recreation element of the City of Yuma General
Plan shall require a conditional use permit; and



      (11)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities.



('80 Code, App. A, § 120)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. 2523, passed 6-5-1991; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (F)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area.



         (a)   The minimum area for the Industrial Park District
shall be four acres. A lot, parcel or tract of land less than four acres may
be rezoned if it adjoins an existing Industrial Park District of four acres
or more, and meets the minimum lot area requirements as specified herein.



         (b)   The minimum lot area within any Industrial Park
District shall be 35,000 square feet.



      (2)   Building requirements.



         (a)   Any use allowed herein including incidental
storage shall take place within an enclosed building.



         (b)   All buildings shall be designed and constructed so
that no odor, dust, noise, vibration, smoke, heat, glare, noxious gas, radio
communication interference, radiation or other emission shall occur outside
the building.



         (c)   Maximum lot coverage including all covered
structures shall not exceed 60%.



         (d)   Maximum building height shall not exceed three
stories or 40 feet, subject to the exceptions as specified in § 154-15.03.



      (3)   Yards.



         (a)   All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance
of 30 feet from any public or private street right-of-way line.



         (b)   All buildings shall be a minimum distance of 75
feet from any property line shared with any residential zoning district.



         (c)   Required yards fronting on a public or private
street shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter and
shall not be used for parking, loading or product display.



      (4)   Screening.  All activities adjacent to a residential
district shall be screened by a minimum six-foot high solid masonry wall or a
permanently maintained dense vegetation screen; provided however, that said
walls or screening shall not be located in any required yard adjacent to a
public or private street.



      (5)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in compliance with Article 16 of this chapter.



      (6)   Lighting.  Lighting all exterior lighting fixtures
shall be arranged and located so as to direct the light away from any public
or private street or adjoining residential district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 120)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)  Penalty, see §
154-999



§ 154-09.02  Light Industrial District (L-I).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purposes of the Light Industrial
(L-I) Zoning District are to accommodate light industrial uses which are not
likely to create conditions of smoke, noise, odor; dust to the detriment of
adjoining properties; to ensure accessibility to major transportation routes
for the movement of materials, products and employees; and to protect
industrial districts from incompatible uses of land by prohibiting the use of
such areas for new residential development.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Business, industrial or scientific research centers;
product development and testing laboratories;



      (2)   Assembling or fabrication of products or articles;
provided, however, that such production does not involve transforming any
material from a raw or natural state to a form suitable for fabrication;



      (3)   Warehousing, storage or collection of products or
materials;



      (4)   Wholesaling;



      (5)   New freestanding monopoles or lattice towers and
replacements (see § 154-19.04) are permitted as principal use that is not
within 300 feet of a residential use or zone, arterial street, state or
federal highway, a designated scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified
in the transportation element of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future
or existing park area as identified in the parks and recreation element of
the City of Yuma General Plan;



      (6)   Job training and vocational rehabilitation services;



      (7)   Offices with adjacent storage yards, for construction
contractors, subcontractors, suppliers and engineering services;



      (8)   For master plat industrial developments greater than 40
acres and consisting of multiple industrial uses, supporting commercial
services whose primary purpose is to serve businesses and employees in the
industrial development, shall be permitted in multi-tenant buildings.
Services shall not exceed 50% of the floor area of any multi-tenant building.
No drive-thru services will be allowed. Supporting services may consist of
the following:



         (a)   Eating establishments;



         (b)   Banking services;



         (c)   Shipping, printing, copying and binding services;



         (d)   Exercise facilities; and



         (e)   Uses which meet the intent of this subsection as
determined by the Director of the Department of Community Development; and



      (9)   Automotive repair;



      (10)   Community garden;



      (11)   Air and water purification;



      (12)   Armored car service (NAICS 561613);



      (13)   Carpet and upholstery cleaning (NAICS 561740);



      (14)   Janitorial/cleaning services, commercial and
residential (NAICS 561720);



      (15)   Equipment repair, home and garden equipment (NAICS
811411);



      (16)   Equipment repair, commercial and industrial machinery
and equipment (NAICS 811310);



      (17)   Equipment repair, stereo and computer equipment (NAICS
811211 and 811212);



      (18)   Equipment repair, medical equipment (NAlCS 811219);



      (19)   Clothing accessories applicator and screen printing
(NAICS 313311);



      (20)   Farm supplies and services, repair and maintenance
(NAICS 811310);



      (21)   Glass repair services, window tinting and coating
services (NAICS 811122);



      (22)   Inspection services, food (NAICS 923120);



      (23)   Inspection services, homes and buildings (NAICS 541350);



      (24)   Inspection services, automotive safety (NAICS 811198);



      (25)   Inspection services, aircraft (NAICS 488190);



      (26)   Internet sales and services, warehousing and
distribution (NAICS 454111);



      (27)   Landscape planning, irrigation, lawn and garden
services (NAICS 561730);



      (28)   Packaging services (NAICS 561910);



      (29)   Pest control services (NAICS 561710);



      (30)   Restorations, commercial and residential (NAICS 236118
and 236220);



      (31)   Restorations, automotive (NAICS 811121);



      (32)   Restorations, furniture and antiques (NAICS 811121);



      (33)   Printing services; and



      (34)   Document shredding.



(Ord. O2010-11, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. O2014-19, passed 7-16-2014; Ord.
O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Living quarters for a caretaker, watchperson or operator
employed on the premises and may include the immediate family;



      (2)   New freestanding monopoles or lattice towers and
replacements (see § 154-19.04) are permitted as an accessory use to a
legally established industrial use that is not within 300 feet of a
residential use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway, a
designated scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified in the
transportation element of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future or
existing park area as identified in the parks and recreation element of the
City of Yuma General Plan;



      (3)   Roof-mounted, wall-mounted and concealed/disguised
personal wireless communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19
herein, are permitted as an accessory use for a legally established principal
use. Wall strapping is permitted for poles that are two inches or less in
diameter and lattice towers that are less than 24 inches in diameter as
circumscribed around the outside of the support poles;



      (4)   Temporary (see § 154-19.05) placement of a mobile
monopole unit is permitted for the purposes of network capacity testing and
siting;



      (5)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses;



      (6)   The use of lattice tower structures for personal
wireless communication facilities is permitted;



      (7)   Food truck; and



      (8)   Retail sale of such goods and materials which are
fabricated or assembled on the premises; provided however, such activity is
clearly incidental to a principal industrial or service use as permitted
herein: and further provided that the area devoted to such retail sale shall
not exceed 20% of the gross floor area of the principal use.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord.
O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014; Ord. O2015-022,
passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Food truck.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (E)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   Dog kennels;



      (2)   Any use which requires a state or federal agency permit,
license or other type of certification for the use or handling of dangerous
materials;



      (3)   Any use allowed in the General Commercial (B-2)
District, except any type of medical facility;



      (4)   Other uses that meet the purpose and development
standards as specified herein;



      (5)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (6)   Any freestanding monopole or lattice tower (see §
154-19.04) that meets the principal or accessory use criteria for this
industrial zoning district but is located within 300 feet of any residential
use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway, a designated
scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified in the transportation element
of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future or existing park area as
identified in the parks and recreation element of the City of Yuma General
Plan shall require a conditional use permit; and



      (7)   Large composting site.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 2523, passed 6-5-1991; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014; Ord. O2019-001,
passed 1-16-2019)



   (F)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards, and further provided, that no use or activity shall create noise,
odor, dust, vibration, heat, smoke, glare, noxious gas, radio communication
interference or other emission beyond the property lines of the site.



      (1)   Area and location.



         (a)   Minimum area.  The minimum area for the Light
Industrial District shall be four acres. A lot, parcel or tract of land less
than four acres may be rezoned if it adjoins an existing industrial district
of four acres or more, and meets the minimum required lot area specified
herein.



         (b)   Minimum lot area.  The minimum lot area within
any Light Industrial District shall be 20,000 square feet, except that
existing lots of record zoned as industrial prior to the effective date of
this chapter may be exempt from this area requirement.



         (c)   Distance from residential zoning district.  Any
industrial building or activity as may be permitted in the Light Industrial
Zoning District shall be located a minimum distance of 600 feet from any
residential zoning district and residential use, unless separated from said
residential district and use by an arterial street, a state or federal
highway, railroad right-of-way in use as such, or a designated truck route.



         (d)   Exception.  An industrial building or activity
may be located less than 600 feet from a residential zoning district and
residential use provided such building or activity is granted a conditional
use by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (e)   Location.  The location of any Light Industrial
District shall be restricted to property which has access to and frontage on
a major or minor arterial street as classified by the transportation element
of the Yuma General Plan, or which gains access by a designated truck route
as defined by this code, or which is contiguous to an industrial zoning
district which meets either of these requirements.



(Ord. O2015-022, passed 4-15-2015)



      (2)   Yards.



         (a)   All buildings shall be set back a minimum distance
of 20 feet from any public or private street right-of-way.



         (b)   Required yards fronting on any public or private
street shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter and
shall not be used for parking, loading or product display



      (3)   Screening.  All activities not within an enclosed
building shall be screened by a minimum six foot high solid wall or fence,
provided, however, that said walls shall not be located in any required yard;
and further provided, that no materials shall be stored in such a manner as
to project or be visible above the wall or fence when viewed from any public
street right-of-way.



      (4)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall comply with Article 16 of this chapter.



      (5)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
arranged and located so as to direct the light away from any public or
private street.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)  Penalty, see §
154-999



§ 154-09.03  Heavy Industrial District (H-I).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purposes of the Heavy Industrial
(H-I) Zoning District are to provide adequate space for industrial operations
and related activities so that the economic base of the city may be
strengthened and employment opportunities expanded; and to protect
residential and commercial districts by locating those industrial uses which
may create noise, smoke, odor, dust or other objectionable influences in
appropriate areas.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121.5)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984)



   (B)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Any use allowed in the Light Industrial District;



      (2)   Military installations and support facilities;



      (3)   Airports and related activities, including heliports;



      (4)   Aircraft-related uses including air transport of goods,
materials or passengers;



      (5)   New freestanding monopoles or lattice towers and
replacements (see § 154-19.04) are permitted as an accessory use to a
legally established industrial use or as a permitted principal use that is
not within 300 feet of a residential use or zone, arterial street, state or
federal highway, a designated scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified
in the transportation element of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future
or existing park area as identified in the parks and recreation element of
the City of Yuma General Plan;



      (6)   Roof-mounted, wall-mounted and concealed/disguised
personal wireless communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19
herein, are permitted as an accessory use for a legally established principal
use. Wall strapping is permitted for poles that are two inches or less in
diameter and lattice towers that are less than 24 inches in diameter as
circumscribed around the outside of the support poles;



      (7)   Temporary (see § 154-19.05) placement of a mobile
monopole unit is permitted for the purposes of network capacity testing and
siting;



      (8)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses;



      (9)   The use of lattice tower structures for personal
wireless communication facilities is permitted; and



      (10)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121.5)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord.
O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (C)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Food truck.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (D)   Interim uses.



      (1)   Food truck.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



   (E)   Conditional uses.  Any of the following uses may be
established or operated as a conditional use upon application and approval by
the Planning and Zoning Commission:



      (1)   Utility plants;



      (2)   Any use allowed in the General Commercial (B-2)
District, except medical care facilities;



      (3)   Extraction, processing or packing of raw materials,
including agricultural products;



      (4)   Any use which requires a state or federal agency permit,
license or other type of certification for the use or handling of dangerous
materials;



      (5)   Other uses that meet the purpose and development
standards as specified herein;



      (6)   Religious institutions including related buildings and
activities;



      (7)   Any freestanding monopole or lattice tower (see §
154-19.04) that meets the principal or accessory use criteria for this
industrial zoning district but is located within 300 feet of any residential
use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway, a designated
scenic/historic or gateway route, as identified in the transportation element
of the City of Yuma General Plan, or a future or existing park area as
identified in the parks and recreation element of the City of Yuma General
Plan shall require a conditional use permit; and



      (8)   Large composting site.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121.5)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 2523, passed 6-5-1991; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014; Ord. O2019-001,
passed 1-16-2019)



   (F)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area and location.



         (a)   The minimum area for the Heavy Industrial (H-I)
District shall be 20 acres. A lot, parcel, or tract of land less than 20
acres may be rezoned if it adjoins an existing Heavy Industrial District of
20 acres or more, and meets the minimum required lot area specified herein.



         (b)   The minimum lot area within any Heavy Industrial
District shall be 20,000 square feet, except that existing lots of record
zoned as Heavy Industrial prior to the effective date of this chapter may be
exempt from this area requirement.



         (c)   Any industrial building or activity as may be
permitted in the Heavy Industrial Zoning District shall be located a minimum
distance of 600 feet from any residential zoning district. Exception:  an
industrial building or activity may be located less than 600 feet from a
residential zoning district provided such building or activity is granted a
conditional use by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



         (d)   The location of any Heavy Industrial District
shall be restricted to property which has access to and frontage on a major
or minor arterial street as classified by the transportation element of the
Yuma General Plan, or which gains access by a designated truck route as
defined by this code, or which is contiguous to an industrial zoning district
which meets either of these requirements.



      (2)   Yards.



         (a)   Any building, outdoor area, or portion thereof
where the public may be received, shall be set back a minimum distance of 20
feet from any public or private street right-of-way.



         (b)   Required yards fronting on any public or private
street shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of this chapter and
shall not be used for parking, loading or product display.



      (3)   Screening.  All activities not within an enclosed
building shall be enclosed by a minimum six foot high security fence,
provided, however, that any dismantling, salvage or wrecking yards shall be
screened by a solid fence or wall, and no materials shall be stored in such a
manner as to project or be visible above the wall or fence when viewed from
any public street right-of-way.



      (4)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall comply with Article 16 of this chapter.



      (5)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
arranged and located so as to direct the light away from any public or
private street.



('80 Code, App. A, § 121.5)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1979, passed
1-7-1981; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)  Penalty, see §
154-999



Article 10 - Old Town Zoning District



§ 154-10.01  Old Town District (OT).



   (A)   Purpose.  The Old Town (OT) District is intended to be a
retail, business and government center with a special emphasis on tourism and
historic preservation, due to the unique qualities present in the Old Town
(OT) District that set it apart from all other districts in the city. In this
district, commercial establishments are intended to serve the residents of
the city, as well as visitors to the area. The priority of this district is
to establish and support a mixture of commercial, cultural, governmental and
residential uses that will help to ensure a lively pedestrian-oriented
district.  The Old Town District is designated as an Entertainment District
as defined by § A.R.S. 4-207(D)(2).



('80 Code, App. A, § 95)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-073, passed
10-18-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  The Old Town (OT) District shall be
applicable to those historic downtown business and government centers and
surrounding support uses established in the early history of the city.



('80 Code, App. A, § 95)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-073, passed
10-18-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.  The following uses as defined in
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (1987), (Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget), or in § 154-01.07 of this
chapter shall be permitted as a matter of right in the Old Town (OT) District:



      (1)   Local and suburban passenger transportation (SIC 411);



      (2)   Taxicabs (SIC 412) and horse drawn carriages and other
non-motorized conveyances;



      (3)   Intercity and rural bus transportation (SIC 413);



      (4)   Bus charter service (SIC 414);



      (5)   Terminal and service facilities for motor vehicle
passenger transportation (SIC 417);



      (6)   United States postal service (SIC 431);



      (7)   Arrangement of passenger transportation (including
travel agencies and tour operators)  (SIC 472);



      (8)   Water supply (SIC 494);



      (9)   Paint, glass and wallpaper stores (SIC 523);



      (10)   General merchandise stores (SIC 53);



      (11)   Food stores (SIC 54);



      (12)   Apparel and accessory stores (SIC 56);



      (13)   Home furniture, furnishings and equipment stores (SIC
57);



      (14)   Eating and drinking places (including outdoor dining)
(SIC 58);



      (15)   Miscellaneous retail (SIC 59, except fuel dealers, SIC
598, shall not be permitted);



      (16)   Depository institutions (SIC 60);



      (17)   Nondepository credit institutions (SIC 61);



      (18)   Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges and
services (SIC 62);



      (19)   Insurance carriers (SIC 63);



      (20)   Insurance agents, brokers and service (SIC 64);



      (21)   Real estate (SIC 65);



      (22)   Holding and other investment offices (SIC 67);



      (23)   Hotels and motels (including bed and breakfast inns and
conference facilities)  (SIC 701);



      (24)   Rooming and boarding houses (SIC 702);



      (25)   Membership based lodging (SIC 704);



      (26)   Laundry, cleaning and garment services (SIC 721;
excluding industrial launderers SIC 7218);



      (27)   Photographic studios, portrait (SIC 722);



      (28)   Beauty shops (SIC 723);



      (29)   Barber shops (SIC 724);



      (30)   Shoe repair shops and shoe shine parlors (SIC 725);



      (31)   Tax return preparation services (SIC 7291);



      (32)   Miscellaneous personal services (SIC 7299);



      (33)   Advertising agencies (SIC 7311);



      (34)   Consumer credit reporting agencies, mercantile
reporting agencies and adjustment and collection agencies (SIC 732);



      (35)   Mailing, reproduction, commercial art and photography
and stenographic services (SIC 733);



      (36)   Personnel supply services (SIC 736);



      (37)   Computer programming, data processing and other
computer related services (SIC 737);



      (38)   Passenger car rental (SIC 7514);



      (39)   Automobile parking (temporary) (SIC 7521);



      (40)   Motion picture theaters (except drive-in) (SIC 7832);



      (41)   Video tape rental (SIC 784);



      (42)   Amusement and recreation services (including
auditoriums, performing arts centers and physical fitness facilities)  (SIC
79);



      (43)   Medical and dental offices (SIC 801 through 804);



      (44)   Legal services (SIC 81);



      (45)   Individual and family social services (SIC 8322);



      (46)   Child day care services (SIC 835);



      (47)   Residential care (SIC 836);



      (48)   Social services (not elsewhere classified) (SIC 839);



      (49)   Museums, art galleries and botanical and zoological
gardens (SIC 84);



      (50)   Engineering, accounting, research, management and
related services (including architects, designers, landscape architects and
urban planners) (SIC 87);



      (51)   Public administration (SIC 91 through 97);



      (52)   Single-family dwellings;



      (53)   Duplex dwellings;



      (54)   Multiple-family dwellings;



      (55)   Planned unit developments;



      (56)   Artist’s and crafters studios and lofts;



      (57)   Itinerant uses;



      (58)   Correction centers;



      (59)   Visitor’s centers;



      (60)   Other uses as approved by the Zoning Administrator
consistent with the purpose of the Old Town (OT) District;



      (61)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities in accordance with Article 19 herein are permitted
as an accessory use for legally established nonresidential uses only;



      (62)   A roof-mounted (see § 154-19.06) personal wireless
communication facility is permitted on a commercial building or a mixed-use
building which is primarily nonresidential (75% of the use is nonresidential);



      (63)   The following permitted uses are allowed in combination
with and may be contained in the same unit as a residential use as a
live/work space:



         (a)   Holding and other investment offices (SIC 67);



         (b)   Photographic studio, portrait (SIC 722);



         (c)   Tax return preparation services (SIC 7291);



         (d)   Commercial art and photography and stenographic
services listed under SIC 733 (mailing and reproduction services under this
SIC are not included);



         (e)   Computer programming, data processing and other
computer related services (SIC 737);



         (f)   Legal services (SIC 81);



         (g)   Engineering, accounting, research, management and
related services (including architects, designers, landscape architects and
urban planners)  (SIC 87); and



         (h)   Artist’s and crafter’s studios and lofts.



      (64)   Farmers Markets on the Main Street right-of-way as
approved through the City of Yuma special event permit process.



      (65)   Farmers Markets at the Depot State Historic Park as
approved through the City of Yuma Heritage Area.



      (66)   Streets fairs on Main Street as approved through the
City of Yuma Special Event Permit process.



      (67)   Streets fairs on Madison Avenue as approved through the
City of Yuma Special Event Permit process.



      (68)   All other principal permitted uses within the Old Town
District not listed above may be contained within the same building as
residential units (see live/work building) within the Old Town District but
must have separate entrances and be independent from the residential use.
Required parking spaces are determined by the gross square footage attributed
to each use as further defined in this section and Article 16.



      (69)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 95)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-073, passed
10-18-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002;
Ord. O2004-52, passed 8-4-2004; O2012-22, passed 11-21-12; Ord. O2013-08,
passed 2-20-2013; Ord. O2013-37, passed 8-7-2013; Ord. O-2015-021, passed
4-15-2015)



   (D)   Conditional uses.  The following uses shall only be permitted
upon the granting of a conditional use permit and compliance with all
conditions as required therein:



      (1)   Drive-through facilities;



      (2)   Gasoline service stations (SIC 554);



      (3)   Carwashes (SIC 7542);



      (4)   Educational services (SIC 82);



      (5)   Job training and vocational rehabilitation services (SIC
833);



      (6)   Religious organizations (SIC 8661);



      (7)   Outdoor sales (except outdoor eating and drinking places
and itinerant uses which are principal permitted uses);



      (8)   Utility installations;



      (9)   Membership organizations (SIC 86); and



      (10)   Other uses as approved by the Zoning Administrator
which further the purpose of the Old Town (OT) District.



('80 Code, App. A, § 95)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-073, passed
10-18-1995; Ord. O2013-08, passed 2-20-2013)



   (E)   Prohibited uses.



      (1)   Any adult oriented business as defined by § 154-01.07
shall be prohibited in the Old Town (OT) District;



      (2)   Wall strapping of a personal wireless communications
facility is not permitted;



      (3)   Personal wireless communication facilities are not
permitted in conjunction with legal nonconforming uses; and



      (4)   The use of lattice tower structures for any personal
wireless communication facility is not permitted.



('80 Code, App. A, § 95)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-073, passed
10-18-1995; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Property development standards.  In addition to the
regulations and requirements contained in other sections of this chapter, the
following minimum property development standards apply to all land and
buildings in the Old Town (OT) District as may be designated on the official
zoning map.



      (1)   Lot size.  The minimum lot size in the Old Town (OT)
District shall be 1,500 square feet.



      (2)   Lot width.  The minimum lot width in the Old Town (OT)
District shall be 15 feet.



      (3)   Lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage in the Old Town
(OT) District shall be 100%.



      (4)   Lot area.  Projects with a residential component are
required to provide a minimum of 2,000 square feet of lot area per
residential unit for subdivisions or multi-family units on any project less
than two acres in size and 1,000 square feet of lot area per residential unit
for subdivisions or multi-family units on land equal to or greater than two
acres.



      (5)   Setbacks.  The following is a list of the minimum yard
setbacks for the Old Town (OT) District:



         (a)   Minimum front yard building setback.  Zero feet;



         (b)   Minimum side yard building setback.  Zero feet;



         (c)   Minimum rear yard building setback.  Zero feet;



         (d)   Minimum street side yard building setback.  Zero
feet;



         (e)   Minimum on-site landscape setback to on-site
parking.  Three feet; and



         (f)   Note.  No structures shall be constructed within
a required visibility triangle.



      (6)   Building height.  Except as provided in § 154-15.03 of
this chapter, the maximum building height shall be 75 feet. The minimum
building height in the Old Town (OT) District shall be 16 feet. The maximum
building height shall be reduced to 20 feet (one story maximum) for all land
located within 60 feet of any single-family residential district located on
the same side of a street.



      (7)   Landscaping and irrigation.  No landscaping or
irrigation materials required by this subchapter shall be installed without a
permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. All landscaping and irrigation
design plans for property within the Old Town (OT) District shall be
submitted for review and approved by the Zoning Administrator. The Design and
Historic Review Commission shall hear all appeals of such decisions made by
the Zoning Administrator for property in the Old Town (OT) District.
Landscaping and irrigation shall be provided as follows:



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



         (a)   For all development, landscaping shall be provided
as required in Article 20 of this chapter;



         (b)   Street landscape setbacks adjacent to on-site
required and provided parking shall include the following items:



            1.   A mixture of minimum size five-gallon shrubs
and vegetative ground cover;



            2.   One minimum size 24-inch box tree at minimum
50 foot intervals; and



            3.   A three foot to four foot high wrought iron
fence or fence of similar open design.



         (c)   Automatic irrigation system.



      (8)   Off-street parking.  Off-street parking in the Old Town
(OT) District shall be provided in accordance with Article 16 of this
chapter, off-street parking and loading regulations and further provided as
follows:



         (a)   For buildings erected with building permits issued
on or before November 1, 1995, no off-street parking shall be required;



         (b)   For buildings containing 5,000 square feet or less
gross floor area, erected with building permits issued after November 1,
1995, no off-street parking shall be required; and



         (c)   For buildings containing more than 5,000 square
feet gross floor area, erected with building permits issued after November 1,
1995, off-street parking shall be provided as required by Article 16 of this
chapter.



      (9)   Encroachments.  Building encroachments, including
outdoor dining areas, planter boxes, benches, landscape features,
architectural features, awnings, arcades, columns, building floors above the
first floor, signs and lighting may encroach into any portion of the public
right-of-way not used for vehicular or pedestrian circulation upon submittal
of detailed plans for receipt of administrative approval by the Zoning
Administrator and issuance of an encroachment permit by the City Engineer.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-10.02  Project Review.



   (A)   Applicability.  Property located in the Old Town (OT)
District, but not also located in the Historic Overlay District, shall
automatically be included within the Aesthetic Overlay (AO) District. The
City Design and Historic Review Commission shall review any proposed
development, alteration or demolition permit for property located in the Old
Town (OT) District.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (B)   General requirements.  The following design guidelines are
used in the review of designs within the Old Town (OT) District and contain
important considerations for projects under review by the Design and Historic
Review Commission:



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



      (1)   The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties with Guidelines for Preserving,
Rehabilitating and Reconstructing Historic Buildings (1995), and The
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties with Guidelines for the Treatment of Cultural Landscapes (1996)
are applied to the review of any properties that are within the Historic
District Overlay and the Old Town (OT) District;



      (2)   Main Street Historic District Design Guidelines, as
prepared by the Urban Design Studio. These guidelines pertain to those
properties located within the Yuma Main Street National Historic District;



      (3)   City of Yuma Downtown Kit of Parts, as prepared by EDAW
and Deardorff Design Resources, July 7, 2000. This guideline contains
elements that are utilized in the Old Town (OT) District rights-of-way and
has preferences for a variety of elements and should be consulted for all
items to be placed in or adjacent to the Old Town (OT) District rights-of-way;



      (4)   Yuma Crossing Design Guidelines, as prepared by Wayne
Donaldson Architects, June 2, 2003. These design guidelines apply to those
properties located between 4th Avenue, Penitentiary Avenue, the Colorado
River and 1st Street; and



      (5)   Aesthetic Overlay (AO) District Design Guidelines, as
presented within the creation of the Aesthetic Overlay Zoning District,
Planning and Zoning Case Z93-2 and adopted by City Ordinance No. 2263 on July
20, 1994. These guidelines pertain to all properties within the Old Town (OT)
District which are not also located within the Historic (H) Overlay District.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-10.03  Signage Regulations.



   (A)   General regulations.  All signs within the Old Town (OT)
District are to be designed and installed in conformance with the following
district permitted signage types and sign regulations. Additionally, all
signs shall be designed and installed in conformance with the adopted Old
Town (OT) District sign guidelines. For the purpose of this chapter, certain
words and terms are defined in § 154-01.07 of this chapter. Signs shall be
installed only as follows:



      (1)   No signs shall be erected or installed unless a sign
permit is issued by the Zoning Administrator;



      (2)   Sign permits shall be required for the following
permitted types of signs; and



      (3)   Signs shall be reviewed by the Design and Historic
Review Commission for all properties in the Old Town (OT) District.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (B)   Permitted sign types.



      (1)   Under canopy signs;



      (2)   Business wall-mounted signs;



      (3)   Awning signs;



      (4)   Blade or protecting signs;



      (5)   Building address numbers;



      (6)   Marquee signs for movie and theater uses;



      (7)   Murals and supergraphics not advertising a business
specifically approved by the Design and Historic Review Commission;



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



      (8)   Permanent painted window signs, first floor limited to
20% of the window area;



      (9)   Temporary window signs, limited to 20% of the first
floor’s glass areas and to four 30-day periods per calendar year;



      (10)   Building signs containing the name of the business at
rear entrances used by customers;



      (11)   Freestanding signs for properties containing at least
300 feet of frontage and where the building is setback at least 20 feet from
the front property line; and



      (12)   Temporary “For Sale”/“For Lease” signs.



   (C)   Prohibited signs.



      (1)   Freestanding signs unless lot has over 300 feet of road
frontage and building is setback a minimum of 20 feet from road;



      (2)   Any signs above the first story (except windows);



      (3)   Roof-mounted signs;



      (4)   Animated signs, except time and temperature displays;



      (5)   Noise emitting signs;



      (6)   Rotating, moving or flashing signs;



      (7)   Light bulb strings, except holiday decorations;



      (8)   Off-site signs and billboards;



      (9)   Banners except for special events for a period of 15
days;



      (10)   Pennants, streamers and bunting, except holiday
decorations;



      (11)   Portable signs;



      (12)   Traffic sign replicas;



      (13)   Balloon signs;



      (14)   Bunting;



      (15)   Formed plastic or injection molded internally
illuminated plastic signs; and



      (16)   Pole signs.



   (D)   Sign standards.  All signs for property in the Old Town (OT)
District shall be reviewed and approved by the Design and Historic Review
Commission.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



      (1)   Wall-mounted signs.  For street level businesses, a
maximum of one square foot per linear front foot of business establishment,
to be located not higher than the lowest of the following:



         (a)   Twenty-five feet above grade;



         (b)   Bottom of the sill line of the second floor
windows; or



         (c)   Cornice line of the building.



      (2)   Permanent window signs.  On ground level, coverage
shall not exceed 20% of the total window and door area visible from the
exterior of the building; on the second and third levels, coverage shall not
exceed 30% per window (No window signs permitted above the third level).



      (3)   Awning signs.  On ground floor level; 30% maximum
coverage allowed of the total exterior surface area of each awning. On the
second floor level and above; 20% maximum coverage allowed of the total
exterior surface area of each awning.



      (4)   Projecting signs.  Allowed; maximum projection of signs
shall not exceed three feet.



      (5)   Under canopy signs.  Allowed under a canopy, roof,
covered walkway or porch; maximum size of four square feet per door entrance;
minimum of seven foot vertical clearance shall be required from pedestrian
walking grade to the bottom of the sign.



      (6)   Major tenant or building name signs.  For buildings
containing more than one story, a sign consisting of individual backlit or
nonilluminated letters identifying the major tenant of a building or the name
of the building, may be placed on the building wall near the top of the
building.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (E)   Sign examples.




Illustrative Example 1 - Types of Signs





Examples of Monument Signs

















Examples of Pedestal Signs

















Examples of Pole Signs

















Example of Other Types of Signs





                     











                     











                                    
















('80 Code, App. A, § 95)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-073, passed
10-18-1995; Ord. O96-56, passed 6-5-1996; Ord. O2001-94, passed 11-20-2001;
Ord. O2003-61, passed 11-19-2003; Ord. O2004-52, passed 8-4-2004; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



Article 11 - Historic Park District



§ 154-11.01  Historic Park District (HP).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Historic Park District (HP) is
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare within the district
by:



      (1)   Creating a cohesive, identifiable character for the
Historic Park District;



      (2)   Allowing site organization which takes best advantage of
the district’s location, surroundings and historic setting;



      (3)   Minimizing conflicts between pedestrians and automobiles
and creating convenient public parking areas which are as unobtrusive as
possible; and



      (4)   Providing for historical settings, buildings,
structures, exhibits, landscaping, trails and reenactment activities and
related uses in keeping with historical themes.



('80 Code, App. A, § 115)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-035,
passed 7-25-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  The provisions and regulations of the
Historic Park District are intended to allow the establishment, preservation
and enhancement of significant historic sites and historic reenactment
settings within the city. It is the intent of the Historic Park District to
provide development standards and permitted uses appropriate to historic
settings and limit the intrusion of contemporary development standards and
use separations which might compromise the accurate portrayals of historic
settings.



('80 Code, App. A, § 115)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-035,
passed 7-25-1995)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Public and private parks including restroom and
picnicking facilities;



      (2)   Exhibition, restoration and recreation of historic
buildings, structures and settings;



      (3)   Reenactment activities including overnight camping by
reenactor personnel;



      (4)   Animal keeping, including large animals such as horses,
mules and cattle, provided that:



         (a)   All animals are part of historic reenactments and
settings;



         (b)   All animals are housed in pens, pastures or
corrals situated at least 150 feet from adjacent privately owned property,
not located in the Historic Park District; and



         (c)   Not more than 25 large animals are kept on any one
acre of land.



      (5)   Retail sales; food and beverage sales;



      (6)   Business and light industrial uses consistent with
historic themes, such as wheel wright, blacksmith or ferry boat operations;



      (7)   Office uses consistent with the maintenance and
operation of an historic park and also office uses consistent with historical
themes;



      (8)   Storage facilities consistent with the maintenance and
operation of an historic park and also uses consistent with historic themes.
All storage shall be within enclosed buildings or shall be screened by solid
walls not less than six feet in height, unless such storage is integral to an
historic exhibit or reenactment;



      (9)   Itinerant uses;



      (10)   Permanent residences for the purpose of on-site
caretakers quarters;



      (11)   Agricultural uses consistent with historic reenactments
and settings;



      (12)   Parking and loading facilities to serve the visiting
public and employees. All public visitor parking areas shall be improved and
paved in the manner specified by Article 16 of this chapter. Parking shall
not be required for specific uses permitted listed in this section; and



      (13)   Community garden.



('80 Code, App. A, § 115)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-035,
passed 7-25-1995; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.  Accessory uses of buildings or
structures customarily incident to a use permitted by this subchapter such as
barns, corrals, stables and sheds.



('80 Code, App. A, § 115)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-035,
passed 7-25-1995)



   (E)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   The keeping of more than 25 large animals on any one
acre of land; and



      (2)   Other uses that meet the purpose and development
standards as specified herein.



('80 Code, App. A, § 115)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-035,
passed 7-25-1995)



   (F)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of this
district, all uses shall comply with the following minimum development
standards.



      (1)   Area and location.  The minimum area for the Historic
Park District shall be five acres (or smaller contiguous parcels with a total
aggregate area of five acres) and with a Master Plan of Development approved
by the City Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (2)   Building requirements.  All buildings shall conform to
an historical theme(s). All applications for building permits shall be
reviewed and approved by the City Zoning Administrator with right of appeal
to the City Design and Historic Review Commission.



      (3)   Yards.  All buildings, including accessory structures,
shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from any property line shared with a
residential zoning district. Required yard setbacks shall be landscaped as
set forth in Article 20 of this chapter and shall not be used for parking or
loading.



      (4)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting shall be arranged and
located as to direct the light away from any adjoining residential district.



      (5)   Signage.  Signage for purposes of identification and
promotion may be provided on the same premises as the use being served, and
shall be clearly incidental to such use. All signage shall comply with the
following minimum standards.



         (a)   Freestanding identification and directional
signage shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Zoning
Administrator with the right of appeal to the City Design and Historic Review
Commission.



         (b)   All signage not covered by division (F)(5)(a)
above for historic buildings, structures, exhibits or reenactment areas shall
not be subject to number, size, area or height restrictions, however shall be
of the number, size, area and height as would be appropriate to their
historical context. All such historical signage shall be subject to the
review and approval by the City Zoning Administrator with the right of appeal
to the City Design and Historic Review Commission.



      (6)   Landscaping.  The provisions of Article 20 of this
chapter shall apply only to required yard setbacks adjacent to residential
district, and to parking lots provided for use by the visiting public.



('80 Code, App. A, § 115)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. O95-035,
passed 7-25-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



Article 12 - Military Reservation District



§ 154-12.01  Military Reservation District (MR).



   (A)   Purpose.  The Military Reservation (MR) District is created
to establish an appropriate zoning district for federally owned land
controlled or owned by the Department of Defense for military purposes. The
Military Reservation District recognizes the federal government’s position
to control and utilize such land for military purposes in accordance with the
supremacy clause of the United States Constitution, and the military’s
responsibility to ensure sound stewardship of federal lands under their
control or ownership



   (B)   Applicability.  The Military Reservation (MR) District shall
be applicable to federally owned land controlled or owned by the Department
of Defense for military purposes.



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.  As determined by the federal
government and the respective federal entity utilizing such land controlled
or owned by the Department of Defense for military purposes.



   (D)   Conditional uses.  None.



   (E)   Property development standards.  None.



(Ord. O2000-36, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



Article 13 - Recreation and Open Space



§ 154-13.01  Recreation and Open Space District (RO).



   (A)   Purpose.  The purpose of the Recreation and Open Space
District is to conserve and protect lands that encompass natural resources,
features and processes and to provide for public and private recreational
parks, resorts or similar facilities. Such lands may include watercourses,
floodplains, viewsheds, natural formations, plant and wildlife habitats,
steep slopes and other environmentally sensitive areas and may also include
lands incompatible with development at the present time, possibly due to
their remote location.



(Ord. O2001-103, passed 12-19-2001)



   (B)   Applicability.  The regulations pertaining to the Recreation
and Open Space District shall be applicable within the Resort, Recreation and
Open Space land use areas designated on the land use map of the City General
Plan.



(Ord. O2001-103, passed 12-19-2001)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Undeveloped, unimproved land; public or private;



      (2)   Parks, amphitheaters, golf courses and golf driving
ranges; public;



      (3)   Agricultural production, crops; public or private;



      (4)   Fish hatcheries and preserves; public;



      (5)   Hunting and trapping, game propagation; public;



      (6)   Nature preserves and wildlife management areas; public;



      (7)   Generation, routing and distribution of public utilities;



      (8)   Individual recreation mining; private; and



      (9)   Community garden.



(Ord. O2001-103, passed 12-19-2001; Ord. O2015-021, passed 4-15-2015)



   (D)   Conditional uses.



      (1)   Single-family residences; minimum lot size:  five
acres; private;



      (2)   Agricultural production, livestock and animal
specialties; private;



      (3)   Fish hatcheries and preserves; private;



      (4)   Hunting and trapping, game propagation, wildlife
management; private;



      (5)   Metal mining (when filing of a mining claim is required);



      (6)   Coal mining;



      (7)   Oil and gas extraction;



      (8)   Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic minerals, including
sand and gravel extraction;



      (9)   Privately owned and operated resort and recreational
commercial developments, including:



         (a)   Recreational, seasonal and resort hotels;



         (b)   Concession stands and tour companies and guides
located or operating on public lands;



         (c)   Theme and amusement parks;



         (d)   Tennis, golf and sports resorts or camps;



         (e)   Water parks and slides;



         (f)   Conference centers, located within resort hotels;



         (g)   Golf courses and golf driving ranges;



         (h)   Exotic animal parks, zoos;



         (i)   Parks; and



         (j)   Amphitheaters.



      (10)   Public or private areas available for public visitation
and recreation with or without developed facilities and associated
businesses, including:



         (a)   Dude ranches;



         (b)   Horse stables, riding academies and rodeo arenas;



         (c)   Botanical gardens;



         (d)   Lakes and waterways;



         (e)   Campgrounds; and



         (f)   Off-road vehicle areas, parks or trails.



      (11)   Generation, routing and distribution of privately owned
utilities; and



      (12)   Other uses which meet the purpose, intent and
development standards as specified herein.



(Ord. O2001-103, passed 12-19-2001)



   (E)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Minimum district size.  None.



      (2)   Minimum lot size.  None for undeveloped public land and
five acres for developed public and all private lands.



      (3)   Maximum building height.  Forty feet.



      (4)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Front yard.  One hundred feet;



         (b)   Side yard.  Fifty feet; and



         (c)   Rear yard.  Fifty feet.



      (5)   Walls and fences.  Any wall or fence as may be erected
along any street line, side property line or rear property line, whether to
meet the requirements of the chapter or provided voluntarily, shall comply
with the minimum requirements for unobstructed traffic visibility as
specified in Article 15 of this chapter. Walls and fences in the front yard
setback area shall be constructed so that they can be seen through or over so
as to comply with the Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
principles of surveillance.



      (6)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be according to Article 20 of this chapter. Additionally, a 30-foot
buffer area surrounding any new construction site shall be maintained during
entire construction period, within which no building materials may be stored,
and which shall be clear of vegetation, debris and other combustible
materials.



      (7)   Parking.  Off-street parking shall be provided in the
manner set forth in  Article 16 of this chapter.



      (8)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be of
the “down-lighting” box-type and no direct lighting shall be allowed to
shine onto any adjacent properties.



      (9)   Signage.  Only permanent on-site signage is permitted.
No temporary off-site signage shall be allowed in the RO Zoning District.
Development standards for permanent on-site signage in the RO district shall
be consistent with the standards of the TR Zoning District.



      (10)   Lot coverage.  None, however all public and private
development of lands located within the RO Zoning District must provide
adequate site improvements including, but not necessarily limited to,
parking, landscaping and the on-site retention of stormwater.



      (11)   Undergrounding of new utility lines.  All new utility
lines including, but not necessarily limited to, electricity, telephone and
television, shall be placed underground in conjunction with development or
redevelopment projects that have been submitted for approval under the
provisions of the City Code.



      (12)   All private and commercially oriented development of
lands located within the RO Zoning District shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Design and Historic Review Commission (DHRC).



(Ord. O2001-103, passed 12-19-2001; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



Article 14 - Overlay Zoning Districts



§ 154-14.01  Aesthetic Overlay District (AO).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The Aesthetic Overlay District is an overlay to the
underlying zoning district which may be used in combination with any zoning
district provided in this zoning code. The purpose of the Aesthetic Overlay
District is to enhance the community’s image and attractiveness through
creation of visually pleasing and inviting entryways of the city as well as
providing community focal points or areas where the design of the physical
improvements and landscape enhances the community’s appearance.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



      (2)   This purpose is to be accomplished by:



         (a)   Creating review procedures that establish the
authority to review, recommend and approve proposed physical design elements
within the viewshed and the general location of major transportation
corridors that are prominent entry points to the city;



         (b)   Focusing on community design principles that
result in creative, imaginative solutions, that establish high quality design
for specific areas of the city;



         (c)   Providing for site development that utilizes the
unique characteristics of the site (such as location, surroundings,
topography or natural resources) and creates areas which are visually
attractive to both the occupants, tenants and the general public;



         (d)   Minimizing conflicts between automobiles,
pedestrians and bicycles; creating parking and loading/unloading areas which
are attractive and unobtrusive; and maintaining efficient vehicular
circulation;



         (e)   Providing safe and convenient access between and
within all development in the district; and



         (f)   Providing landscaping which visually enhances both
on-site and off-site development.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The Aesthetic Overlay District does not modify uses
permitted in existing zones, but that the district be superimposed over
existing zones with each use conforming to the development standards required
by the underlying zoning district. The provisions and regulations of the
Aesthetic Overlay District are in addition to all other provisions and
regulations of the zoning code that apply to the underlying zoning as
determined on the official zoning map of the city. Should provisions of the
Aesthetic Overlay District conflict with other provisions of the zoning code
or the General Plan, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.



      (2)   The Aesthetic Overlay District may be used in
combination with any zoning district provided in the zoning code.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (C)   Design review procedure.  The project design plan shall be
submitted and approved by the Design and Historic Review Commission (DHRC)
prior to the issuance of any construction or development permits (see §
154-03.08).



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (D)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Walls and fences.



         (a)   Any decorative or screening walls or fences must
be either a masonry design or a well-foliaged plant wall.



         (b)   Chain link fencing, with or without slats, is not
an acceptable screening or fencing material for areas visible from a public
street. Razor wire, concertina wire or similar material shall not be used in
areas visible from a public street.



         (c)   Walls located on a property line shall provide a
minimum five foot wide landscaping strip located along said walls.
Landscaping within this strip shall meet the requirements stated in Article
20 of this chapter.



      (2)   Landscaping.



         (a)   All landscaped areas, whether required or provided
voluntarily, shall meet the requirements stated in Article 20 of this chapter.



         (b)   All landscape materials shall be allowed to grow
to their natural height and shape appropriate for that plant.



         (c)   Automatic irrigation (maximizing drip irrigation)
is required for all landscaped areas.



         (d)   Buildings shall be located so that the building
does not abut paved parking areas or drive aisles. A minimum five foot wide
landscape strip shall be provided between parking areas or drive aisles and
the building. This landscape strip shall not be included in the calculation
of interior parking lot landscaping required in Article 16 of this chapter.
Twenty-five percent of the square footage of the landscape strip requirement
may be used for pedestrian sidewalks. This landscape strip requirement shall
be waived for areas adjacent to the building that are designed as access to
loading dock(s) and delivery areas and that are screened from view from
public streets.



         (e)   Accessible pedestrian route(s) shall be provided
between public street sidewalks and accessible entrances to buildings on site.



      (3)   Signs.



         (a)   Project identification signs shall be placed on
monuments, building facades or on low profile walls.



            1.   Monument signs.  To encourage design
flexibility, the maximum height of the sign may be lowered in order to
decrease required setback from the street. No signs shall be permitted within
visibility sight triangles. Low profile signs may be setback from the
property line as follows:



 

Over 6 feet in height
 
12-foot setback


4 feet to 6 feet
 
6-foot setback


4 feet or less
 
2-foot setback



 



            2.   Pedestal sign; and



            3.   Signs shall be fully integrated with the
design of the building and the site development, reflecting the architecture
and the building materials. The means of integrating signs with the
architecture of the building shall be achieved through replication of
architectural embellishments, colors, building materials, texture and other
elements found in the building design.



         (b)   Window signs shall not exceed two square feet in
area per tenant space and are limited to business identification, hours of
operation, address and emergency information.



         (c)   Window signs are prohibited above the ground level
floor of the building.



         (d)   Lettering or icons located on canopies or awnings
shall not exceed 5% of the total square footage of the canopy or awning
located on the particular facade on which the canopy or awning is attached.



         (e)   The following sign types are prohibited in the
Aesthetic Overlay District:



            1.   Animated signs;



            2.   Portable signs;



            3.   Revolving signs;



            4.   Flashing signs;



            5.   Banner signs;



            6.   Swinging signs;



            7.   Under-canopy signs;



            8.   Roof-mounted signs;



            9.   Internally-lit awning and canopy signs; and



            10.   Pole mounted signs.



      (4)   Utilities.  All utilities shall be placed underground.
In the event an above ground electrical transformer is located outdoors on
any site within the Aesthetic Overlay District, it shall be screened from
view with a landscaping and not located within any setback area. If the
transformer cannot be screened, it shall be located in an underground vault.
Exceptions to this requirement are as follows:



         (a)   Transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes,
meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be placed above ground, if they are
used solely in connection with the underground transmission or distribution
lines;



         (b)   Poles supporting street lights;



         (c)   If topography, soil or other physical conditions
prevent underground installation of utilities unreasonable or impractical,
the Design and Historic Review Commission may waive the requirement; and



         (d)   The remodeling of existing structures, where the
cost of remodeling is less than 50% of the replacement cost of the existing
structure as determined for building permit fees shall be exempt.



      (5)   Parking structures.



         (a)   Parking lot landscaping shall be designed to
include tree varieties to provide shaded parking at growth maturity for a
minimum of 30% of the required parking stalls.



         (b)   A bike rack shall be provided for each building on
site.



      (6)   Lighting.  Minimum standards for lighting for
properties located within the Aesthetic Overlay District are as follows.



         (a)   Aisles, passageways and recesses related to and
within the building complex shall be illuminated with an intensity of a
minimum of one maintained footcandle at the ground level and at seven feet
vertical between sunset and sunrise.



         (b)   Open parking lots shall be illuminated with a
minimum of one maintained footcandle of light on the parking surface and at
seven feet vertical between sunset and sunrise.



         (c)   All exterior entrances shall be illuminated with a
minimum of five maintained footcandles at ground level and at seven feet
vertical between the hours of sunset and sunrise, with a minimum 15-foot
radius from the center point of the entrance.



         (d)   Closed and covered parking structures and carports
shall be illuminated with a minimum of five maintained footcandles at ground
level and at seven feet vertical between the hours of sunset and sunrise;
during daylight hours, the area shall be illuminated with a minimum of ten
footcandles.



         (e)   Greenway trails, pathways, linear parks, multi-use
trails and similar facilities shall be illuminated with a minimum of one-half
maintained footcandle at ground level and at seven feet vertical between
sunset and sunrise.



         (f)   Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and
vandal-resistant covers.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2001-94, passed 11-20-2001; Ord. O2003-38, passed 8-20-2003;
Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (E)   Aesthetic Overlay District Design guidelines.  The Aesthetic
Overlay District Design guidelines upon adoption by the City Council, shall
be used in conjunction with this chapter to provide guidance for the property
owners, tenants and design professionals in the preparation of a project
design plan.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994)



   (F)   Building permits based upon approved project design.  Within
one year of approval of a project design by the Design and Historic Review
Commission, a building permit may be granted for a site based upon the
project design approved by the Design and Historic Review Commission. If more
than one year has elapsed since approval of the project design for that
location, such design plan shall be resubmitted to the Design and Historic
Review Commission to accept or modify the design previously approved, prior
to issuance of a building permit.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (G)   Amendments to approved project design.  Any substantial
amendment or modification to an approved project design shall be reviewed by
the Design and Historic Review Commission.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (H)   Minor project design plan changes within the Aesthetic Overlay.



      (1)   The Zoning Administrator, or his or her designee, shall
have the authority to review modifications to an approved project design only
for minor changes that do not substantially change the visual appearance of
the project as approved by the Design and Historic Review Commission. The
Design and Historic Review Commission will be advised of any administrative
decisions pursuant to this section.



      (2)   Minor project design changes include, but are not
limited to:



         (a)   Slight color palette changes;



         (b)   Exterior wall or fencing alterations;



         (c)   Slight materials change; and



         (d)   Insignificant signage material or color changes.



('80 Code, App. A, § 113)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2663, passed
7-20-1994; Ord. O2008-31, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009;
Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.02  AutoCenter Overlay District (ACO).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The AutoCenter Overlay District is an overlay zoning
district which may be used in combination with the B-2 General Commercial
district provided in this zoning code. The purpose of the AutoCenter Overlay
District is to retain and expand a major component of the city’s sales tax
and employment base by permitting a clustering of automobile sales and
related uses in an environment that provides an attractive shopping
experience for the purchase of automobiles.



      (2)   This purpose is to be accomplished by:



         (a)   Using a right-of-way and setback area improvement
design to help create a unique, attractive and visually cohesive shopping
district which showcases and emphasizes the sale and appeal of new and used
vehicles while preserving the functionality of the streets and improving the
amount of and access to parking;



         (b)   Using the required setback areas to serve a dual
purpose. The primary purpose will be to preserve future rights-of-way needs
and provide required landscaping. Another purpose will be to use the setback
areas, where appropriate, as a display area for cars. Accordingly, travel
lanes internal to the site may be reduced in certain areas and setback areas
may be used for new vehicle display;



         (c)   Providing safe and convenient access between and
within all development in the district;



         (d)   Providing uniform and unobstructive landscaping
which visually enhances both on-site and off-site development;



         (e)   Providing meandering public sidewalks to and
through adjoining properties;  and



         (f)   Creating review procedures that establish the
authority to review, recommend and approve proposed improvement projects
within the AutoCenter Overlay District.



(Ord. O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000)



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The AutoCenter Overlay District does not modify uses
permitted in the existing General Commercial (B-2) District but does allow an
overlay district to be superimposed over existing B-2 zones with each use
conforming to the development standards required by the underlying zoning
district. The provisions and regulations of the AutoCenter Overlay District
are in addition to all other provisions and regulations of the zoning code
which apply to the underlying zoning as determined on the official zoning map
of the city. Should provisions of the AutoCenter Overlay District conflict
with other provisions of the zoning code or the Yuma General Plan, the
AutoCenter Overlay District provisions shall apply where development
standards for rights-of-way, landscaping, signage and setback areas are
concerned. Airport Overlay District development requirements, including, but
not limited to provisions in the RADSA, when adopted, supersede any
provisions of the AutoCenter Overlay District.



Editor’s note:



   RADSA - Runway Approach and Departure Area as provided in the
City/County Joint Land Use Plan, City of Yuma General Plan



      (2)   The AutoCenter Overlay District may be used in
combination with the B-2 Zoning District provided in the zoning code,
provided that a minimum of 40 acres exist within a given area to warrant such
a district (minimum district size is 40 acres).



(Ord. O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000)



   (C)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Setbacks.  The intent is to provide an attractive and
dramatic setting for the display of vehicles. New vehicles displays are to be
the focal point of the setback. Landscaping may be used to provide a setting
of beauty and visual interest that would enhance the focal points.



         (a)   The landscape area may extend to and include
portions of the public right-of way.



         (b)   Meandering sidewalks shall be constructed within
the public right-of-way outside the 15 foot setback area.



         (c)   Block walls shall not be used to visually separate
the sidewalk and the 15 foot landscape setback area.



         (d)   Isolated new car vehicle display pads may be
located within this 15 foot landscaped setback area, provided they will not
conflict with sight visibility triangles. Two-thirds of the landscaped area
shall be reserved for landscaping. Up to one-third of the surface area within
the setback may be used for the isolated/distinct vehicle display pads.



         (e)   The landscape emphasis should be on low-mounded
turf with accents of ground covers, low shrubs, linear placement of palm
trees and hard landscape features.



         (f)   Freestanding light pole fixtures maybe included in
the 15 foot landscape setback area, strategically placed at the corners of
the new car vehicle display pads to accent the vehicles. Dual box-style
lighting fixtures, of a uniform height and color, shall be used within the 15
foot landscape setback area.



      (2)   Rear vehicle storage yards. The following development
standards apply to rear vehicle storage yards over one acre in size and
located a minimum 300 feet from an arterial road upon which the business has
frontage:



         (a)   An all-weather crushed gravel ground cover may be
utilized in lieu of the general blacktop/asphalt code requirement for paving;
and



         (b)   Landscaping requirements may be reduced by 50%.



      (3)   Signs. The following development standards apply to
signs for automobile dealership franchises within the AutoCenter Overlay
District:



         (a)   Signs are permitted a maximum 20% increase from
the development standard or dimension required within the zoning code where a
practical difficulty, unnecessary hardship or a result inconsistent with the
general purposes of the zoning code would occur from its strict and literal
interpretation and enforcement;



         (b)   Multiple automobile dealership franchises on a
single parcel may be permitted additional freestanding signage per the
following standards and criteria:



 


Table No. 1 - AutoCenter Overlay Signage



Zoning District
 
Type of Installation
 
Max. Total Area of All Sign Faces
 
Max. Area of Any Sign Face
 
Max. Number of Signs
 
Max. Height W/in Street Setback
 
Max. Height Outside of Street Setback


B-2

ACO
 
F-S
 
1 sq. ft. per 1 lineal foot of street frontage upon which the sign is located
 
300 sq. ft.
 
For parcels with less than 300 feet of street frontage:

1 per street frontage

 

For parcels with 300+ feet of street frontage:

1 per each separate auto franchise not to exceed 2 per street frontage (a)
 
See § 154-17.03(C) Footnotes: Table No.5 and Table No.6


(a)  Such signs shall be located a minimum of 60 linear feet from any other
F-S sign.



 



         (c)   To create a sense of place and assist in the
marketing and appeal of the AutoCenter Overlay District, uniform “Olympic
style” vertical street banners may be used throughout the District subject
to review and approval by the Clean and Beautiful Commission. Such banners
may be incorporated into street light standards or hung on special poles and
shall only identify the autocenter and/or its autocenter logo. No private
business shall be advertised.



(Ord. O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2002-04, passed 2-6-2002; Ord.
O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



   (D)   Design review procedures.  AutoCenter Overlay District
development standards shall be incorporated into any project plans submitted
to the city for which a development permit is required. The Zoning
Administrator, or his or her authorized representative, shall review all
AutoCenter Overlay District development standards incorporated in such
project plans to ensure compliance with the intent and spirit of the district.



(Ord. O2000-52, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.03  Bed and Breakfast Overlay District (BB).



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  This overlay district is adopted to
provide for overnight tourist accommodations within residences or guest
houses, located in variously zoned properties within the area identified as
the Bed and Breakfast Overlay District, as reflected on the city zoning map.
The bed and breakfast shall not be used by the public or paying guests for
the hosting of receptions, private parties or the like. A bed and breakfast
use must comply with all other provisions of the zone in which it is located
and must comply with all other ordinances of the city.



(Ord. O99-92, passed 1-5-2000)



   (B)   Property development standards.



      (1)   Eligible facilities.  The primary residential structure
on the property and any allowed guest house are facilities that are permitted
to be used for bed and breakfast activities. Only site-built structures are
permitted. Any structure that the city recognizes as historical can be
converted to a bed and breakfast. One bed and breakfast facility shall be
allowed per legal parcel of land (maximum of four bed and breakfast sleeping
rooms per parcel). If two adjacent parcels of land are under one ownership,
the resident host can live on one parcel and the bed and breakfast facility
can occur on the adjacent parcel. The maximum occupancy of the entire bed and
breakfast, including the resident host and family, shall be ten.



      (2)   Number of guest rooms.  The maximum number of bed and
breakfast guest rooms shall be four. This maximum does not include the
resident host’s sleeping room(s).



      (3)   Length of stay.  The length of stay shall be limited to
a minimum of one night and a maximum of 90 days in a 12-month period. In
cases where the guests are not related by marriage or blood, the stay shall
be limited to a maximum of 30 days.



      (4)   Kitchen facilities.  No food preparation or storage
facilities (microwave, oven/stove, refrigerator) shall be allowed in the bed
and breakfast sleeping rooms, except for a coffee maker provided by the bed
and breakfast. The only kitchen facility on the property shall be the main
kitchen used by the resident host.



      (5)   Bathroom facilities.  The bed and breakfast function
shall have one three-quarters or full bath facility, separate from the
resident host’s required three-quarters or full bath room facility.



      (6)   Inspections/licensing registration.  The following
licensing conditions apply:



         (a)   A business license must be in the owner’s name,
identifying the resident host of the facility;



         (b)   The resident host must live on the premises;



         (c)   No more than two occupants shall be allowed per
room;



         (d)   A person who does not reside at the home shall not
be employed to assist in the conduct of the bed and breakfast business,
except as usual for a residential use (i.e., gardener, pool maintenance and
the like);



         (e)   A guest room shall not be located in the basement
or attic without meeting the UBC requirements for exiting;



         (f)   The bed and breakfast shall be made available for
annual inspections to ensure compliance with the provisions of this district;



         (g)   For annual license fee purposes, bed and breakfast
uses shall be considered hotels; and



         (h)   The resident host shall maintain a guest register
for accounting/tax purposes.



      (7)   Signage.  Signs for the bed and breakfast function
shall be limited to four-square feet with a maximum dimension of four feet.
Design review is required if the signage is proposed to be lit. The sign(s)
shall complement the nature of the use and be placed near the front door,
walkway, over the porch, back door or on the mail box post.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



      (8)   Off-street parking.  On-site parking shall be provided
per the following:



         (a)   One and two bed and breakfast rooms.  One space;



         (b)   Three and four bed and breakfast rooms.  Two
spaces; and



         (c)   Resident host.  Additionally, one on-site space
shall be provided for the resident host. All required parking spaces shall be
paved. Pavers or turf-blocks may be used to allow for percolation of
stormwater runoff. The creation of on-site parking shall not reduce or
eliminate the required front yard setback and required landscaping.



      (9)   Exterior lighting.  Any exterior lighting shall be
residential in nature and character. Lighting shall be located so as to
minimize off-site illumination and direct the light away from any public or
private street right-of-way or from any residential district or use. All
exterior lighting shall be approved by the Design and Historic Review
Commission. Lighting shall be in accordance with Article 18 of this chapter
of the City Code. No color lighting shall be permitted.



      (10)   Sanitary sewer requirement.  Structures used for the
purpose of providing bed and breakfast facilities shall be connected to and
use a sanitary sewer system. Septic systems are not acceptable.



      (11)   Fire protection.  Smoke detectors shall be installed
in each sleeping room. A fire escape route shall be identified and placed on
the inside door of each bed and breakfast sleeping room.



      (12)   Conformance with UBC.  The facilities used for bed and
breakfast purposes shall comply with the Uniform Building Code or the Uniform
Code for Building Conservation, as required by those codes.



      (13)   Cleaning requirements.  The resident host shall
provide clean linens and towels as necessary, as well as adequate heating and
cooling, ventilation, water and sewage disposal. The resident host shall
maintain the outside area in a clean and sanitary manner and shall properly
clean the premises and facilities during the guest’s stay and after each
guest has departed.



(Ord. O99-92, passed 1-5-2000)



   (C)   Additions to the Overlay District.  Any addition to the
Overlay District shall follow the Amendment process as outlined in Article 3,
§ 154-03.03. Additional areas of the city may be added to the overlay
district, subject to all the following criteria:



      (1)   The proposed area must be contiguous to the existing Bed
and Breakfast Overlay boundary;



      (2)   The proposed area must be bounded on all sides by public
rights-of-way; and



      (3)   The proposed area must be a minimum of two and one-half
net acres in size.



(Ord. O99-92, passed 1-5-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.04  Historic Overlay District (H).



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of this section
is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the
community and to ensure the harmonious growth and development of the
municipality by encouraging the preservation of historic places and
structures through the designation of sites and districts of historical
significance. It is not intended that the designation of a site or a district
as historic should modify uses permitted in existing zones, but rather, the
designation of an historic site or an historic district be superimposed over
existing zones to encourage the retention of early structures and objects in
active use and in substantially their historic appearance, setting and
placement. It is intended that the renovation of an historic site shall
preserve its distinguishing historic qualities or character and that new
structures erected within an historic district or the renovation of an
existing structure within an historic district shall harmonize with the
general character or ambiance of existing structures in the district in order
to preserve the architectural heritage of the district and to promote the
historical significance of the site or district among residents and visitors
to the community.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (B)   Initiation of historic site or district.



      (1)   An historic site or an historic district may be created
only by ordinance adopted after a public hearing is conducted by the Design
and Historic Review Commission on the application for that designation. A
direction of the Mayor and Council to the Commission for consideration of a
building, structure, object or an area for that designation, or consideration
of a building, structure or object or area for that designation on the
Commission’s initiative, is an “application” subject to this subchapter.



      (2)   The Mayor and Council shall consider whether to
designate by ordinance a building, structure or object as an historic site or
an area as an historic district upon the recommendation of the Design and
Historic Review Commission. The Commission shall consider either designation
upon the direction of the Mayor and Council or upon the application of 35 or
more adult residents of the city filed with the Community Development
Department.



      (3)   A fee of $100 shall be required for the filing of an
application for either designation. The form of the application shall be
determined by the Commission and made available to the public at the
Community Development Department office.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (C)   Historic district criteria.



      (1)   Seven or more properties, whether or not separated by a
street, or total cumulative street frontage not less than 300 feet, but in no
case fewer than four properties, shall be the minimum criteria for
designation of an “historic district”.



      (2)   An “historic district” may be designated only by
ordinance if:



         (a)   The area meets the criteria for historic districts
adopted or hereafter adopted by the State of Arizona through the state
historic preservation office, or substantially meets the criteria for the
listing of districts to the National Register of Historic Places adopted or
hereafter adopted by the United States Secretary of the Interior, copies of
which shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Community Development
Department and made available there for public inspection;



         (b)   The area possesses a significant concentration,
linkage or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects which are
united by past events of 50 or more years ago, or aesthetically by plan or
physical development of 50 or more years ago; and



         (c)   The area is worthy of preservation and protection
for aesthetic interest or value, educational potential or significance in the
history of the city.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (D)   Historic site criteria.  A building, structure or object
within or without an historic district in the city may be designated as an
“historic site” only by ordinance (see § 154-03.09) if:



      (1)   It meets the criteria for historic sites adopted or
hereafter adopted by the State or Arizona through the State Historic
Preservation Office, or it substantially meets the criteria to qualify for
individual listing in the National Register of Historic Places adopted or
hereafter adopted by the United States Secretary of the Interior, copies of
which shall be on file with the City Clerk and the Community Development
Department and made available there for public inspection; or



      (2)   Any part of it is 50 or more years old and it:



         (a)   Exemplifies or reflects special elements of the
city’s cultural, social, economic, political, aesthetic, engineering or
architectural past;



         (b)   Embodies distinguishing characteristics of a
style, period, method of construction or development in the city or serves as
a valuable example of the use of indigenous materials or craftsmanship;



         (c)   Represents the notable work of a master builder,
designer or architect;



         (d)   Represents a rare building type, style, design or
indigenous building form; or



         (e)   Is identifiable with a person or event significant
in local, state or national history.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



   (E)   Building and demolition permits for historic sites and
structures within historic districts.



      (1)   No structure shall be erected within an historic
district nor upon an historic site, nor shall any part of an historic site
nor any structure within an historic district be demolished and removed, or
its exterior renovated or changed in any manner except as permitted by this
subchapter. However, nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent
the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of
an historic site or of a structure within an historic district that does not
involve a change in its design, material, color or other appearance.



      (2)   The city and all property owners or possessors of
property, without exception, desiring to construct, renovate, demolish,
remove or otherwise make any changes to the exterior of an historic site or
of any structure within an historic district shall apply to the Community
Development Department for all permits.



      (3)   In addition to the forms, plans and fees as may be
required for a building permit for a structure outside an historic district,
any application to construct, renovate, demolish, remove or otherwise to make
any changes to the exterior of an historic site or of any structure within a
district shall include photographs, plans, descriptions,  dimensions, 
drawings, sketches or other information sufficient to allow meaningful review
and determination of the ultimate appearance and the impact of the proposed
project. Professional quality plans, renderings or materials shall not be
required.



      (4)   Following determination by the Community Development
Department that an application meets the requirements of the building or
other applicable code for issuance of a permit outside an historic district
or of the code as modified for historic districts or sites, the Community
Development Department shall schedule the project for consideration with the
Design and Historic Review Commission. The Commission shall consider the
application at a public meeting to be held within 14 days of its receipt by
the Chairperson.



      (5)   Written notice of the meeting shall be delivered or
mailed by the Community Development Department Liaison no less than seven
days before the meeting. The Commission shall establish rules and procedures
governing notice to owners of record of adjacent surrounding properties.



      (6)   At the meeting the Commission shall review the
application and the additional materials submitted with it and discuss the
project with the applicant and any others attending to determine whether the
project is appropriate and in keeping with the historic character of the site
and/or district.



      (7)   In determining whether to approve an application, the
Commission shall follow the United States Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards for Rehabilitation, appearing in C.F.R. Part 67, § 36. The
Commission may also formulate additional standards and guidelines not
inconsistent with those of the Secretary of the Interior. Copies of these
standards and guidelines shall be on file with the City Clerk and the
Community Development Department and made available there for public
inspection.



      (8)   The Commission shall take action by approving or denying
the application, at a Design and Historic Review Commission public meeting
held for that purpose. The Commission shall specify the reason(s) for
approval or denial. The Community Development Department shall transmit a
copy of the decision, by mail, to the applicant. Failure of the Commission to
meet and make a decision on any application submitted within 60 days of
receipt of the application by the Community Development Department shall
constitute approval of the application unless the applicant consents in
writing to an extension.



      (9)   When the Commission approves an application, a permit
for the project shall be issued, subject to compliance with plan check
comments from all other city departments. In the event an application is
denied by the Commission, no permit shall be issued for the project.



      (10)   Except for a decision denying an application for
demolition or removal, the decision of the Commission shall be final and
conclusive.



      (11)   A decision of the Commission denying an application for
demolition or removal of a building, structure or object shall delay issuance
of the permit for 120 days after the effective date of the decision. During
that 120-day period, the Commission shall endeavor to convince the applicant
to preserve the building, structure or object, or the Commission shall try to
find someone to purchase it for a price and upon terms agreeable to the
applicant, and the buyer must also agree to preserve it for at least five
years, if, within the 120-day period, the Commission is unable either to so
convince the applicant or to find such a buyer, the permit shall be issued at
the request of the applicant at any time, 121 days or more after the
effective date of the decision.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Public safety exceptions.  Nothing in this section shall
prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or
demolition of any such feature which the building safety official shall
certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983)



   (G)   Conflicting regulations.  Where the provisions of this
section are in conflict with another section of the zoning code, the
provisions of this section shall govern.



('80 Code, App. A, § 114)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2125, passed
5-4-1983; Ord. O97-45, passed 7-2-1997; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.05  Airport Overlay District (AD).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the Airport Overlay
District is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare in the
vicinity of the Marine Corps Air Station and the Yuma International Airport
by minimizing exposure to high noise levels and accident hazards generated by
airport operations and to encourage future development which is compatible
with the continued operation of the airport.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987)



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   Generally.  The provisions and regulations of the
Airport Overlay District supersede and are in addition to other provisions
and regulations of the zoning ordinance that are applicable as determined by
the zoning districts on the official zoning map of the city.



      (2)   Application to new construction.  Nothing contained
herein shall require any change or alteration in a lawfully constructed or
established building, structure or use in existence at the time of the
adoption or amendment of the Airport Overlay District. These regulations are
intended to regulate only the construction or establishment of any new
building, structure or use; moving or relocation of any building, structure
or use to a new site or new location; the expansion, extension or
reconstruction of any existing building, structure or use; and the operation
or continuance at any time following the effective date of the Airport
Overlay District of any building, structure or use which has been unlawfully
established, erected, remodeled or rehabilitated.



      (3)   Not applicable to parcels with gross area of five acres
or less.  The provisions and regulations of the Airport Overlay District
shall not be applicable to parcels of land with a gross area of five acres or
less which are surrounded by and contiguous on all sides to residential
dwellings, except for means of ingress and egress, existing at the date of
adoption of the Airport Overlay District. However, any new residential units
shall be designed and constructed so that the interior day-night sound level
will be 45 decibels or less.



      (4)   Nonconforming residential subdivision.  Residential
subdivisions, as defined by the Arizona Revised Statutes and the City of Yuma
Subdivision Regulations, which have been previously zoned, the subdivision
plat recorded with the County Recorder, which have utilities constructed, the
sewer, water and street improvements constructed to city standards and
accepted by the city or county prior to the effective date of the Airport
Overlay District, shall be exempt from the Airport Overlay District provided
that future development complies with other provisions of the Airport Overlay
District, of the zoning ordinance and other applicable city ordinances,
regulations and codes.



      (5)   Expansion.  If the gross floor area of a structure or
project is expanded by less than 50%, the requirements of this section apply
only to the area of expansion. If the gross floor area of a structure or
project is expanded by more than 50%, the requirements of this section apply
to the entire structure, except for existing single-family, mobile home,
manufactured housing unit or duplex dwellings or any multi-family property
used for residential purposes.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. O2002-30, passed 8-7-2002)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   For the purpose of the Airport Overlay District, there
are hereby created zones (65-70 dB, 70-75 dB, 75-80 dB, greater than 80 dB
noise zone, APZ-1, APZ-2 and clear zone) as delineated on the Airport Noise
and Accident Potential Zone Map and parts thereof as shown on the official
zoning map of Yuma. The land uses permitted within the various zones are
delineated in Table No. 2 - Airport Overlay District Land Use Matrix. The
permitted uses within the Airport Overlay District land use matrix have
precedence over and supersede any permitted uses existing within a zoning
district of this chapter. If a permitted use is not specifically listed in
the Airport Overlay District land use matrix that use is considered
inconsistent and not compatible with airport operations and shall be
prohibited. This does not preclude a determination of compliance if the city
and Marine Corps Air Station, Yuma mutually agree that an individual use is
compatible and consistent with the high noise or accident potential zone of
the military airport.



      (2)   Single-family housing, two-family housing, multi-family
housing, manufactured housing, recreation vehicles and residential group
quarters are expressly considered inconsistent and not compatible with
airport operations and shall be prohibited.



      (3)   This section does not restrict, limit or modify the
development and use of any property under the terms of the development plan
approved on or before December 31, 2000, except that the development must
comply with the sound attenuation standards prescribed herein.



      (4)   For territory located in the arrival and departure
corridor, but outside Accident Potential Zone One and Two, and outside the
noise contour lines, permitted uses shall be determined in accordance with
the requirements applicable to territory located in the 65-70dB level as
prescribed in the Airport Overlay District Land Use Matrix.



      (5)   Runway Approach Departure Safety Area/Airport Industrial
Overlay Districts as delineated in Table No. 3.



 


Table No. 2 - Airport Overlay District Land Use Matrix




Land Use Category

 

65-70dB

 

70-75dB

 

75-80dB

 

*80dB+

 

APZ-2

 

APZ-1

 

Clear Zone



(Y= yes / N= no)




Commercial - Services


Business services
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Contract construction services
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
N
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Finance, insurance and real estate services
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Indoor recreation services
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Medical and other health services offices
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Personal services
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Repair services
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
N
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Commercial - Trade


Retail trade - general merchandise
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, RV, aircraft and accessories
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Retail trade - building materials, hardware and farm equipment
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Retail trade - food
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Retail trade - furniture, home furnishings and equipment
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Wholesale trade - exclusive of membership-based businesses
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(13)
 
N
 
N


Industrial/Manufacturing


Apparel
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Chemicals and allied products
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
N
 
N
 
N


Fabricated metal products
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Food and kindred products
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Furniture and fixtures
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Lumber and wood products
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Miscellaneous manufacturing
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Paper and allied products
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Petroleum refining and related industries
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
N
 
N
 
N


Primary metal industries
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Printing and publishing
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Professional, scientific and controlling instruments
 
Y
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Rubber and miscellaneous plastic
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Stone, clay and glass product
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Textile mill products
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Outdoor Recreation


Auditoriums and concert halls
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Community and regional parks
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
Y(11)
 
N
 
N


Golf courses and riding stables
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
N
 
Y(11)
 
Y(11)
 
N


Nature exhibits
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Outdoor amphitheaters and music shells
 
Y(10)
 
Y(10)
 
Y(10)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Playground and neighborhood parks
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Resort and group camps
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Spectator sports, including arenas
 
Y(10)
 
Y(10)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Water-based recreational areas
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Public and Quasi-Public Services


Cemeteries
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
N
 
Y(11)
 
N
 
N


Cultural activities, including churches
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Government services
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
Y(12)(13)
 
N
 
N


Nonprofit organizations
 
Y(1)
 
Y(2)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Residential


Single-family (15)

agricultural residence
 
Y(7)
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Accessory dwelling units
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Resource Production, Extraction and Open Space


Agriculture (except livestock)
 
Y(7)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
N


Livestock farming and animal breeding
 
Y(7)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
N
 
N


Forestry activities
 
Y(7)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
Y(9)
 
N
 
N


Fishing activities and related services
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Mining activities
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y(12)
 
N
 
N


Permanent open space
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y


Background composting
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Large composting
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Agricultural composting
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N
 
N


Transportation, Communication, Utilities and Miscellaneous


Communication facilities
 
Y
 
Y(2)
 
Y(3)
 
N
 
Y(11)(12)
 
Y(11)(12)
 
N


Highway and street right-of-way
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y(11)
 
Y(11)
 
Y(11)


Motor vehicle parking
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y(11)
 
Y(11)
 
N


Railroad and rapid rail transit
 
Y
 
Y(4)
 
Y(5)
 
Y(6)
 
Y(11)
 
N
 
N


Signs (per § 154-17.03)
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y(14)
 
Y(14)
 
N
 
N
 
N


Utility facilities
 
Y
 
Y
 
Y
 
N
 
Y(11)(12)
 
Y(11)(12)
 
Y


Table No. 2 - Airport Overlay District Land Use Matrix Notes


*   The Airport Noise and Accident Potential Map does not establish noise
contours above 75dB; therefore where the state permits uses to occur under
80dB such uses are permitted to occur within the 75-80dB range.


(1)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 25
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of all
buildings and the Zoning Administrator must make an express finding, as part
of approval, that use of noise reduction level criteria will not alleviate
outdoor noise.


(2)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 30
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of all
buildings and the Zoning Administrator must make an express finding, as part
of approval, that use of noise reduction level criteria will not alleviate
outdoor noise.


(3)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 35
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of all
buildings and the Zoning Administrator must make an express finding, as part
of approval, that use of noise reduction level criteria will not alleviate
outdoor noise.


(4)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 25
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of
buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas
or where normal noise level is low.


(5)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 30
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of
buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas
or where normal noise level is low.


(6)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 35
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of portions of
buildings where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas
or where normal noise level is low.


(7)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 25
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of new
residential buildings or expansions of existing residential buildings.


(8)   Measures to achieve an outdoor to indoor noise reduction level of 30
decibels must be incorporated into the design and construction of new
residential buildings or expansions of existing residential buildings.


(9)   No new residential buildings or expansions of existing residential
buildings are permitted.


(10)   Compatible if special sound reinforcement systems are installed.


(11)   No aboveground buildings or structures.


(12)   No new buildings or improvements or expansion of nonagricultural
buildings or improvements for uses that result in the release of any
substance into the air that would impair visibility or otherwise interfere
with operating aircraft, such as any of the following:


(a)   Steam, dust and smoke;


(b)   Direct or indirect reflective light emissions;


(c)   Electrical emissions that would interfere with aircraft and air
force communications or navigational aid systems or aircraft navigational
equipment;


(d)   The attraction of birds or waterfowl such as operation of sanitary
landfills or maintenance of feeding stations; and


(e)   Explosives facilities or similar activities.


(13)   A maximum of one employee per 3,500 square feet of net lot area
shall be allowed.


(14)   Signs with flashing lights or exterior light sources are not
permitted.


(15)   Single-family residential that is the primary residence for persons
engaging in agricultural use and ancillary residential buildings incident to
the primary agricultural use.




 



 


Table No. 3 - RADSA/AIOD-1/AIOD-2 Land Use Compatibility Matrix



Land Use Category/Activity
 
RADSA/AIOD-1
 
AIOD-2



 
(Footnotes 1a, 1b, 2)
 
(Footnotes 1c, 2)


(Y= yes / N= no)




Cultural, Entertainment and Recreational


Caretakers residence
 
Y
 
Y


Nature exhibits
 
Y
 
Y


Parks with passive open space areas, not with active recreation space
facilities that concentrate people
 
Y
 
Y


Manufacturing of:


Caretakers residence
 
Y
 
Y


Fabricated metal products
 
Y
 
Y


Food and kindred products
 
Y
 
Y


Furniture and fixtures
 
Y
 
Y


Lumber and wood products
 
Y
 
Y


Miscellaneous manufacturing
 
Y
 
Y


Paper and allied products
 
Y
 
Y


Primary metal industries
 
Y
 
Y


Printing and publishing industries
 
Y
 
Y


Stone, clay and glass products
 
Y
 
Y




 



 


Table No. 3 - RADSA/AIOD-1/AIOD-2 Land Use Compatibility Matrix



Land Use Category/Activity
 
RADSA/AIOD-1
 
AIOD-2



 
(Footnotes 1a, 1b, 2)
 
(Footnotes 1c, 2)




(Y= yes / N= no)


Textile mill products
 
Y
 
Y


Miscellaneous


Existing uses (as of October 21, 2000)
 
Y
 
Y


Resource Production and Extraction


Agricultural
 
Y
 
Y


Agricultural composting
 
N
 
N


Agriculturally-related activities
 
Y
 
Y


Backyard composting
 
N
 
N


Caretakers residence
 
Y
 
Y


Fishing activities and related services
 
Y
 
Y


Forestry activities and related services
 
Y
 
Y


Large composting
 
N
 
N


Livestock farming and animal breeding
 
Y
 
Y


Mining activities and related services
 
Y
 
Y


Other resource production and extraction
 
Y
 
Y


Personal services
 
Y
 
Y


Professional services
 
Y
 
Y


Repair services
 
Y
 
Y


Trade/Commercial


Caretakers residence
 
Y
 
Y


Retail trade - automotive, marine craft, aircraft and accessories
 
N
 
Y


Retail trade - building materials, hardware and farm equipment
 
N
 
Y


Retail trade - food
 
N
 
Y


Retail trade - furniture, home furnishings and equipment
 
N
 
Y


Retail trade - general merchandise
 
N
 
Y


Retail trade - restaurants and eating and drinking establishments
 
N
 
Y


Storage
 
Y
 
Y


Wholesale trade exclusive of membership-based businesses
 
Y
 
Y


Transportation, Communications and Utilities


Airports
 
Y
 
Y


Caretakers residence
 
Y
 
Y


Highway and street right-of-way
 
Y
 
Y


Other transportation, communication and utility facilities
 
Y
 
Y


Railroad, rapid rail transit and street railway uses or ancillary
office/maintenance facilities but not terminals, stations or transit centers
 
Y
 
Y


Truck terminals
 
Y
 
Y


Utilities (below ground okay; above ground requires review as to placement)
 
Y
 
Y


Vehicle storage/parking lots
 
Y
 
Y


Table No. 3 - RADSA/AIOD-1/AIOD-2 Land Use Compatibility Matrix Footnotes


* Within each land use category listed, land uses and activities may require
further evaluation during the development process due to the variation of
density requirements for people and structures. These requirements are as
follows.


1a   A maximum of one person per 2,800 square feet of net lot area (15.55
people per acre) shall be allowed (applies to Runway Approach Departure
Safety Area).


1b   A maximum of one person per 1,100 square feet of net lot area (39.6
people per acre) shall be allowed (applies to Airport Industrial Overlay
District-1).


1c   A maximum of one (1) person per 900 square feet of net lot area (48.4
people per acre) shall be allowed (applies to Airport Industrial Overlay
District-2).


(2)   The occupancy/density standards of the Uniform Building Code will
apply in determining the maximum number of persons per square feet of
building area (applies to RADSA, Airport Industrial Overlay District-1 and
Airport Industrial Overlay District-2).


(3)   In order to establish a 200-foot wide corridor free of surface
obstructions along the 34th Street alignment within the RADSA, a north and
south building or structure setback of 100 feet from the centerline of 34th
Street alignment shall be maintained. To achieve this, the property owner
shall select from one of the following development options listed below:  a
combination of (a) and (b); or (c); or (d).


   (a)   At the time of development a 34th Street alignment, 49 feet
half-width right-of-way is to be dedicated to the city for the construction
of a collector street.


   (b)   An adjoining 51 feet no-build easement will be granted to the
city. The no-build easement may be used for a shallow retention basin and/or
parking and, the no-build easement may be included within the calculation of
the total net lot area in regards to determining density of  people per
acre. The no-build easement is not required to be landscaped. If landscaping
is not emplaced an approved permanent dust control measure shall be utilized.


   (c)   In lieu of street construction, a 100 feet half-width right-of
way may be dedicated to the city.


   (d)   In lieu of 34th Street construction, a 100 feet half-width
no-build easement may be granted to the city, provided a separate and
distinct industrial collector street is constructed to serve the internal
property. All development conditions specified in division (3)(b) above apply
here, except that all vehicles parked in the 100 feet no-build easement shall
be limited to the outer 51 feet of the no-build easement.


(4)   Factors to be considered in land use or site development include
labor intensity, occupancy loads, building configuration and location,
parking and vehicular circulation, structural coverage, flashing light or
other exterior light sources, the extent of storage or use of explosive
materials or flammables, release of airborne particulates or pollutants which
may obscure vision or pose potential explosive hazards; generation of
electromagnetic fields or transmission of electrical signals or impulses that
would interfere with aircraft operations or radio transmissions or other
processes or uses of similar character or origin.


(5)   Above ground electrical transmission lines are not allowed.


(6)   West AIOD Clear Zone owned by the county and maintained by the Yuma
County Airport Authority for runway protection is limited to those uses
established by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) and approved by the Federal
Aviation Administration.


(7)   Land use categories and/or activities not listed in this land use
compatibility matrix are not permitted.


(8)   All existing uses (as of October 21, 2000) are fully grandfathered
and permitted to lawfully operate within the limits of the existing zoning at
the effective date of the Plan’s adoption subject to:


   (a)   Facility/use expansion allowed to maximum permitted under
current zoning;


   (b)   Compliance with nonconforming use regulations where/if
applicable;


   (c)   Approach/departure clearance surface slope criteria and other
airport surfaces where applicable; and


   (d)   By fully grandfathering it is meant that all current uses
shall be allowed to continue the current category of use, i.e., property with
a current retail sales use (such as a car dealership) can continue to be used
for any use within that category (such as retail clothing sales) and shall be
allowed to develop or redevelop to the fullest extent allowed under present
building code, fire code, development standards and lot coverage standards.
Vacated facilities may be reestablished within three years if of the same
category of land use. The grandfathering specifically does NOT apply to
zoning on property that is not currently being used for that purpose, i.e.,
if the property is presently being used to raise alfalfa but is currently
zoned light industrial, a light industrial use would not be grandfathered. A
light industrial use could be built on that parcel if, however, it was one of
the uses in the list of approved uses for the underlying AIOD or RADSA area
and conformed with the occupant load limitations for that AIOD or RADSA area.
The occupant load for grandfathered uses would not be restricted other than
is presently provided for in Building and Fire Code restrictions.




 



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. O2001-03, passed 1-3-2001; Ord.
O2002-30, passed 8-7-2002; Ord. O2004-07, passed 3-3-2004; Ord. O2011-30,
passed 9-7-2011; Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017; Ord. O2019- 001, passed
1-16-2019)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (D)   Additional height and use regulations.



      (1)   Heights.  The construction or establishment of any
building, structure or use shall comply with the height limits as determined
by the zoning district on the official zoning map of the city or the heights
as determined from the airport runway approach clearance map, whichever is
the more restrictive.



      (2)   Hazard marking and lighting.  When in the opinion of
the Building Official the construction or existence of any structure, pole,
tower, tank or plant material constitutes a hazard to aircraft operation in
the vicinity of the airport, the owner of the structure, pole, tower, tank or
plant material shall, at his or her own expense, reduce in height or install,
operate and maintain such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate
to aircraft operators the presence of an airport hazard, as provided in
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Advisory Circular 70/7460-ID.



      (3)   Communications.  No use or activity shall be made of
land within the Airport Overlay District as to create electrical interference
with communications between the airport tower and aircraft.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (E)   Land use waiver.



      (1)   If a property owner desires to develop a parcel of land
with a use that is not permitted within the airport noise and accident
potential zone in which the property is located, the owner may file an
application for a land use waiver in accordance with procedures established
in § 154-03.03 of this chapter. Waivers may be granted after public hearings
by the Planning Commission and City Council, and upon a specific finding by
the Council that the purpose of the Airport Overlay District and the zoning
ordinance is preserved. Applications shall be filed with the Planning
Division, and shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan, a detailed
description of the proposed uses and their relationship to adjacent property.



      (2)   Applications shall be submitted under one of the two
following provisions.



         (a)   Submission of a test report.



            1.   The test report to be prepared under the
supervision of a registered engineer in Arizona in accordance with accepted
day-night average sound level methodology of sound measurements. Such test
report shall establish the Ldn level for the requested land use as permitted
by this Airport Overlay District; or



            2.   At the option of the applicant, the applicant
shall provide an accurate survey map for the petitioned property and
financial assurance in a form approved by the city. Said assurance being for
the sole purpose to reimburse the city for the actual cost of hiring a
registered engineer to conduct the test report.



         (b)   Submission of an application, report and plans. 
Submission of an application, report and plans which provide the following:



            1.   A statement acknowledging and not challenging
the noise level as indicated by the airport noise and accident potential zone
map;



            2.   Documentation that the permitted uses within
the specific noise zone and/or APZ Zone are not reasonable uses of the
property because of one of the following conditions:



               a.   The permitted uses would have a
detrimental effect upon adjacent property; or



               b.   There are special circumstances
applicable to the property including, but not limited to size, shape,
topography, adjacent development, street access, utilities and other
development constraints.



      (3)   A land use waiver, shall not be granted if the
conditions which created the detrimental effect upon adjacent property or the
special circumstances were established by the property owner after the
adoption of the Airport Overlay District.



      (4)   A land use waiver shall not be granted for residential
uses within the APZ-1, APZ-2 and clear zones.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987)



   (F)   Nonconforming uses.  Any use of land, building or structure
lawfully existing at the time the Airport Overlay District or amendments
thereto become effective may be continued even though such use does not
conform with the regulations of the zoning ordinance or amendments thereto
for the Airport Overlay District in which it is located. These special
provisions for continuation and reconstruction of legal nonconforming uses
shall only apply to uses, structures and buildings which become nonconforming
through the adoption of the Airport Overlay District. These special
provisions for nonconforming uses will apply since the Airport Overlay
District has a large impact area, considerable development presently exists,
and a substantial economic hardship would be created if those properties were
required to comply with the provisions of the Airport Overlay District and
other sections of the zoning ordinance.



      (1)   Discontinuance of legal nonconforming uses.



         (a)   In the event that a legal nonconforming use of
land, building or structure is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months, any future use thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of
the Airport Overlay District and the zoning ordinance.



         (b)   In the event that a legal nonconforming
nonresidential use of land, building or structure is destroyed by fire,
flood, earthquake, war, riot or so-called act of God to the extent of 75% of
its value, according to the appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, then
and without further action by the City Council, the future use thereof shall,
from and after the date of such destruction, be subject to all the
regulations of the Airport Overlay District in addition to the provisions of
the other sections of the zoning ordinance.



         (c)   In the event that a legal nonconforming
residential use of buildings or structures is destroyed to any extent by
fire, flood, earthquake, war, riot or so-called act of God, it may be
reconstructed, except that such reconstruction shall comply with the
provisions of the other sections of the zoning ordinance and other applicable
city ordinances, regulations and codes. Such reconstruction shall be limited
to 100% of the destroyed structure.



      (2)   Expansion of a legal nonconforming use.



         (a)   Nonresidential.  A nonresidential legal
nonconforming use of land, building or structure shall not be enlarged,
extended, reconstructed or structurally altered unless such enlargement,
extension, reconstruction or structural alteration, and further use of such
property conform with the regulations of the Airport Overlay District in
which such property is located, other sections of the zoning ordinance and
other applicable city ordinances, regulations and codes. In the event that
the above-described nonconformity involves a building or structure, said
building or structure shall not be permitted to be relocated elsewhere on the
property or enlarged or extended by separate and detached construction.



         (b)   Residential.  A legal nonconforming residential
structure may expand if such expansion does not exceed 50% of the floor area
of the original structure provided that the expansion is in conformance with
the regulations of the district applicable immediately prior to the effective
date of the Airport Overlay District, other sections of the zoning ordinance
and other applicable city ordinances, regulations and codes. This provision
shall not permit the construction of separate and detached residential
structures or the relocation of such structure elsewhere on the property.



         (c)   Accessory structures.  The construction,
expansion and alteration of accessory structures, such as garages, barns,
swimming pools and fences shall be permitted. Said construction, expansion or
alteration shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning
district.



      (3)   Change of legal nonconforming use.  If no structural
alterations are made, any legal nonconforming use of land, building or
structure may be changed to another legal nonconforming use provided the
proposed use is of the same or more restricted classification, upon review
and approval by the Building Official and Planning Director. Under no
circumstances shall a nonresidential legal nonconforming use be converted to
a residential nonconforming use.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987)



   (G)   Administration.



      (1)   Lots divided by Airport Overlay District boundaries. 
Whenever a lot of record is divided by an Airport Overlay District boundary,
the regulations of these districts shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   The development shall conform to the land use and
design criteria of the respective districts applicable to the lot in
accordance with the official zoning map of the city; or



         (b)   For lots of record of five acres or less in size,
development shall conform to the land use and design criteria of the district
in which 50% or more of the lot is located in accordance with the official
zoning map of the city.



      (2)   Concurrent or conflicting regulations.  Where any
action in regard to a structure or use is regulated or controlled by more
than one provision of the zoning ordinance, such action shall comply with all
applicable provisions of both regulations, except that if a conflict exists,
the limitation or requirement which is most restrictive shall govern.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987)



   (H)   Amendments.



      (1)   The City Council, after receiving a recommendation from
the Planning Commission and after a public hearing or hearings, may amend
Airport Overlay District boundaries or the regulations herein or subsequently
established. Amendments may be initiated either by an individual or by
Commission initiative in accordance with the procedures established under §
154-03.03 of this chapter.



      (2)   The boundaries of an Airport Overlay District shall be
amended as necessary to ensure that the application of these regulations
remains in conformance with the purpose of the zoning ordinance. All
amendments to the Airport Overlay District boundaries shall be shown on the
official zoning map of the city. Amendments may be considered whenever the
following occurs:



         (a)   Evidence shows that the operation of the airport
has or will change substantially and that such modifications will be
permanent in nature;



         (b)   Additional information concerning the health
effects of high noise levels or the accident hazards associated with aircraft
operations becomes available; and



         (c)   New evidence is provided which indicates that
modifications to any Airport Overlay District is otherwise required.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987)



   (I)   Variances.



      (1)   A request for a variance from the Airport Overlay
District Land Use Matrix provided for in division (C) above, shall be
processed in accordance with A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 25, Article VII,
Airport Zoning and Regulations, including, but not limited to, A.R.S. §§
28-8471, 28-8473, 28-8481 and their successors, except as follows:



         (a)   The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
and is hereby designated as the entity that will hear requests for variances
under this section and shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
Within 30 days after conducting the hearing on the request for variance, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its recommendation to the City
Council, which shall, within a reasonable time, hear and decide the request
for variance and render a decision. The City Council, in rendering its
decision, may affirm, modify or reject the recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission.



         (b)   Any appeal from the decision of the City Council
under this section shall be as provided for in A.R.S. § 28-8475.



      (2)   In addition to the criteria for a variance contained in
A.R.S. § 28-8471, a variance shall not be granted without a specific finding
that the purpose of military airport compatibility is preserved as required
by A.R.S. § 28-8481(C).



(Ord. O2002-30, passed 8-7-2002; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.06  Public Overlay District (P).



   (A)   Purpose.  The principal purpose of the (P) Public Overlay
District is to allow those government which are necessary to serve the public
in particular locations of the city, and to distinguish them from private
uses. The (P) Public Overlay District is to provide an overlay designation
superimposed over existing zoning districts for those lands held in public
ownership by local, state and federal agencies within the city limits. It is
intended that each public use conform to the development standards required
for all other uses permitted within the underlying zoning district.



('80 Code, App. A, § 123)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2166, passed
11-2-1983)



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The (P) Public Overlay District shall not apply to
publicly owned land leased to private concerns for use other than by a
political subdivision nor shall this district apply to privately owned land
which is leased to a government agency.



      (2)   In the event that a government agency disposes of its
property for which a Public Overlay District has been granted, such
designation shall automatically expire, and the underlying zoning
classification shall remain in effect.



('80 Code, App. A, § 123)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2166, passed
11-2-1983)



   (C)   Permitted principal uses.



      (1)   Open space, parks, fine arts center, convention center
and public recreational facilities;



      (2)   Public schools and playgrounds;



      (3)   Governmental office buildings and grounds, including
service and maintenance facilities;



      (4)   Such public facilities as hospitals, libraries, museums
and similar public facilities;



      (5)   Municipal water production and storage facilities;
municipal sewage treatment plants; municipal facilities for the collection,
transfer and disposal of solid wastes;



      (6)   Public safety and law enforcement facilities; and



      (7)   Airports, armories and military installations.



   (D)   Permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Wall-mounted and concealed/disguised personal wireless
communication facilities, in accordance with Article 19 herein, are permitted
as an accessory use for a legally established nonresidential principal use.
Wall strapping of a personal wireless communications facility is not
permitted;



      (2)   Roof-mounted personal wireless communication facilities
are permitted on a publicly owned nonresidential building; and



      (3)   The use of lattice tower structures for any personal
wireless communication facility is not permitted.



('80 Code, App. A, § 123)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2166, passed
11-2-1983; Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002)



   (E)   Property development standards.  To meet the purpose of the
(P) Public Overlay District, all uses shall meet the minimum development
standards as specified by the zoning ordinance for the underlying zoning
district or districts in which they are located.



('80 Code, App. A, § 123)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2166, passed
11-2-1983)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Procedure.  An application for the (P) Public Overlay
District shall only be made by an agency of the local, state or federal
government, in accordance with the procedures established under § 154-03.03
of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 123)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2166, passed
11-2-1983; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.07  Planned Unit Developments Overlay District (PUD).



   (A)   Purpose.  Planned unit developments (PUDs) are intended to
permit greater flexibility and, consequently, more creative and imaginative
design for the development of residential areas than generally is possible
under conventional zoning regulations. PUDs are further intended to promote
more economical and efficient use of the land while providing a harmonious
variety of housing choices, a higher level of urban amenities and
preservation of natural scenic qualities of open spaces.



('80 Code, App. A, § 195)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1546, passed
10-27-1976; Ord. O95-040, passed 12-20-1995)



   (B)   Applicability.  Variations from strict interpretations of
this chapter and subdivision regulations of the city are permitted pursuant
to the provisions of this subchapter and § 153-77 of this title.



('80 Code, App. A, § 195)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1546, passed
10-27-1976; Ord. O95-040, passed 12-20-1995)



   (C)   Criteria for establishment.  PUDs are permitted in accordance
with the following provisions.



      (1)   Location.  A PUD may be permitted in any Residential
Estate (RE), any Low Density Residential (R-1), Medium Density Residential
(R-2) or High Density Residential (R-3), Transitional (TR), Planned Shopping
Center (PSC), Limited Commercial (B-1), General Commercial (B-2) or Business
Park (BP) District established by this chapter.



      (2)   Size.  The planned unit development shall consist of a
minimum net site area of two acres.



      (3)   Permitted uses.  Any use permitted as a matter of right
in the High Density Residential (R-3) District shall be permitted in
conformity with the procedural and regulatory provisions hereinafter set
forth.



      (4)   Density.  The average lot area per dwelling unit,
including common area but excluding area occupied by public or private
streets, shall not be less than that required by the zoning district
regulations otherwise applicable to the site. In density computations, common
area shall include only open space and recreational areas that are to be used
exclusively for the residents of the development who receive an undivided
ownership and responsibilities for such area.



      (5)   Permitted variations.  Variations in type of dwelling
unit, yard, setback, lot size, height, circulation facilities and off-street
parking requirements may be permitted which are consistent with the spirit
and intent of this section.



      (6)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 195)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1546, passed
10-27-1976; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord. O95-040, passed 12-20-1995)



   (D)   Application.  Applications for a PUD shall be submitted and
reviewed in accordance with the following procedure:



      (1)   Sketch plan.  In order to obtain information upon city
policies and applicable regulations concerning development alternatives, and
in order to inform the city of the applicant’s intentions, the applicant
may submit a general outline of the proposal, including a schematic sketch
plan in accordance with guidelines established by the Planning Director. This
information shall be reviewed by pertinent city officials and the Planning
and Zoning Commission;



      (2)   Preliminary plan.  The following minimum information is
required in addition to requirements of §§ 153-30 and 153-31 of the
subdivision regulations:



         (a)   Statement.  A statement of planning objectives to
be achieved by the PUD through the particular approach proposed. This
statement should include a description of the character of the proposed
development and the rationale behind the assumptions and choices made;



         (b)   Development schedule.  A development schedule
indicating the approximate date when construction of the PUD or stages of the
PUD can be expected to begin and be completed;



         (c)   Statement of intentions.  A statement of
intentions with regard to the future selling or leasing of all or portions of
the PUD, such as land areas, dwelling units, recreation facilities and the
like. Two copies of the proposed deed restrictions and articles of
incorporation of a home owners association shall be furnished;



         (d)   Quantitative data from the following.  Total
number of each type of dwelling units; gross and net parcel size; gross and
net residential densities; total amount of open space in various categories;
variations in setbacks, height, individual lot size and lot coverage for each
dwelling type proposed; total number of parking spaces;



         (e)   Economic feasibility study.  Economic feasibility
study or market analysis where necessary and requested by the Planning
Director or Planning Commission;



         (f)   Typical floor plans.  Typical floor plans and
placement of structures on individual lots or parcels;



         (g)   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation system. 
Interrelationship of pedestrian and vehicular circulation system;



         (h)   Landscape plan.  A schematic landscape plan
indicating the treatment of private and common open spaces;



         (i)   Information on adjacent land areas.  Adequate
information on adjacent land areas to indicate relationships between the
proposed development and existing and proposed adjacent areas, including land
uses, zoning classifications, densities, circulation systems, public
facilities and unique natural features;



         (j)   Treatment of perimeter.  Treatment of perimeter
of the PUD, including materials and techniques used such as screens, fences
and walls; and



         (k)   Additional information.  Any additional
information which may be necessary to properly evaluate the character and
impact of the proposed PUD.



            1.   Where projects are developed in stages, PUD
zoning designation can only be considered for the stages for which the above
materials have been presented. Sketch plans including land uses, site design,
circulation and adjacent land uses shall be submitted for the remaining lands
to be developed in future stages of the project even though they are not
under consideration for approval at this time.



            2.   The preliminary plan shall be heard by the
Planning Commission and shall be forwarded to the City Council with the
recommendation of the Planning Commission in accordance with the procedures
established under § 154-03.03 of this chapter. Upon approval of the
preliminary plan by the City Council, PUD zoning shall be designated on the
official zoning map.



      (3)   Final plan.  Within a maximum of six months following
approval of the preliminary plan, the applicant shall file with the Planning
Director a final development plan containing in a precise and detailed form
the information required in division (D)(2) above and in §§ 153-45 through
153-51 of the city subdivision regulations. At its discretion, and for good
cause, the Planning Commission may extend for six months the period for
filing of the final development plan upon request by the applicant. The final
development plan shall be in substantial conformance with the preliminary
development plan, and shall be referred to the Planning Commission for
recommendation prior to consideration by the City Council.



('80 Code, App. A, § 195)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1546, passed
10-27-1976; Ord. O95-040, passed 12-20-1995)



   (E)   Final approval.  The approved final development plan, rather
than any other provision of this zoning ordinance, shall govern the use of
the land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or
structures within the PUD.



      (1)   Minor changes in the location, siting and height of
buildings and structures may be authorized by the Planning Commission without
additional public hearings if required by engineering or other circumstances
not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No change authorized by
this division may cause any of the following:



         (a)   A change in the use or character of the
development;



         (b)   An increase in lot coverage;



         (c)   An increase in the intensity of use;



         (d)   A change in traffic circulation or public
utilities;



         (e)   A reduction in approved open space;



         (f)   A reduction of off-street parking and loading
space; and



         (g)   A reduction in required pavement widths.



      (2)   All other changes in use, or rearrangement of lots,
blocks and building tracts or any changes in the provision of common open
spaces must be made by the City Council upon report and recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.



      (3)   If no construction has begun within one year following
approval of the final development plan, said approval shall lapse and become
void. The Planning and Zoning Commission, upon showing of good cause, may
extend for a period of six months, the time for beginning of construction.



      (4)   After completion of the PUD, any minor extensions,
alterations or modifications of existing buildings or structures may be
authorized by the Board of Adjustment if they are consistent in concept and
character with the PUD.



('80 Code, App. A, § 195)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1546, passed
10-27-1976; Ord. O95-040, passed 12-20-1995; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.08  Smart Growth Overlay District (SGO).



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The Smart Growth Overlay (SGO) District is designed to
promote compact, pedestrian-friendly development, encourage a compatible mix
of uses, encourage more condensed residential subdivisions, provide a choice
of housing types and transportation modes, preserve open space and provide a
consistent development review process.



      (2)   The SGO District establishes and defines the development
pattern, the allowed uses of land and implements standards for the siting and
character of improvements and structures through the use and adoption of
pattern books or form-based codes as regulatory documents. This approach is
intended to allow a broad range of uses and options in order to encourage the
development of diverse, attractive neighborhoods.



      (3)   The development plan review process will assure that
adjacent uses are compatible and that design is of a high quality. The Zoning
Administrator, or his or her designee, shall review all SGO District project
plans to ensure proposed development patterns and standards, as depicted in
the pattern book or form-based code, comply with the purpose and intent of
the district.



      (4)   The purpose will be accomplished by the adoption of
site-specific pattern books or form-based codes which evaluate urban design
projects from the regional to the architectural scale. pattern books or
form-based codes include a plan displaying the pattern of development for
allowed uses, lot types and development standards and available architectural
styles and design standards. Pattern books or form-based codes will support
the SGO District by the following actions:



         (a)   Promoting mixed land uses and mixed-use
commercial/residential buildings;



         (b)   Taking advantage of compact design;



         (c)   Fostering distinctive and attractive communities
by including parks, pedestrian oriented streets, public art and community
facilities;



         (d)   Supporting a variety of transportation choices to
enhance the interconnectivity between mixed-use commercial and residential
neighborhoods via streets with detached sidewalks, bike paths and walking
paths;



         (e)   Increasing the availability of housing by creating
a range of housing opportunities in neighborhoods;



         (f)   Establishing flexible development standards;



         (g)   Ensuring high quality architecture and urban
design that reflects classic elements, including vernacular, or local,
styles; and



         (h)   Clearly defining and activating the public realm
by locating buildings to form street edges and corners and locating buildings
to activate the street level.



      (5)   To accomplish the purpose, it will be necessary to form
a special taxing district such as a community facilities district for
maintenance of landscaping and non-necessary public infrastructure, for
example, pedestrian oriented streets, public art, water features, bike and
walking paths. The developer will enter into a development agreement
requiring the developer to post assurances until such time that the taxing
district generates sufficient revenues to become self-supporting.



   (B)   Intent.



      (1)   The Congress for the New Urbanism (CNU) was formed in
1993 to advance the principles of New Urbanism and promote their broad
application. The CNU later ratified the Charter of the New Urbanism at its
fourth annual Congress. Its goals promote walkable, neighborhood-based
development as an alternative to sprawl. In the process of urban design, this
is accomplished by identifying and focusing on development patterns within
the scale of neighborhoods, districts and corridors with the idea of
regulating within clear, identifiable spatial boundaries.



      (2)   The CNU Charter outlines principles for building better
communities, from the scale of the region down to the block. The principles
are intended to guide public policy, development practice, urban planning and
design. It is the intent of the SGO District that development shall recognize
and be in harmony with the principles of New Urbanism as summarized below.



         (a)   Civic sites.  Clearly identified and at a
prominent location, civic sites should attract residents to that location
where they can meet neighbors or have scheduled community events. They also
lead to a “sense of place”, which increases pride in one’s community.



         (b)   Walkability.  A modified grid design, with
sidewalks, mixed with linear parks and parkways, encourages residents to move
around without the use of automobiles. This is particularly important for
children and the elderly, as well as reducing fuel consumption on unnecessary
vehicle trips.



         (c)   Connectivity.  Plentiful connections between
different communities within a development reduces traffic on “connector”
routes, by allowing for traffic to flow on a greater number of local streets.



         (d)   Mix of land uses.  Uses in addition to
residential within a properly designed development can provide a sense of
place. Access to mixed-use centers should be encouraged by both vehicles and
non-vehicular means through multiple connections, sidewalks and the like.
Mixed-use centers may provide housing and non-housing within the same
district, or may provide only nonresidential uses, if well connected to
adjacent residential uses. Retail within mixed use must have good visibility
from high volume thoroughfares as well as plentiful parking in order to be
financially successful. Good design can accommodate both these needs into a
mixed-use design.



         (e)   Diverse housing types.  Single-family,
townhouses, multi-family apartments and condos can be integrated into one
development, as long as the scale and design of adjacent uses is compatible
with each other. A mix of housing types ensures that people of various
socio-economic classes may live in proximity to one another and share a
common pride in the community.



         (f)   High quality architecture and urban design. 
Architecture should reflect classic elements, including vernacular or local,
styles. However, overly prescriptive architectural standards may raise the
cost of housing construction and should be flexible when considering
workforce housing.



         (g)   Increased density.  More units on smaller lots
allows for preservation of open space, reduces infrastructure and maintenance
costs and allows for a more diverse mix of housing stock, which opens
communities up to many socio-economic groups.



         (h)   Environmental sensitivity.  Open space areas
should also be counted toward, not in addition to, other open space
requirements, such as setbacks and park dedication. This mainly applies to
suburban locations that have existing natural features on site, but there are
opportunities even in more urban settings.



         (i)   Public transportation.  The structure of these
communities (good connectivity, walkability and higher density) should make
existing and potential public transportation service more accessible and
feasible than conventional subdivisions.



   (C)   Applicability.



      (1)   Other overlay districts applicable within project
boundaries shall not be subordinate to the SGO District. The SGO District may
be applied to all underlying commercial and residential districts in
conformance with the City General Plan. The overlay shall be established to
promote the purpose and intent of this section by allowing flexibility in
development patterns and uses not otherwise permitted in the underlying
district and to implement stand-alone development standards through the use
of site-specific pattern books or form-based codes.



      (2)   Where the overlay district exists and there is a
conflict between the requirements and/or uses specified between the overlay
with its supporting documents and the underlying district, the standards of
the overlay district shall prevail.



      (3)   A zoning map change establishing any SGO District shall
be subject to the same procedures and requirements as any other zoning map
change.



   (D)   Permitted principal uses and conditional uses.



      (1)   Proposed uses listed in the adopted supporting documents
for the SGO District will be supplemental to those listed in the underlying
zoning districts. An example of the supplemental uses would be mixed-use
buildings, live/work units and carriage houses. A list of those uses as they
apply to the specific underlying zoning district shall be included within the
pattern book or form-based code.



      (2)   Proposed uses will be evaluated to ensure they meet the
purpose and intent of this section. All uses will be subject to in-house
review and approval to ensure development is compatible with adjacent uses,
and that identified impacts are mitigated if needed. Final determinations on
project status and requirements will be made by the Director of Community
Development.



   (E)   Rezoning submittal requirements.



      (1)   All SGO Districts shall have site-specific names. The
naming convention shall be as follows:  Smart Growth Overlay (SGO) District
- Project Name.



      (2)   The submittal of a rezoning application shall include a
site-specific pattern book or form-based code as the regulatory document(s)
for the project.



      (3)   Pattern books shall contain at a minimum the following
sections: Introduction, Community Patterns and Architectural Patterns.
Optional sections may be required including, but not limited to, Landscaping
and Infrastructure.



      (4)   Form-based codes shall contain at a minimum the
following sections:  Regulating Plan, Public Space Standards, Building Form
Standards, Administration and Glossary. Optional sections may be required
including, but not limited to, standards regulating Blocks, Building Types,
Architecture and Landscaping.



      (5)   Pattern books or form-based codes shall generally
include the following information:



         (a)   A master plan and/or regulating plan displaying
the pattern of development for allowed uses;



         (b)   List(s) of uses that are supplemental to the
permitted uses and conditional uses of the underlying zoning district;



         (c)   Lot types, building types, placement of structures
on lots and development standards (i.e., setbacks, lot coverage, building
height, landscaping and the like);



         (d)   Building forms and available architectural styles
and design standards;



         (e)   Pertinent quantitative data such as the total
number of each type of commercial building and dwelling units; parcel sizes;
residential densities; total amount of open space in various categories; and
parking requirements;



         (f)   Supporting illustrations and standards for
streetscapes (local and arterial road connections), lot layouts, building
frontages and elevations;



         (g)   Interrelationship of pedestrian and vehicular
circulation system and how pedestrian walkways/pathways and bicycle
facilities interconnect to adjoining neighborhoods;



         (h)   Supporting illustrations and standards for civic
spaces and open space such as parks, squares, linear pathways/parks and
plazas; and



         (i)   Any additional information or optional elements to
be included with the pattern book or form-based code which may be necessary
to properly evaluate the character and impact of the proposed development as
determined by the Director of Community Development.



      (6)   The proposed rezoning action with the adoption of the
pattern book or form-based code shall be heard by the Planning Commission and
shall be forwarded to the City Council with the recommendation of the
Planning Commission. Upon approval of the rezoning action and adoption of the
pattern book or form-based code by the City Council, the SGO zoning shall be
designated on the official zoning map.



   (F)   Minimum requirements; district size.  Forty acres.



   (G)   Development, design and landscaping standards.  Development,
design and landscaping standards shall be site-specific, dependent upon the
type of proposed project. The standards will be included in the pattern book
or form-based code and shall be compliant with the purpose and intent of this
overlay district.



   (H)   Density.  Development shall comply with the overall density
standards of the underlying General Plan land use designation(s) and zoning
district(s).



   (I)   Sign standards.  Sign standards shall be site-specific,
dependent upon the type of proposed project. A sign package for the entire
development shall be submitted for review and approval.



   (J)   Variations, minor deviations and major deviations.



      (1)   Variations submittal requirements.  Variations in the
aforementioned submittal requirements may be permitted which are consistent
with the purpose and intent of this section as approved by the Director of
Community Development.



      (2)   Minor deviations to the SGO pattern book or form-based
code.



         (a)   Proposed deviations to the SGO regulatory
documents (pattern book or FBC) that substantially conform to the adopted
standards, regulations and guidelines, and are not in conflict with any
provisions of the City of Yuma  Municipal Code that may apply to the SGO,
may be permitted as “minor deviations”. Minor deviations may include, but
are not limited to:



            1.   Allowance of a use not listed in the
permitted uses of the SGO regulatory documents, if the use is consistent with
or similar to the intent of the General Plan, underlying zoning district and
SGO designation for the area in which the use is requested;



            2.   Changes to numbers or letters establishing or
referencing text sections or figures, including references to City Code
sections;



            3.   Modifications to park and public space
designs described in the regulatory documents;



            4.   Modifications to informational material
contained in the pattern book or the FBC that does not have regulatory
effect; and



            5.   Any other modifications determined by the
Director of Community Development to be in accordance with the required
findings for a minor deviation.



         (b)   1.   A request for a minor deviation shall be
submitted in writing and shall include the specific text, exhibits or other
changes proposed for the minor deviation and other material or information
requested by the Department of Community Development in order to review the
proposal and document all of the findings identified above.



            2.   All approved minor deviations shall be
documented in writing and maintained by the city with the SGO case file. A
minor deviation is not intended to replace the variance process or approve
variances described in the City Municipal Code.



            3.   The Director of Community Development, acting
upon any application for a minor deviation that is determined to be complete,
shall:



               a.   Approve the request;



               b.   Approve the request with conditions or
modifications;



               c.   Deny the request; or



               d.   Refer the request to the Planning
Commission or Hearing Officer for consideration.



            4.   In order to approve a minor deviation, the
Director must make all of the following findings for the minor deviation:



               a.   The minor deviation substantially
conforms to the adopted standards, regulations and guidelines of the SGO;



               b.   The minor deviation is not in conflict
with any provisions of the City of Yuma Municipal Code that apply to the SGO;



               c.   The minor deviation will not adversely
affect public health, safety or welfare;



               d.   The minor deviation will not adversely
affect adjacent property; and



               e.   The minor deviation will not have
adverse environmental effects that have not been previously analyzed.



      (3)   Major deviations.  Any proposed deviation to the
form-based code or to the pattern book that is not a minor deviation shall be
a major deviation. Major deviations to SGO regulatory documents shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review and approval.



(Ord. O2009-19, passed 3-4-2009; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-14.09  Infill Overlay District (IO).



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   The Infill Overlay District is an overlay to the
underlying zoning district which may be used in combination with any zoning
district provided in this zoning code. It is in the public interest to
maximize efficiency of the utilization of public services, infrastructure,
and facilities as a means to achieve focused growth and to provide a
cost-effective method for municipal service delivery. Within the identified
Infill Overlay District, there exists an opportunity to achieve maximum
utilization of land resources that have been under-utilized in past
development. The City of Yuma encourages infill development to be compatible
and consistent with existing uses in the area.



      (2)   The purpose and intent of the Infill Overlay District
includes, but is not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Encouraging investment and maintenance of the
existing neighborhoods;



         (b)   Stabilizing and enhancing property values;



         (c)   Promoting new development that will enhance and
protect existing structures;



         (d)   Encouraging efficient use of land and public
services in existing neighborhoods;



         (e)   Providing flexibility in development standards to
facilitate infill development and redevelopment; and



         (f)   Promoting neighborhood preservation and
enhancement through redevelopment of blighted, distressed and underutilized
properties.



   (B)   Applicability.



      (1)   The provisions of the Infill Overlay District apply to
all parcels identified within the boundary, which meet the eligibility
section below, and are able to utilize the provisions set forth in this
ordinance.



         All land uses and development, including but not limited
to: buildings, parking areas, landscaping and design, shall be located and/or
provided in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and land
development regulations, except as modified by this chapter.



      (2)   The boundaries of the Infill Overlay District are
generally based upon the redevelopment element as adopted by the City of Yuma
General Plan:







 



   (C)   Relationship to underlying zoning districts. All provisions of
the city code that would apply to a non-infill project shall apply to infill
projects except as specifically modified in this ordinance. The developer
and/or owner of property within the specified area of this overlay may choose
to develop their property using either the standards of the underlying zoning
designation or the standards set forth within this chapter. If the developer
decides to use the standards set forth in this chapter, then standards of
this section shall take precedence over those of the underlying zoning
designation and other sections of the zoning code. If the developer decides
to use the standards of the underlying zoning designation, the standards of
this chapter will not apply.



   (D)   Use regulations.



      (1)   Permitted principal uses.



         (a)   The principal uses as allowed in the underlying
zoning districts; and



         (b)   Corner markets, in accordance with § 154-15.17.



      (2)   Conditional uses.  The conditional uses of the
underlying zoning district may be established or operated as a conditional
use, upon application and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.



   (E)   Pre-development meetings. All development inquiries and
requests within the Infill Overlay District shall be required to be reviewed
and assessed during a pre-development meeting, where customers and city staff
discuss typical development standards and identify any potential incentives
available for a particular site.



   (F)   Design review procedures. Infill Overlay District development
standards shall be incorporated into all project plans submitted to the city
for which a building permit is required. The Zoning Administrator, or his or
her designee, shall review all Infill Overlay District development standards
incorporated in such project plans to ensure compliance with the intent and
spirit of the district. Any property located within a Historic District or
Aesthetic Overlay District will require review and approval by the Design and
Historic Review Commission (DHRC) prior to the issuance of any construction
or building permits.



   (G)   Infill Incentive Plan. The City of Yuma Infill Incentive Plan
was prepared by the City Community Planning Division in coordination with
Building Safety, Engineering, Utilities, the Heritage Area and City
Administration. The Plan describes the process used to identify vacant and
underutilized land in the city and formulates a strategy for encouraging
development and redevelopment in the area. The Plan's primary goal is to
promote infill development, rehabilitation, and reuse of properties that
contribute positively to the identified redevelopment areas.



      The Plan assesses development-related concerns in the infill
area, evaluates the regulatory processes related to development, and provides
focused incentives for development and redevelopment of infill sites.



(Ord. O2017-022, passed 6-21-2017; Ord. O2018-032, passed 8-1-18)



Article 15 - General Provisions



§ 154-15.01  Purpose.



The purpose of this article is to establish general development and
performance standards applicable to all zoning districts. The standards and
regulations set forth in this article shall qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the district regulations set forth elsewhere in this chapter.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.02  General Provisions for Buildings and Uses.



   (A)   Restoring unsafe buildings and structures.  Nothing in this
chapter shall prevent a strengthening or restoration to safe or lawful
condition of any building or structure declared unsafe or unlawful pursuant
to law.



   (B)   Security guards and caretakers.  The occupancy of buildings
or premises by security guards or caretakers for sleeping shall not
constitute residence occupancy within the meaning of this chapter, except
that, within the Airport District any such occupancy shall be expressly
limited to the principal building or premises used for commercial, industrial
or agricultural purposes only, in accordance with the provisions of this
Code. Any such area within a commercial, industrial or agricultural building
used for such purpose within the Airport District shall be limited to a
maximum of 400 square feet and shall be sound attenuated.



   (C)   Minimum lot size.



      (1)   Where the provisions of this chapter establish a minimum
lot size requirement which would prohibit an application for rezoning, such
application may be considered if it meets the criteria set forth in division
(C)(2) below.



      (2)   Applications which do not meet the minimum lot size as
defined under the development standards for that zoning district may be
considered for rezoning only if a specific plan of development is submitted
at the time of the rezoning request which complies with all other development
standards without the necessity of a variance.



   (D)   Minimum district size.



      (1)   Where the provisions of this chapter establish a minimum
district size requirement which would prohibit an application for rezoning,
such application may be considered if it meets the criteria set forth in
division (D)(2) below.



      (2)   Applications which do not meet the minimum district size
as defined under the development standards for that zoning district may be
considered for rezoning only if:



         (a)   The property is zoned as Agriculture (AG) as a
result of having been annexed by the city;



         (b)   The existing use is a legal nonconforming use in
the Agriculture (AG) District;



         (c)   Rezoning to a more appropriate district is
necessary in order to continue or expand the existing activity; and



         (d)   The proposed district at least 25% of the
established minimum district size required by this chapter.



   (E)   Legally established yard setbacks.  On any property where
there is a legally established building setback line less than that required
by the standards established by this chapter, that setback may be continued
when expanding a structure for a use permitted by the zoning district in
which the property is located. The provision is not applicable to proposed
expansions in street yard setback lines.



('80 Code, App. A, § 30)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2375, passed
9-16-1987; Ord. O97-11, passed 3-5-1997; Ord. O97-23, passed 9-3-1997; Ord.
02000-25, passed 5-3-2000; Ord. O2002-30, passed 8-7-2002; Ord. O2010-32,
passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-15.03  Height Limits.



   (A)   Specifications.  For the purpose of this chapter, an attic
story shall be deemed a full story. No story shall be deemed a first story if
its floor level is more than four feet below the mean lot level, except that
if any basement or cellar is used for residence occupancy by other than a
janitor or caretaker, such basement or cellar shall be deemed to be a first
story. A mezzanine story shall be considered a full story if it covers an
area greater than one-half of the ground floor area, or if the total height
of the story which includes the mezzanine exceeds 24 feet.



   (B)   Exceptions to height limits.  The provisions of this section
shall not apply to church spires, domes, belfries, cupolas, monuments, water
tank towers, fire towers, observation towers, transmission towers used
specifically for high voltage electrical transmission, wind-mills, chimneys,
smokestacks, silos, derricks, conveyors, flag; or to a parapet wall extending
not more than four feet above the limit of height of the building on which it
rests; nor on High Density Residential R-3, Business or Industrial Districts,
to bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks, monitors or scenery lofts;
provided that such structures shall not have an aggregate area greater than
25% of the ground floor area of the building, and provided that no linear
dimension of any such structure other than a parapet wall shall exceed 50% of
the corresponding street frontage, if the structure be within 25 feet of such
frontage.



   (C)   Visibility.  No walls, building, signs, vehicles, shrubbery
or dense planting or other visual obstruction in excess of 30 inches in
height shall be placed on any corner in any zoning district within the
visibility triangle. Trees may be permitted, provided that the branches and
leaves shall be trimmed to a minimum height of eight feet above the ground to
permit unobstructed visibility.



('80 Code, App. A, § 140)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2096, passed
11-3-1982; Ord. 2235, passed 1-20-1984; Ord. O95-040, passed 9-5-1995; Ord.
O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see §
154-999



§ 154-15.04  Projections, Encroachments.



   (A)   Specifications.  Except as specified in this section, yards
required by this chapter shall be open and unobstructed to the sky.



   (B)   Cornices and eaves.  Cornices and eaves may project not to
exceed two feet over any minimum required yard.



   (C)   Ornaments and balconies.  Sills, leaders, belt courses and
similar ornamental features may project six inches over any minimum yard. An
open fire balcony, fire escape or fire tower may project five feet over any
yard.



   (D)   Bay windows and porches.  A bay window, oriel or balcony,
which is not more than eight feet wide may project not more than two feet
into any front or side yard. A porte cochere over a driveway may extend into
any side yard.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.05  Swimming Pools.



   All swimming pools (municipal, commercial or private) shall be subject
to the following criteria.



   (A)   All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence or wall which
has a minimum height of five feet measured from the exterior of the fence.
Said fence or wall shall have no openings greater than four inches in any
dimension and does not afford climbing. All gates in said fence or wall shall
be of a self-closing and self-latching type.



   (B)   All swimming pools shall comply with the minimum front yard
setbacks of the applicable zoning district. All swimming pools shall be set
back five feet from the side, rear and street side property lines. The
required five-foot wall may be located on the side, rear or street wide
property lines but shall not be located within the front yard setbacks. In
all cases, the sight clearance and fence requirements shall be applicable.



   (C)   Swimming pools shall not be included in the computation of
maximum lot coverage.



   (D)   Swimming pool equipment shall be installed per
manufacturer’s specifications; however, if these devices are installed
within the rear and/or side yard setbacks they shall adhere to the following:



      (1)   The side yard setback for pool equipment shall have a
minimum distance of four feet from the side property line or the building to
maintain fire access.



      (2)   The rear yard setback for pool equipment shall have a
minimum distance of zero feet from the rear property line.



('80 Code, App. A, § 190)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1497, passed
5-19-1976; Ord. 2235, passed 11-20-1984; Ord. O95-040, passed 9-5-1995; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2014-14, passed 5-7-2014)  Penalty, see §
154-999



§ 154-15.06  Walls and Fences.



   (A)   Walls and fences.  A wall or fence shall be permitted along
any lot line in any Agriculture, Suburban Ranch, Residential Estate, Low
Density Residential, Medium Density Residential, High Density Residential or
Transitional District, provided, however, that no wall or fence more than
three feet in height shall be permitted within a required front yard setback
area.



   (B)   Development abutting canals, laterals or drainage channels.



      (1)   Any lands proposed for residential development adjacent
to actively used (non-abandoned) canals, laterals or drainage channels shall
have construction thereon a barrier wall to mitigate potential property
damage from flooding and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of
community residents.



      (2)   As a general rule, the following guidelines apply to the
construction of barrier walls adjoining canals, laterals or drainage channels:



         (a)   When proposed residential development abuts a
canal or lateral the barrier wall shall be a wall of solid masonry material
at least six feet high, subject to the provisions of division (B)(2)(d) below;



         (b)   When proposed residential development abuts a
drainage channel the barrier wall may be a wrought iron fence of the same
height in lieu of solid masonry;



         (c)   A wrought iron fence in lieu of solid masonry may
be constructed when a canal or lateral abuts a roadway and a solid masonry
wall exists on the opposite side of the street protecting the adjoining
development;



         (d)   The topography of the proposed development and its
relation to abutting canals, laterals or drainage channels will also affect
the type of barrier wall and its height. To this end, the developer of the
proposed development shall coordinate with the city and, in consultation with
the irrigation district or water users’ association, determine the optimal
barrier wall type, height and configuration, as well as public access points
to linear parks and pathways, possible emergency access points and access
points to canals, laterals and drainage channels at street crossings;



         (e)   All barrier wall construction shall meet the
minimum requirements of the city, construction standard detail drawings, as
amended;



         (f)   The barrier wall shall be located outside the
right-of-way and any existing work or facility including embankments and
access roads; and



         (g)   A one-foot non-access easement shall be required
outside the irrigation district or water users’ association border or the
existing work or facility including embankments or access roads.



(Ord. O2006-11, passed 1-18-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.07  Manufactured Home Placement Permits.



   (A)   A manufactured home placement permit shall be required for the
installation of any manufactured home within the city. No manufactured home
built prior to January 1, 1985 shall be placed or relocated in the city.
Application shall be made on the appropriate forms provided for this purpose
by the Building Safety Division and shall include a site plan showing the
location of the manufactured home, other structures or dwellings on the lot,
setbacks between all improvements and distances to property lines. If a
manufactured home is placed in a mobile home or manufactured home park, a map
of the park showing all existing spaces and points of access shall be
required.



   (B)   The Building Official, or his or her designee, shall issue
placement permits only if the manufactured home complies with all applicable
zoning and building code requirements including use, setbacks and noise
attenuation. A fee to cover administration and inspection costs will be
charged as determined by the Arizona State Office of Manufactured Housing.



   (C)   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to the ground in
conformance with the manufacturer’s specifications, per the currently
adopted Residential Code. All manufactured homes which are set above the
ground level shall be skirted.



   (D)   Placement permits shall be valid for a period of six months
from the date of issuance. Manufactured homes shall not be occupied until
placement permits have been issued and a final inspection has been performed
and approved.



(Ord. O2006-77, passed 12-6-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.07.01  Park Model Placement Permits.



   (A)   A placement permit shall be required for the installation of
any park model within the city. Application shall be made on the appropriate
forms provided for this purpose by the Building Safety Division and shall
include a site plan showing the location of the park model, other structures
or dwellings on the lot, setbacks between all improvements and distances to
property lines. If a park model is placed in a recreational vehicle, mobile
home or manufactured home park, a map showing adjacent structures with
distance separations shall be required.



   (B)   The Building Official, or his or her designee, shall issue
placement permits only if the park model complies with all applicable zoning
and building code requirements including use, setbacks and noise attenuation.



   (C)   All park models shall be anchored to the ground in conformance
with the manufacturer's specifications, per the currently adopted Residential
Code. All park models which are set above the ground level shall be skirted.



   (D)   Park models shall not be occupied until placement permits have
been issued and a final inspection has been performed and approved.



(Ord. O2012-20, passed 11-7-12)



§ 154-15.08  Home Occupations.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.



      (1)   Establish criteria for operation of home occupations in
dwelling units within residential districts;



      (2)   Permit and regulate the conduct of home occupations in a
dwelling unit, whether owner or renter-occupied;



      (3)   Ensure that such home occupations are compatible with,
and do not have a negative impact on adjacent and nearby residential
properties and uses;



      (4)   Ensure that public and private services such as streets,
sewers, water or utility systems are not burdened by the home occupations to
the extent that usage exceeds that normally associated with residential use;



      (5)   Allow residents of the community to use their residences
as places to enhance or fulfill personal economic goals, under certain
specified standards, conditions and criteria, while maintaining the character
and integrity of the residential neighborhood;



      (6)   Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these home
occupation regulations; and



      (7)   Allow home occupations only in conformance with the
regulations and performance standards set forth in this section.



   (B)   Performance standards.  All proposed home occupations must
meet the following performance standards in order to be permitted.



      (1)   Accessory use.  Home occupation activities shall take
place within a principal dwelling unit or within an attached or detached
accessory structure. The maximum square footage of a home occupation is 300
square feet. Home occupations shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to
the residential land use established on the lot or parcel being utilized.
Home occupations are prohibited where there is no principal dwelling unit.



      (2)   Private recreation areas.  Private recreation areas
(e.g., swimming pools, tennis courts and riding areas) may only be used when
conducting a home occupation clearly related to the recreation area being
used.



      (3)   Number of home occupations.  Multiple home occupations
may be allowed at one single residence. All home occupations must be within
the same 300 square foot area. All areas devoted to the home occupation shall
maintain a residential appearance.



      (4)   Employees.  The number of employees involves with a
home occupation shall be limited to the residents of the principal dwelling
unit on the site.



      (5)   Hours of operation.  Clients shall only be received
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



      (6)   Clients.  The number of clients that can visit the
residence is limited to one client per hour, one at a time.



      (7)   Rental units.  Home occupations that take place within
rental units or mobile home parks must have the owner’s or manager’s
written permission.



      (8)   Sale and display of merchandise.  On-site display and
sale or rental of goods/products is prohibited.



      (9)   Number of vehicles.  Vehicles related to the operation
of a home occupation shall be restricted to one, under one and one-half tons
gross vehicle weight, per residence.



      (10)   Deliveries.  Deliveries other than standard parcel
services are prohibited when associated with a home occupation.



      (11)   Signs.  One sign, totaling one-square foot is
permitted in the window of the residence. Vehicles used in the home
occupation can have signs of one-square foot attached to the doors that
advertise the home occupation.



      (12)   Storage.  Materials or goods associated with a home
occupation shall be stored within the 300 square feet allotted for the home
occupation. No material or goods associated with the home occupation can be
stored outside.



      (13)   Nuisances.  No equipment or activity shall be used in
a home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor or
electrical interference detectable from beyond the subject property
boundaries. Noise levels shall not exceed those levels that are currently in
existence in the neighborhood. The use of equipment, other than office
equipment, shall be limited to the hours of operation listed in division
(B)(5) above.



      (14)   Health hazards.  No home occupation shall be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare of the abutting neighbors
or the neighborhood or city in general:



         (a)   Class A, B or C explosives, with the exception of
hobby reloading as defined by the Uniform Fire Code;



         (b)   Class A, B poisons; flammable combustible liquids
over five gallons, unless in a licensed vehicle or watercraft;



         (c)   Corrosive/oxidizing chemicals other that what are
normally consumed on premises for normal use (drain cleaner, pool chemicals
and the like);



         (d)   Hazardous materials as defined by the
Environmental Protection Agency; and



         (e)   Pesticides registered under the Federal
Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act, as amended by the Federal
Environmental Pesticide Control Act of 1979, which are not used around the
home for personal consumption. Home occupations requiring a permit/license
from a regulatory body which do not involve the use of hazardous materials
may be permissible, provided the occupation is in compliance with all
applicable federal, state and local regulations. This prohibits home
occupations that involve: hazardous materials that pose a detonation hazard,
a deflagration hazard such as combustible dusts or flammable gases or
materials that readily support combustion or contain corrosives and the
fabrication of semiconductors.



      (15)   Mechanized equipment.  Mechanized equipment shall be
used only in a completely enclosed building within the 300 square feet
designated for the home occupation.



      (16)   Access for inspection.  Upon the receipt of a
complaint, a City of Yuma Code Enforcement Officer or police officer may
enter a structure housing a home occupation to investigate the complaint and
determine whether or not the home occupation complies with the conditions of
this section.



      (17)   Other applicable regulations.  Home occupations shall
comply with health codes, building codes and all other applicable local,
state and federal regulations.



   (C)   Uses not permitted.  The following types of uses shall not be
permitted as home occupations in all residential zoning districts:



      (1)   Barber shop;



      (2)   Beauty parlor;



      (3)   Dance studio;



      (4)   Electrical repair shop;



      (5)   Massage parlor;



      (6)   Motor vehicle repairing services;



      (7)   Real estate or insurance office;



      (8)   Veterinary office and kennels or similar uses;



      (9)   Engine repair;



      (10)   Furniture refinishing;



      (11)   Medical/cosmetic facilities for animals including
animal care or boarding facilities;



      (12)   Machine shop/metal working;



      (13)   Mortuaries;



      (14)   Taxi service with more than one vehicle;



      (15)   Commercial insecticide, fungicide, herbicide or
rodenticide operators; and



      (16)   Medical or dental office.



   (D)   Limited use home occupation.



      (1)   Merchandise parties.  Merchandise parties (i.e.,
Tupperware, Avon, Mary Kay and the like) held for the purpose of soliciting
sales shall be limited to no more than one party per month on the site of the
home occupation;



      (2)   Contracting service.  Contracting services must, in
addition to, the performance standards listed in division (B) above, comply
with all of the following additional performance standards:



         (a)   The contracting service is a sole ownership
business;



         (b)   The contracting service has no employees other
than those living in the home;



         (c)   There are no materials stored on the lot of the
residence of the home occupation;



         (d)   There are no more than 1 one and one-half-ton
vehicle associated with the business, parked at the home; and



         (e)   The home occupation can not serve as a
headquarters or dispatch center, where employees come to be dispatched to
other locations.



      (3)   Home occupation disclosure.  Home occupation operators
shall complete a home occupation disclosure form at the time of application
of a business license.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.09  Live/Work Space.



   Live/work spaces must contain the following:



   (A)   The designated residential space shall not be less than 400
square feet in livable area;



   (B)   A separate bathroom, with a toilet and a tub or shower with
hot and cold water;



   (C)   Cooking facilities including a sink, some countertop, a range
and sufficient electrical outlets for a refrigerator and other countertop
appliances; and



   (D)   A designated sleeping area.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.10  Adult Oriented Businesses.



   (A)   Purpose.  It is the purpose of this section to regulate
sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable
and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration
of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this
section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this
section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimize
the distribution of obscene material.



   (B)   Findings.  Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the City Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases
of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,  475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas,
493 U.S. 215 (1990), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City
of Erie v. Pap’s A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and on studies in other
communities, including, but not limited to:  Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis,
Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana;
Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier,
California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia;
Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin;
and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General’s Working
Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State
of Minnesota), the City Council finds:



      (1)   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to
ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled
by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the
activities that occur on their premises;



      (2)   Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses,
defined in this section as adult theaters and adult cabarets, engage in
higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees
of other establishments;



      (3)   Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal
sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live
sex shows;



      (4)   Offering and providing such space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions;



      (5)   Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades
and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex
within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses;



      (6)   At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by
activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not
limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella
infections and shigella infections;



      (7)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
in the United States:  600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in
1985, and 253,448 through December 31, 1992. The Center for Disease Control
indicates that of the 753,907 AIDS cases reported in the United States
through June of 2000, Arizona accounted for 7,234 of those cases. At the end
of 1999, there were 3,195 people reported to be living with AIDS in Arizona;



      (8)   As of December 2001, there have been 7,966 reported
cases of AIDS in the state;



      (9)   Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an
increasing cumulative number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody
test in Yuma County, Arizona;



      (10)   The number of cases of early (less than one year)
syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases
reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November 1990;



      (11)   The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States
reported annually remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases
being reported in 1990;



      (12)   In his report of October 22, 1986, the Surgeon General
of the United States has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV
infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse,
exposure to infected blood and blood components and from an infected mother
to her newborn;



      (13)   According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by
sexual acts;



      (14)   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented
businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities
and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to
self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities;



      (15)   Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen
is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view
“adult oriented films”;



      (16)   The findings noted in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(15)
above raise substantial governmental concerns;



      (17)   Sexually oriented businesses have operational
characteristics, which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect
those substantial governmental concerns;



      (18)   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate
mechanism to place the burden of reasonable regulation on the owners and
operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing
procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually
oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and
welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It
is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the
actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein;



      (19)   Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity
occurring in adult theatres;



      (20)   Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to
keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will
help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by
facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by
preventing minors from working in such establishments;



      (21)   The disclosure of certain information by those persons
ultimately responsible for the  day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related
to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will
aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases;



      (22)   In the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct, which this section is
designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct;



      (23)   The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has
been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption
that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this
section;



      (24)   The barring of such individuals from the management of
adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents
conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases; and



      (25)   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the
citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this section.



   (C)   Location requirements.



      (1)   Adult oriented businesses may be located in Limited
Commercial (B-1), General Commercial (B-2), Light Industrial (L-I) or Heavy
Industrial (H-I) Zoning Districts as permitted by the appropriate district
regulations of this chapter. However, no adult oriented business shall be
located within 1,000 feet of:



         (a)   A church or synagogue or temple;



         (b)   A public or private elementary or secondary school;



         (c)   A residential district;



         (d)   A lot used for a residential use;



         (e)   Another adult oriented business;



         (f)   A public park; or



         (g)   A public or private child day care center, large
or small preschool facility.



      (2)   For purposes of this section, measurement shall be made
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from
the nearest portion of the lot used for the adult oriented business and the
nearest property line of the lot used for the purposes enumerated above.



   (D)   Number in building.  No more than one adult oriented business
may be located in the same building.



   (E)   Nonconformity.  Any adult oriented business lawfully
operating on the effective date of this chapter that is in violation of
divisions (C) and (D) above of this section shall be a nonconforming use. If
two or more adult oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another,
and otherwise in a permissible location, the adult oriented business which
was first established and continually operating at a particular location is
the conforming use and the latter established business is nonconforming. In
any event, no increase in the floor area of any nonconforming adult oriented
business shall be permitted in any building or on any lot containing another
adult oriented business or a dwelling unit.



   (F)   Encroachment of other uses.  An adult oriented business
lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by
the location, subsequent to the lawful establishment of the adult oriented
business, of a use enumerated in division (C) above of this section.



   (G)   Variance to location requirements.



      (1)   An applicant may make application for a variance from
the location requirement of division (C) above of this section above in the
same manner as found in § 21 of City Ordinance No. 583, as amended.



      (2)   The Board of Adjustment, in making its finding about a
variance request from the location requirement of division (C) above of this
section, shall, as part of the condition in § 21(C)(3)(d) of City Ordinance
No. 583, consider the following:



         (a)   The location of the proposed adult oriented
business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the
adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; and



         (b)   The location of an additional adult oriented
business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood
conservation, nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal,
restoration or historic preservation.



('80 Code, App. A, § 124)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2515, passed
2-20-1991; Ord. 2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2003-22, passed 5-21-2003; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-15.11  Noise Limitation Standards for B-1 and B-2 Commercial Zones.



   (A)   The application for any building permit, or business license
for a new business, which consists of a single use or single building of
35,000 square feet or greater gross floor area, and which is located within
300 feet of any residential district, and which includes an outdoor use,
operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., an exterior loading
dock, unscreened mechanical equipment or an outdoor trash compactor (for
which an acoustical engineering report has not been previously provided and
approved by the city for the same use) shall be accompanied by an acoustical
engineering report prepared by a person who is a board certified member of
the Institute of Noise Control Engineers indicating the means by which the
applicant proposes to comply with the provisions of this section. It shall
include drawings, measurements and methods of mitigation in sufficiency to
show such compliance. If the city determines that the report needs to have an
independent review, the cost of the independent review of the report and
drawings by a person who is a board certified member of the Institute of
Noise Control Engineers shall be paid in equal half amounts by the applicant
and the city. Prior to the independent review of the report, the applicant
shall deposit with the city a sum equal to one-half of the cost of the review
as determined by the City Engineer. City approval and issuance of a building
permit or a business license shall be contingent upon the city approval of
the acoustical engineering report and the provision of all recommended
mitigation measures recommended by the report.



   (B)   The operation of facilities, including but not limited to
trucking operations, loading operations, operation of mechanical equipment,
trash compaction and exterior cleaning operations, but excluding trash and
garbage collection operations, shall not produce noise, when measured on any
portion of residential property within 300 feet of the property line of the
commercial operation to exceed the following standards:



      (1)   From 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. = 55 decibels average, not
to exceed 75 decibels; and



      (2)   From 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. = 45 decibels average, not
to exceed 65 decibels.



   (C)   Where the ambient noise level is greater than the minimum
decibels average stated in this section, the decibels average shall be
increased to the level of the ambient noise. Each of the noise limits
specified above shall be reduced by five dB(A) for noise associated with the
sudden release of air or steam, or impact, or bells, or horns, or humming, or
screeching, or predominant tone noise, or truck or vehicle idling, or
fork-lift operational warning noises, or noise consisting of speech or such
speech as would be generated by a paging system.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-15.12  4H and FFA.



4-H and FFA animal projects shall be allowed in all residential zones,
subject to the following performance standards:



   (A)   The project time frame is September 1 through April 15 of each
year. Included within this timeframe is the time designated for raising veal
calves, which begins in January 1 and runs through April 15.



   (B)   At the beginning of each 4-H and FFA season, the University of
Arizona Extension Yuma County 4-H and County FFA Chapter Advisors shall
provide the Community Development Director with a list of participants, their
addresses, number and type of animals.



   (C)   The City Code §§ 130-050 through 130-059 and 130-070 through
130-076 applies to the keeping of animals.



   (D)   Animals shall be housed and/or caged according to standard
acceptable 4-H and FFA practice.



   (E)   4-H and FFA students shall ensure that 4-H and FFA standards
for sanitation and food containment are followed.



   (F)   4-H and FFA students shall be required to notify their
immediate neighbors (any property touching the subject property) if they
propose to keep animals outside the home, in the yard.



   (G)   Any animals proposed to be kept outside the house shall be
located on a well-drained site in the rear portion of the lot (not in the
side-yard unless arrangements have been made with the side-yard neighbor).



   (H)   Division (A) above does not overrule the decision of the
property owner (if renting the residence) or the CC&R’s who/which may not
allow this activity.



   (I)   In the event the city receives a complaint about the keeping
of any 4-H and FFA project animal(s), the city will first notify the
University of Arizona Extension Yuma County 4-H and County FFA Chapter
Advisors and allow those advisors to work with the student to correct the
situation, before proceeding with any code enforcement action.



   (J)   Animals located on a lot that is adjacent to an agricultural
farm field that is producing fresh vegetables must comply with the following
additional requirements:



      (1)   Provide a minimum of a three feet solid barrier fence
between the lot and agricultural farm field;



      (b)   The animal(s) shall be kept a distance of at least 30
feet from the crop in the neighboring field (the distance of separation
follows the current Commodity Specific Food Safety Guidelines for the
Production and Harvest of Lettuce and Leafy Greens, as may be amended);



      (c)   No run-off is allowed onto any adjacent property; and



      (d)   Animals shall not be walked within 30 feet of
agricultural farm fields.



(Ord. O2009-29, passed 10-7-2009; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2012-05, passed 3-7-12)



§ 154-15.13  Mobile Food Vending.



   (A)   Site restrictions.



      (1)   A mobile food vendor on private property shall be
subject to the following site restrictions:



         (a)   Mobile food vendors shall operate only upon paved
surfaces, not within any required retention areas, and shall not block drive
aisles or required parking spaces (§ 154-16).



         (b)   Each mobile food vendor must maintain a minimum of
three paved parking spaces on the site designated for their customers'
vehicles. These spaces are in addition to what is required for any existing
business at the mobile vending site operating during concurrent hours. Tables
and chairs may be used but cannot be located in required parking spaces.



         (c)   Mobile food vendors shall operate only at sites
that provide access to a restroom that meet current City of Yuma Building
Codes. Portable restrooms will not be recognized as a required restroom. This
restroom must be available to the mobile food vendor(s) and their customers.



         (d)   The use of signs on the food vending unit and any
associated vehicles may not break/ extend beyond the silhouette of the
vehicle. All mobile food vendors are subject to the City of Yuma Sign
Regulations (§ 154-17). A mobile menu board located no further than five
feet from the food vending unit is allowed, but may not be placed upon or
block any public sidewalk.



         (e)   Food vending units shall not be located within:



            1.   20 feet of any street right-of-way;



            2.   Any visibility triangle;



            3.   300 feet of the beginning of a freeway
entrance ramp and the ending of a freeway exit ramp;



            4.   125 feet of a residentially zoned property or
residential use;



            5.   150 feet of a customer entrance of a business
that has a primary use classified as restaurant; or



            6.   300 feet of any school property.



         (f)   Mobile food vendors shall obtain and maintain
written permission from the property owner(s) to use the property on which
the food vending unit is located. A copy of the written permission shall be
provided to the City of Yuma on an annual basis in order to renew the
business license, and shall be kept visible to the public, along with the
current business license, in the food vending unit.



         (g)   Mobile food vendors shall obtain and maintain a
mobile food unit permit from the Yuma County Health Department. A copy of
this permit shall be provided to the City of Yuma on an annual basis in order
to renew the business license. Upon revocation of the Yuma County Health
Department permit, the City of Yuma business license will be suspended,
whether temporarily or permanently.



         (h)   Only one mobile food vendor is allowed to operate
one food vending unit at a mobile vending site. A conditional use permit,
heard and decided by the Hearing Officer, is required for more than one
mobile food vendor or food vending unit to locate at a mobile vending site.



         (i)   Exemptions. These provisions do not apply to
itinerant vendors of non-food related items or seasonal itinerant vendors, as
defined in § 154-01.07.



   (B)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Mobile food vending on private property shall be subject
to the following operational restrictions:



         (a)   Mobile food vendors shall not operate between the
hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m.



         (b)   All food vending units shall be removed from the
mobile vending site during the hours of non-operation. Any accessory
structure(s) used and/or associated with the food vending operation shall
also be removed from the mobile vending site during hours of non-operation.
This means that all food vending units and their structures shall be removed
from the mobile vending site no later than midnight.



         (c)   The site upon which a food vending unit is
operating shall at all times be kept clean and free from litter, garbage,
rubble and debris. The mobile food vendor is required to provide their own
trash can and to dispose of their own trash at appropriate places. This means
that the food vendor(s) have the responsibility of maintaining a clean site,
even if their customer(s) are not making the mess.



         (d)   Mobile food vendors shall not use bells, chimes,
microphones, generators louder than 70 decibels at 10 feet, loudspeakers,
amplified music, strobe lights, spot lights or any other audible or visual
disturbance as a part of its mobile vending operation.



(Ord. O2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



§ 154-15.14  Transient Food Vending.



   (A)   Site restrictions.



      (1)   A transient food vendor on private property shall be
subject to the following site restrictions:



         (a)   Transient food vendors shall operate only upon
paved surfaces, not within any required retention areas, and shall not block
drive aisles or required parking spaces (§ 154-16).



         (b)   Tables and chairs cannot be used at the mobile
vending site.



         (c)   The use of signs on the food vending unit and any
associated vehicles may not break/extend beyond the silhouette of the
vehicle. All transient food vendors are subject to the City of Yuma Sign
Regulations (§ 154-17). A mobile menu board located no further than five
feet from the food vending unit is allowed, but may not be placed upon or
block any public sidewalk.



         (d)   Food vending units shall not be located within:



            1.   20 feet of any street right-of-way;



            2.   Any visibility triangle;



            3.   300 feet of the beginning of a freeway
entrance ramp and the ending of a freeway exit ramp;



            4.   125 feet of a residentially zoned property or
residential use;



            5.   150 feet of a customer entrance of a business
that has a primary use classified as restaurant; or



            6.   300 feet of any school property.



         (e)   Transient food vendors shall obtain and maintain
written permission from the property owner(s) to use the property on which
the food vending unit is located. A copy of the written permission shall be
provided to the City of Yuma on an annual basis in order to renew the
business license, and shall be kept visible to the public, along with the
current business license, in the food vending unit.



         (f)   Transient food vendors shall obtain and maintain a
mobile food unit permit from the Yuma County Health Department. A copy of
this permit shall be provided to the City of Yuma on an annual basis in order
to renew the business license. Upon revocation of the Yuma County Health
Department permit, the City of Yuma business license will be suspended,
whether temporarily or permanently.



         (g)   Only one transient food vendor is allowed to
operate one food vending unit at a mobile vending site. A conditional use
permit, heard and decided by the Hearing Officer, is required for more than
one transient food vendor to locate at a mobile vending site.



         (h)   Exemptions. These provisions do not apply to
itinerant vendors of non-food related items or seasonal itinerant vendors, as
defined in § 154-01.07.



   (B)   Operational restrictions.



      (1)   Transient food vending on private property shall be
subject to the following operational restrictions:



         (a)   Transient food vendors shall not operate between
the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m.



         (b)   All food vending units shall be removed from the
mobile vending site during the hours of non-operation. Any accessory
structure(s) used and/or associated with the food vending operation shall
also be removed from the mobile vending site during hours of non-operation.
This means that all food vending units and their structures shall be removed
from the mobile vending site no later than midnight.



         (c)   The site upon which a food vending unit is
operating shall at all times be kept clean and free from litter, garbage,
rubble and debris. The transient food vendor is required to provide their own
trash can and to dispose of their own trash at appropriate places. This means
that the food vendor(s) have the responsibility of maintaining a clean site,
even if their customer(s) are not making the mess.



         (d)   Transient food vendors shall not use bells,
chimes, microphones, generators louder than 70 decibels at 10 feet,
loudspeakers, amplified music, strobe lights, spot lights or any other
audible or visual disturbance as a part of its mobile vending operation.



(Ord. 2014-20, passed 8-27-2014)



§ 154-15.15  Accessory Buildings, Uses and Structures in Certain
Residential Districts.



   (A)   Applicability. Accessory buildings or structures and uses
shall be incidental to the principal residential use. They must be detached
from the principal building, occupy less floor area, cover less lot area, and
have a use that is secondary to the primary structure(s) and use(s) on the
property. Accessory buildings or structures include storage sheds, workshops,
outdoor barbeques, outdoor fireplaces, background composting site subject to
the performance standards noted in § 154-15.18(A) and any other structures
as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Buildings, structures, and uses
may all function as "accessory," subject to the provisions below.



   (B)   Accessory uses. Accessory buildings or structures may be used
for home occupations in compliance with § 154-15.08.



   (C)   Accessory buildings or structures.



      (1)   Accessory buildings or structures that exceed 200 square
feet in area or eight feet in height are permitted in residential districts,
subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Use.  Accessory buildings or structures shall not
be used as a dwelling, except where permitted by Zoning District.  Plumbing
is permitted in accessory buildings for a washing machine only.



         (b)   Setback.



            1.   Accessory buildings or structures shall be
located behind the midpoint of the principal building. The leading edge of
such buildings, including overhangs, shall be setback at least three feet
from side and rear property lines. An additional one foot setback is required
for every additional foot in height above eight feet. This provision is
applicable within certain identified zoning districts regardless of setback
illustrations on plats if the setbacks illustrated on the plat are the same
as the standard setbacks for that zoning district. If the setbacks
illustrated on the plat are larger than the standard setbacks for that zoning
district, then the platted setbacks take precedence.



            2.   Accessory buildings in the Agriculture (AG)
district shall comply with the setback standards required in the district.



            3.   Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with the street setback standards required in the applicable zoning
district.



            4.   On a through lot, accessory buildings or
structures shall not be located closer to the rear property line than the
distance required for the front yard building setback.



            5.   Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with all applicable building and fire codes.



         (c)   Height. The maximum allowable building height
shall be 15 feet or the height of the principal building, whichever is less.
On lots with elevation changes, accessory structures shall not be permitted
on lot areas where the accessory structure will be higher than the principal
structure roofline. See Illustration 15-1.







         (d)   Area. Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with lot coverage regulations for the applicable zoning district and
shall not occupy more than 30% of the area between the principal structure
and the rear property line.



         (e)   Compatibility. Accessory buildings or structures
shall be designed with a logical hierarchy of masses with regard to height,
size, and volume; and use construction materials and colors that are
contextually appropriate and compatible with the principal building and
surrounding neighborhood. An accessory building or structure shall not exceed
50% of the total square footage of the primary residence.



      (2)   Accessory buildings or structures that are between 121
square feet and 200 square feet in area, and less than eight feet in height
are permitted in residential districts, subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Use. Accessory buildings or structures shall not
be used as a dwelling, except where permitted by Zoning District. Plumbing is
permitted for a washing machine only.



         (b)   Setback.



            1.   Accessory buildings or structures shall not
be located in the required front yard building setback. The leading edge of
such buildings, including overhangs, shall be setback at least three feet
from side and rear property lines. This provision is applicable within
certain identified zoning districts regardless of setback illustrations on
plats.



            2.   Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with the street setback standards required in the applicable zoning
district.



            3.   On a through lot, accessory buildings or
structures shall not be located closer to the rear property line than the
distance required for the front yard building setback.



         (c)   Height.  The maximum allowable building height
shall be less than eight (8) feet or the height of the principal building,
whichever is less. On lots with elevation changes, accessory structures shall
not be permitted on lot areas where the structure will be higher than the
principal structure roofline.



         (d)   Area. Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with lot coverage regulations for the applicable zoning district and
shall not occupy more than 30% of the area between the principal structure
and the rear property line.



      (3)   Accessory buildings or structures that are 120 square
feet or less in area and less than eight feet in height are permitted in
residential districts, subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Use. Accessory buildings or structures shall not
be used as a dwelling, except where permitted by Zoning District. Plumbing is
permitted for a washing machine only.



         (b)   Setback.



            1.   Accessory buildings or structures shall not
be located in the required front yard building setback. The leading edge of
such buildings, including overhangs, can be set along the side and rear
property lines. This provision is applicable within certain identified zoning
districts regardless of setback illustrations on plats. A four foot
separation between the accessory structure and any other structures shall be
provided in order to maintain fire and emergency access.



            2.   Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with the street setback standards required in the applicable zoning
district.



            3.   On a through lot, accessory buildings or
structures shall not be located closer to the rear property line than the
distance required for the front yard building setback.



         (c)   Height. The maximum allowable building height
shall be less than eight feet or the height of the principal building,
whichever is less. On lots with elevation changes, accessory structures shall
not be permitted on lot areas where the structure will be higher than the
principal structure roofline.



         (d)   Area. Accessory buildings or structures shall
comply with lot coverage regulations for the applicable zoning district and
shall not occupy more than 30% of the area between the principal structure
and the rear property line.



   (D)   Appeals.  An applicant may appeal a decision of the Zoning
Administrator regarding the compatibility requirement to the Hearing Officer
in accordance with § 154-03.02(C).



 


Table 15-1- Basic Guidelines for Accessory Buildings and Structures




Height

 



 

Area

 

Accessory Structure Setback



More than 8 feet
 
OR
 
More than 200 square feet
 
3 feet + 1 foot for each foot over 8 feet in height


8 feet or less
 
AND
 
121 - 200 square feet
 
3 feet


8 feet or less
 
AND
 
0 - 120 square feet
 
0 feet


Structures larger than 200 square feet or 10 feet in wall height require a
building permit.

Electrical requires separate permits.

Additional building requirements may apply.



 



(Ord. O2014-29, passed 10-1-2014; Ord. O2017-035, passed 9-20-2017; Ord.
O2019-001, passed 1-16-2019)



§ 154-15.16  Accessory Dwellings, Carriage Houses and Garage Apartments in
Residential Districts.



   (A)   Applicability. One accessory dwelling is permitted as a
subordinate to an existing or planned single-family dwelling unit, provided
that the provisions below are met.



   (B)   Accessory uses. Accessory dwellings may be used for home
occupations in compliance with § 154-15.08.



   (C)   Accessory dwellings. Accessory dwellings are subject to the
following standards:



      (1)   Use. Permitted on certain residentially zoned properties
which currently have or will have a single-family residence. The construction
of an accessory dwelling will require consent from all adjacent property
owners. Only one unit will be permitted for each property; the accessory
dwelling must be detached from the primary residence.



      (2)   Lot size. Accessory dwellings are permitted on lots that
meet the minimum lot size requirement for the zoning district they are
located.



      (3)   Lot coverage. Accessory dwellings are permitted to
increase the lot coverage of the applicable zoning district by 5%.



      (4)   Setback.



         (a)   Accessory dwellings shall be located 60 feet from
the front property line, in addition to complying with the side and rear yard
setbacks of the applicable zoning district.



         (b)   If the accessory dwelling is being accessed from
an alley, the rear yard setback may be reduced to five feet.



      (5)   Unit size.



         (a)   Each accessory dwelling shall have a minimum size
of 200 square feet.



         (b)   The maximum permitted size of an accessory
dwelling based upon lots measuring 6,000 - 15,000 square feet in size is:



            1.   Lot size measuring between 6,000 square feet
to 7,500 square feet allows for a maximum size unit of 600 square feet.



            2.   Lot size measuring between 7,501 square feet
to 10,000 square feet allows for a maximum size unit of 800 square feet.



            3.   Lot size measuring 10,001 square feet to
15,000 square feet allows for a maximum size unit of 1,000 square feet.



            4.   Accessory dwellings on lots measuring between
6,000 - 15,000 square feet shall meet unit sizes noted above and shall not
exceed 50% of the total square footage of the primary residence, whichever is
less.



         (c)   Accessory dwellings on lots measuring greater than
15,000 square feet allow for a maximum size unit of 1,200 square feet or a
unit size not exceeding 50% of the total square footage of the primary
residence, whichever is greater.



      (6)   Height. The maximum allowable building height shall be
15 feet for a single-story unit. Dwelling units which are located above a
detached garage (carriage house or garage apartment) shall not exceed a total
building height of 25 feet. See illustration at the end of this section.



      (7)   Parking. Required off-street parking for the principal
dwelling unit must be maintained or established.



      (8)   Owner occupancy. It is required that the property owner
reside on the property, whether it be in the principal or accessory dwelling
unit. Owner occupancy is intended to help protect the stability and character
of a neighborhood. A deed restriction shall be recorded against the property
requiring owner occupancy of one of the units on the site.



         The property owner shall sign and the City shall record a
deed restriction for the accessory dwelling pursuant to the City of Yuma Code.



      (9)   Design. Accessory dwellings will be required to
incorporate the same or similar exterior colors, architectural detailing, and
exterior materials, including window style, as the principal residence. The
design of all accessory dwellings or carriage houses shall be reviewed by
staff upon the submittal of an application. Any accessory dwelling located in
a historic district will require approval from the Design and Historic Review
Commission. An appeal, heard and decided by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, is required when a proposed accessory dwelling unit does not meet
these design requirements.



      (10)   Pre-existing units. An accessory dwelling that existed
prior to the adoption of this ordinance, may be legally established and
continue to be utilized as a dwelling unit if the following conditions are
met:



         (a)   The property owner must file an application for
the accessory dwelling. The Zoning Administrator may waive certain
requirements, if said requirements are unfeasible to achieve in bringing a
pre-existing unit into compliance.



         (b)   Prior to the establishment of a conforming
pre-existing dwelling unit, the property owner shall allow inspection of the
unit by the City of Yuma in order to ensure the minimum requirements relating
to fire, life safety, and public health are met.



         (c)   A pre-existing unit shall remain non-conforming
until an application has been applied for and approved legalizing the
existing accessory dwelling.



         (d)   The property owner shall obtain a deed restriction
for the accessory dwelling pursuant to the City of Yuma Code.



   (D)   Accessory dwelling examples.







   Accessory Dwelling (Alley Access)







   Accessory Dwelling (Garage Apartment w/ Alley Access)







   Accessory Dwelling (Modern Suburban Subdivision)



(Ord. O2017-013, passed 5-3-2017)



§ 154-15.17  Corner Markets in Residential Districts within the Infill
Overlay District.



   (A)   Purpose. Regulations for corner markets are established to
promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of the community.
Allowing limited commercial development to occur within certain residential
districts allows nearby residents the opportunity to conveniently access
goods and services. Which translates to an increase in walking, and a
decrease in trips by automobile, benefitting the health of residents and
reducing traffic congestion and energy consumption for transportation. To
protect the residential character of the neighborhood, corner markets shall
be limited to specific uses so as to protect the public health, safety,
convenience, general welfare and character of the surrounding residential
neighborhood.



      The Infill Overlay District is intended to encourage walkable,
mixed-use development. Careful planning efforts, allow for new development
and businesses, giving residents the option to live close to their daily
destinations. By permitting limited commercial activities to occur within the
residential districts of the Infill Overlay, the City of Yuma is providing
residents the opportunity to increase mixed-use development and create more
livable neighborhoods.



   (B)   Uses allowed as a corner market:



      (1)   Cafes;



      (2)   Grocery and produce sales;



      (3)   Bakery;



      (4)   Deli;



      (5)   Hardware stores; and



      (6)   Personal service(s); limited to salons, barbers, tailors
and laundromats.



   (C)   Conditional uses allowed as a corner market:



      (1)   Group teaching of the arts, including music, vocal,
dance or physical training; limited to no more than five students per session
or to the number of parking spaces provided for each parent vehicle and
employee, in accordance with § 154-03.05. In addition to the requirements
outlined in § 154-03.05, such uses shall also be subject to the following
development standards:



         (a)   All lessons shall be located within an enclosed
building;



         (b)   Adequate parking shall be provided through
on-street and offstreet parking. Parking shall be provided for each parent
vehicle and for each employee;



         (c)   The hours in which classes begin and end need to
be properly timed in order to ensure no traffic congestions occurs; and



         (d)   Hours of operations shall be limited to the hours
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



   (D)   Limitations. Allowed uses above shall not be permitted to
engage in the sale or consumption of alcohol.



   (E)   Allowed accessory uses. A single dwelling unit located within
the same building may be owner-occupied or a rental unit.



   (F)   Corner markets. Corner markets are subject to the following
development standards:



      (1)   Location. Corner markets shall be located on 2-lane
collector streets as identified by the 2014 City of Yuma Transportation
Master Plan.



      (2)   Lot size. Corner markets are permitted on lots that meet
the minimum lot size requirement for the zoning district they are located.



      (3)   Lot coverage. Corner markets are required to meet the
lot coverage allowances as dictated by the applicable zoning or overlay
district.



      (4)   Setbacks. Corner markets are required to meet the
setback requirements as identified within the applicable zoning or overlay
district.



      (5)   Height. Corner markets shall not exceed a total building
height of 25 feet and shall be in keeping with the general character of the
surrounding area.



      (6)   Maximum area. The area of a corner market shall be
limited to a maximum gross floor area of 1,600 square feet.



      (7)   Distance. A corner market may not be located within
1,000 feet of another corner market.



      (8)   Landscaping and irrigation. Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter.



      (9)   Parking. Corner markets and any attached residential
unit shall provide adequate parking as outlined below.



         (a)   A corner market shall be required to provide two
spaces offstreet.



         (b)   Off-street parking shall be limited to no more
than four spaces.



         (c)   Retail uses shall provide one space for each 400
square feet of gross floor area.



         (d)   Cafes shall provide one space for each 50 square
feet of gross floor area where the public is served.



         (e)   Required parking utilized by customers may be
provided through the means of on-street parking, if available. If utilizing
on-street parking, parking is to be located on the same side of the street as
the use, may not extend beyond the street frontage of the subject property,
and must be approved by the City of Yuma Traffic Engineer.



         (f)   In addition to motor vehicle parking, bicycle
parking shall be provided on-site.



         (g)   Unless specified above, all parking areas shall be
provided in accordance with Article 16 of this chapter.



      (10)   Lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
properly arranged, shielded and located as to direct the light away from any
public or private street right-of-way or adjoining residential properties, as
specified in Article 18 of this chapter. In addition to the requirements
outlined in Article 18, light poles shall be restricted to a maximum height
of 12 feet.



      (11)   Hours. Hours of operation, including the loading and
unloading of merchandise, are limited to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. Deliveries shall not be permitted between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.



      (12)   Neighborhood meeting. A neighborhood meeting shall be
held onsite prior to the issuance of a building permit and/or establishment
of a corner market. Neighborhood meetings are an informal meeting between the
applicant and interested residents who may reside, own property, or work in
the area. These meetings offer residents an opportunity to provide input
before formal plans are rendered.



      (13)   Appeal. An appeal, initiated by the applicant or
neighboring resident, regarding a determination of the Zoning Administrator
may be requested to the Hearing Officer in accordance with § 154-03.02(C).



(Ord. O2018-033, passed 8-1-18)



§ 154-15.18  Composting.



   (A)   Backyard composting sites shall be allowed in all residential
zoning districts or properties with a residential use and are an accessory
use to a community garden, subject to the following performance standards:



      (1)   No composting container may be located closer than five
feet to any rear or side property and may not be located within the front
yard setback.



      (2)   No composting container shall be located closer than 20
feet to any residential dwelling, except the dwelling on the property at
which the compost container is located.



      (3)   Composting containers shall be located and designed such
that seepage from the compost will not run off into public or private
streets, storm sewers, drainage ditches, stormwater basins or neighboring
properties.



      (4)   All composting must occur in a container constructed of
wood, wire mesh, or concrete block or a combination thereof, or in a
commercially available compost bin designed for composting organic materials.



      (5)   The maximum height of the composting container shall be
five feet.



      (6)   No composting container may be located within the
following Airport Overlay District Zones: APZ-1, APZ-2 and Clear Zone, and
may not be located within the Runway Approach Departure Safety Area/Airport
Industrial Overlay Districts.



   (B)   Large composting sites may be permitted as a conditional use
in the Agricultural (AG), Light Industrial (LI) and Heavy Industrial (HI)
zoning districts, subject to the following performance standards:



      (1)   A large composting site shall be located on three or
more contiguous acres.



      (2)   No composting activity may be located closer than ten
feet to any rear or side property and may not be located within the front
yard setback.



      (3)   No composting activity shall be located closer than
1,000 feet to any property that is residentially zoned or used for a
residence, except the dwelling on the property at which the compost activity
is located.



      (4)   Composting activity shall be located and designed such
that seepage from the compost will not run off into public or private
streets, storm sewers, drainage ditches, stormwater basins or neighboring
properties.



      (5)   All composting must occur in a controlled manner to
minimize the creation of nuisances.



      (6)   Compost materials shall be layered, aerated, moistened,
turned and managed to promote effective decomposition of the materials in a
safe, secure and sanitary manner.



      (7)   No composting activity may be located within the
following Airport Overlay District Zones: 75-80 dB, greater than 80 dB noise
Zone, APZ-1, APZ-2 and Clear Zone, and may not be located within the Runway
Approach Departure Safety Area/Airport Industrial Overlay Districts.



   (C)   Agricultural composting sites that meet the requirements of
A.R.S. § 9-461.02(G) are not prevented or restricted by these requirements.
Agricultural composting sites are subject to the following performance
standards as noted in A.R.S. § 9-461.02(G):



      (1)   Agricultural composting shall be located on five or more
contiguous acres.



      (2)   An agricultural composting operation shall notify the
City of Yuma Fire Department in writing of the location of the composting
operation.



      (3)   Agricultural composting may not be conducted within
1,320 feet of an existing residential use, unless the operations are
conducted on farmland or land leased in association with farmland.



      (4)   No agricultural composting operation may be located
within the Airport Overlay District or within the Runway Approach Departure
Safety Area/Airport Industrial Overlay Districts.



   (D)   Nuisance. A backyard composting site or large composting site
must not be established or maintained in a manner such that it creates
malodorous conditions or other nuisances and any composting shall be
suspended or terminated if at any time it is determined by the City of Yuma
that a nuisance exists or that conditions exist constituting a fire or health
hazard.



(Ord. O2019-001, passed 1-16-2019)



Article 16 - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations



§ 154-16.01  Purpose.



   The off-street parking and loading regulations are designed to reduce
street congestion and traffic hazards by the establishment of standards to
ensure adequate number, size and location of off-street parking and loading
spaces to be provided with the various land uses permitted in this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)



§ 154-16.02  General Requirements.



   (A)   Duty to provide.  The duty to provide and maintain off-street
parking and loading spaces herein required shall be the joint and several
responsibility of the owner and occupant of the land on which is established
any use for which any off-street parking or loading space is required to be
provided and maintained.



   (B)   Permit.  No building permit shall be issued, no use shall be
established or changed, and no structure shall be erected, enlarged or
reconstructed unless the applicant has presented satisfactory evidence to the
Building Official that the off-street parking and loading spaces herein
required are provided in the minimum amounts and maintained in the manner
specified; provided, however:



      (1)   For the enlargement of a structure or for the expansion
of a use of structure or land there shall be required only the number of
off-street parking and loading spaces as would be required if such
enlargement or expansion were a separate new structure or use; and



      (2)   For a change in the class or use of a structure or land,
the number of additional off-street parking and loading spaces required shall
be equal to the number required for the new use, less the number of spaces
which would have been required for the previous use if it had been
established in conformance with this subchapter; but in no case shall the
total number of spaces furnished be required to exceed the minimum number
required for the new use.



   (C)   Paving; materials.  All off-street parking spaces, parking
lots, access ways, and loading areas shall be paved with a durable, dust-free
surface of masonry; portland cement concrete, asphalted concrete or other
durable, hard-faced material, except residential uses in the agriculture or
suburban ranch zoning districts where gravel or ABC may be used.



   (D)   Gross floor area.  Gross floor area, for determining
off-street parking and loading requirements, shall mean the sum total of the
gross areas of the several floors of a building or buildings measured from
the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
separating two buildings; and including open areas either covered or open to
the sky used for serving the public as customers, patrons, clients or
patients. Gross floor area shall not include:  underground parking space,
uncovered steps, exterior balconies, exterior walkways, restrooms or
mechanical equipment areas.



   (E)   Joint usage of parking.  The joint use of a parking lot for
two or more buildings or mixed uses may be permitted provided that:



      (1)   The total number of spaces used together is not less
than the sum required for various buildings or uses if computed separately;



      (2)   The lot is in the same zoning district, or in a district
that permits as a principal use the activity for which the parking is
provided; and



      (3)   A legal agreement prepared by and between users is filed
with the Department of Development Services and the County Recorder.



   (F)   Parking spaces for the disabled.  In accordance with the
current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards, parking for disabled
persons shall be provided in all public places in convenient locations and
reserved for the disabled. A ramp shall be provided if there is a change of
level from the parking lot to the adjoining walk or building. Said spaces and
ramps shall further conform to the provisions of A.R.S. § 41-1492.



   (G)   Fractional measurements.  Unless otherwise provided for in
the specific regulations, one additional parking space shall be required if
the fractional number of one-half or more is calculated for required parking
spaces.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-16.03  Parking Lots.



   (A)   Design standards.



      (1)   Site plan.  A site plan for any proposed parking lot
for five or more required spaces shall be submitted to the Department of
Development Services for review and approval at time of application for a
building permit for the building to which the parking is accessory, or at
such time any land is to be used for a parking lot.



      (2)   Minimum parking lot dimensions.  All parking lots shall
conform to the following minimum parking lot dimensions where a minimum stall
length of 19 feet may be used. In addition, a minimum stall width of nine
feet may be used for employee parking, provided said parking shall be clearly
designated by pavement marking, signs or other method. A stall width not less
than nine feet six inches may be used to meet the parking requirements for
office buildings. All other uses shall have a minimum stall width of ten feet.



      (3)   Site plan.  The scale of the site plan shall contain
not more than 50 feet to the inch. The site plan shall be drawn according to
the following requirements and shall show these items detailed herein:



         (a)   Zoning, setbacks and statement of use;



         (b)   North arrow and scale;



         (c)   All adjacent streets, alleys, sidewalks and curbs,
with dimensions;



         (d)   Ownership of the parcel being developed;



         (e)   Use, total floor area and location of each
existing and proposed structure;



         (f)   Complete dimensions of parking lot;



         (g)   Grading and drainage plan of parking lot;



         (h)   Landscaping, walls, lighting and irrigation system;



         (i)   Type and thickness surface and base of parking;



         (j)   Number of employees in proposed business;



         (k)   If public assembly, number of seats and/or
occupant capacity; and



         (l)   If applicable, the number of rooms or beds.



      (4)   Entrance and exit driveways.  Separate entrances and
exit driveways shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion on the
site and in the public street. Said entrances and exits may be combined in a
single driveway where adequate safeguards are provided to minimize congestion
and to protect pedestrian and vehicular traffic upon the approval of traffic
flow plans on the site and in the public street by the Department of Public
Safety and Engineering Division.



      (5)   Arrangement of parking spaces.  Parking spaces shall be
so arranged as not to require the moving of any vehicle on the premises in
order to enter or leave any other stall, or to require the backing of any
vehicle across any sidewalk or onto any street.



      (6)   Landscaping and irrigation.  Landscaping and irrigation
shall be provided in the manner set forth in Article 20 of this chapter
except that when required to comply with development standards following the
loss of a nonconforming status or change of use a landowner or tenant shall
not be required to reduce the parking area by more than 10% or reduce the
parking area to a size which would not satisfy the minimum parking
requirements for any lawful use of such lot, parcel or land.



   (B)   Improvement of parking lots (five or more required spaces). 
All parking lots shall be improved as follows:



      (1)   Designed in compliance with Chapter 192 of this code;



      (2)   Surfaced with a hard-faced material;



      (3)   Parking stalls shall be clearly indicated by a four-inch
stripe of white traffic paint or other method approved by the Engineering
Division;



      (4)   Wheel-stops for vehicles shall be provided and so
located that no part of a parked vehicle shall extend beyond the property
line;



      (5)   A barrier shall be constructed between all parking lots
and adjacent residential uses or districts so that the adjacent residents are
not unreasonably disturbed, either by day or night, by the operation of
vehicles. These barriers shall be required along any property line or
required setback line for that portion of the lot which adjoins or lies
across the street, alley or other public way from said residential area,
except for necessary driveways. The barrier shall be a solid wall or fence,
or permanently maintained dense vegetation, and shall be three feet in height
within the front yard area and not less than four feet in height within said
side and rear yard area. In all cases, the visibility triangle and fence
requirements of this code shall be applicable; and



      (6)   Lighting standards shall be placed so as to reflect the
light away from the adjacent areas, and so as not to interfere with traffic
movement or control. Illumination of parking area shall be required for all
parking areas with four or more parking spaces. Open parking lots shall be
illuminated with a minimum of one maintained footcandle of light on the
parking surface and seven feet vertical between sunset and sunrise.



   (C)   Vehicular access required.



      (1)   Each required off-street parking space shall open
directly upon an aisle of such width and design as to provide safe and
efficient means of vehicular access to said space. Each parking lot shall be
designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to an improved public or
private street on which the lot or building site has frontage. If a secondary
means of permanent vehicular access is provided, such as a paved alley or
service road, such means of access shall be improved to city standards.



      (2)   All vehicular accessways shall be located as far as
feasible and in any case not less than 30 feet from the ultimate curb line of
intersecting streets.



      (3)   Along any highway, major or minor arterial street, each
building or group of buildings, together with its parking or service areas,
shall be physically separated by a vertical curb, maintained planting strip
or other suitable barrier to channel and direct vehicular ingress and egress,
except for necessary accessways.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. 2399, passed 4-20-1988; Ord.
O2000-25, passed 5-3-2000; Ord. O2004-53, passed 8-18-2004; Ord. O2010-32,
passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-16.04  Parking in Residential or Services Districts.



   (A)   In any residential or services district, all required parking
spaces shall be set back from adjoining street right-of-way lines to conform
with required front and side street setback lines of such residential or
services district. In instances where the rear property line is adjacent to
an alley and parking is accessed from the rear yard alley, parking spaces may
be set back zero feet from the property line. In addition, if any of the
required parking spaces have direct access and are perpendicular to the side
street, there shall be provided a minimum driveway length of 20 feet as
measured between the side street property line and the near end of the
parking spaces(s).



   (B)   In residential districts, parking is permitted within the
front yard setback in front of garages, carports or on an adjacent paved
surface in accordance with § 154-16.02(C). Such area shall not exceed 40% of
the front yard setback.



   (C)   The parking of any commercial vehicle of more than one and
one-half tons capacity on any lot in any residential district shall be
considered a commercial use and is prohibited.



   (D)   The outdoor parking and/or storage of recreational equipment,
recreational vehicles, and watercraft is permitted in any residential or
services district, provided that said vehicle shall not be used for living,
sleeping or housekeeping purposes and subject to the following for the front
yard setback of any residential district:



      (1)   Only low-profile recreational equipment, vehicles, and
watercraft (inclusive of items such as boats, jet skis, utility trailers,
tent trailers, travel trailers, truck campers when attached to an operational
vehicle, but exclusive of truck campers not attached to an operational
vehicle) are permitted;



      (2)   No part of the vehicle or attached appurtenance shall be
located closer than five feet from the front property line;



      (3)   That said vehicle shall be located on a paved surface in
accordance with § 154-16.02(C); and



      (4)   Each residential lot shall have no more than one area of
parking and/or storage.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-16.05  Location.



Off-street parking facilities or spaces shall be located as required herein.
Where a distance is specified, such distance shall be measured from the
nearest point of the building or use served by said parking.



   (A)   For single-family, duplex or multiple-family dwellings and
motel/hotels, parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or building
site as the buildings or on the street adjacent to the same lot or building
site as the buildings they are required to serve.



   (B)   For mobile home parks and recreational vehicle parks, parking
spaces shall be located for convenient access to mobile home or trailer
spaces. One parking space shall be located on each mobile home or trailer
space and the remaining automobile parking spaces required may be located in
adjacent parking areas.



   (C)   For hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes, sanitariums,
homes for children or the aged, rooming houses, club rooms or fraternity
houses, parking facilities shall be located not more than 150 feet from the
building they are required to serve.



   (D)   For uses other than those specified above, a parking lot may
be located on a separate lot provided that such lot shall be located not more
than 300 feet from the building or use they are required to serve, and that
the lot is either in the same zoning district or in a district that permits
as a principal use the activity for which the parking is provided.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-16.06  Exempt Areas.



The following properties are hereby exempt from the minimum parking space
requirements of the zoning ordinance except that all additions to existing
buildings and all new construction on said parcels shall conform to the
requirements of this section to the extent that such modification exceeds the
gross floor area of the existing structures on said lots, or of structures
existing on said lots at the time of completion of the downtown parking
improvement district:



   (A)   Blocks 6, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20;



   (B)   Lots 1 through 4, inclusive, of Block 18; and



   (C)   Block 7 (except Lots 1, 7, 13 through 16, inclusive), City of
Yuma Subdivision.







('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)



§ 154-16.07  Parking Spaces Required.



   For all dwellings or businesses hereafter erected, provisions shall be
made to supply the following parking requirements. Any parking spaces
required for employees shall be determined according to the maximum number of
employees on duty and/or residing on the premises at any one time. If for any
reason the classification of any use for the purpose of determining the
required amount of off-street parking space is not readily determinable
hereunder, the classification of the use shall be determined by the Planning
Director upon recommendation from the Building Official based on the
permitted occupancy of the building.



   (A)   Adult arcade.  One space for each arcade machine plus one
space for each employee per shift.



   (B)   Adult bookstore.  One space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area.



   (C)   Adult cabaret.  One space for each 50 square feet of gross
floor area where the public is served, plus an additional 10% of the
off-street parking required herein for use by employees.



   (D)   Adult motel.  One and one-tenth parking spaces shall be
provided for each guest room. When auxiliary commercial uses are included,
the following additional standards are required:



      (1)   One parking space for every 100 square feet of gross
floor area where public is served;



      (2)   One parking space for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area of commercial accessory use; and



      (3)   One space for every six seats, if seats are fixed; or
one space for 50 square feet for places of public assembly.



   (E)   Adult motion picture theater.  One off-street parking space
for every four seats, if seats are fixed; or one space for each 30 square
feet of open assembly area where seats are not fixed, excluding platform and
stage areas.



   (F)   Adult theater.  One off-street parking space for every four
seats, if seats are fixed; or one space for each 30 square feet of open
assembly area where seats are not fixed, excluding platform and stage areas.



   (G)   Adult video store.  One space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area.



   (H)   Auto rental agencies.  One space for each 200 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one parking space for each vehicle to be stored on the
lot.



   (I)   Auto service station motor fuel sales (retail).  One and
one-half spaces for each pump dispenser up to the first six pump dispensers
and one space for each additional pump dispenser. (Standing areas at pump
dispenser island and interior circulation areas shall not be counted as
parking areas.)



   (J)   Automobile service and repair shops automotive repair.  Three
spaces for each service bay. (A service bay shall not be counted as parking
space.)



   (K)   Banks.  One space for every 200 square feet of gross floor
area.



   (L)   Bowling alleys.  Three spaces for each alley, plus one for
each billiard table, plus one for each five seats in any gallery. (If other
uses are included, each use shall provide the spaces required for that use.)



   (M)   Cafes, restaurants, cocktail lounges or bars.  One space for
each 50 square feet of gross floor area where the public is served.



   (N)   Commercial buildings (not otherwise specified herein).  One
parking space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.



   (O)   Child day care services, large.  One space per 300 square
feet of gross floor area.



   (P)   Drive-in facilities.  Temporary parking spaces are to be
provided in moving lanes, or “stack-up”, preceding customer service space:



      (1)   Drive-in bank.  Three spaces for each service window.



      (2)   Personal service businesses (such as dry cleaners and
photo pick-up).  Two spaces for each service window.



      (3)   Drive-in theater.  One space for each four viewing
spaces within theater.



      (4)   Facilities that serve fast food and/or beverages. Seven
spaces for each service window.



   (Q)   Educational facilities.  Elementary and secondary schools,
kindergartens and parochial schools shall provide one space for each
classroom, plus one space for each five students of legal driving age and one
space for each three non-teaching employees.



   (R)   Escort agency.  One space for each 300 square feet of gross
floor area.



   (S)   Grocery, supermarkets. One space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area.



   (T)   Gymnasiums or health studios.  One space for each 400 square
feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each employee.



   (U)   Hospitals.  One space for each three beds, plus one space for
each staff doctor, plus one space for each three employees other than staff
doctors.



   (V)   Hotels and motels.  One and one-tenth parking spaces shall be
provided for each guest room. When auxiliary commercial uses are included,
the following additional standards are required:



      (1)   One parking space for every 100 square feet of gross
floor area where public is served;



      (2)   One parking space for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area of commercial accessory use; and



      (3)   One space for every six seats, if seats are fixed; or
one space for 50 square feet for places of public assembly.



   (W)   Manufacturing and industrial uses (including open industrial
uses).  One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area or one space
for each three employees on the maximum shift, whichever is greater. Open
industrial uses:  one space per 4,000 square feet of lot area.



   (X)   Offices and clinics; medical.  One space for each 150 square
feet of gross floor area.



   (Y)   Motor fuel sales (wholesale).  One parking space per employee
per shift.



   (Z)   Motor vehicle or machinery retail sales.  One space for each
400 square feet of gross floor area,plus one for each 20 outdoor vehicle
display spaces.



   (AA)   Mortuaries, funeral homes.  One space for each 100 square
feet of assembly room floor area, plus one employee, plus one for each car
owned by such establishment.



   (BB)   Nude model studio.  One space for each 300 square feet of
gross floor area.



   (CC)   Nursing and personal care facilities, large.  One space for
each six beds, plus two spaces for any permanent residence on the property.



   (DD)   Places of public assembly.  Churches, auditoriums,
exhibition halls, theaters, convention facilities, meeting rooms and other
places of public assembly shall provide one off-street parking space for
every four seats, if seats are fixed; or one space for each 30 square feet of
open assembly area where seats are not fixed, excluding platform and stage
areas. For churches, off-street parking shall be required for primary seating
only.



   (EE)   Offices (not otherwise specified herein).  One space for
each 300 square feet of gross floor area, exclusive of floor area used for
utility equipment.



   (FF)   Residential uses.  The following minimum parking
requirements shall be met for all residential uses as specified herein except
that for a single-family, duplex or multi-family residence constructed or to
be constructed on an existing lot of record prior to December 31, 1978, which
is less than 7,500 square feet in area, at least one space per dwelling unit
shall be provided.



      (1)   Single-family dwellings.  Two spaces for each dwelling
unit.



      (2)   Duplex dwellings.  Two spaces for each dwelling unit.



      (3)   Multiple-dwellings.  One and one-half spaces for each
efficiency one-bedroom or two-bedroom dwelling unit and two spaces for each
dwelling unit containing three or more bedrooms.



      (4)   Rooming and boarding houses.  One space for each two
guest rooms, plus two spaces for any permanent residence on the property.



      (5)   Manufactured housing park (MHP).  Two spaces for each
manufactured home or one space for each park model or recreational vehicle.



      (6)   Manufactured housing subdivision (MHS).  Two spaces for
each lot.



      (7)   Recreational vehicle subdivision (RVS).  Two spaces for
each manufactured home or one space for each park model or recreational
vehicle.



   (GG)   Retail stores, shops, convenience food stores.  One space
for each 400 square feet of gross floor area.



   (HH)   Trade schools, business colleges.  One space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area.



   (II)   Wholesaling and warehousing.  One space for each 1,500
square feet of gross floor area.



   (JJ)   Shopping centers.  One space per 250 square feet of gross
floor area.



   (KK)   Self-storage facilities.  One space for each 50 storage
cubicles plus two spaces.



   (LL)   Sexual encounter center.  Parking spaces shall be not less
than 30% of maximum occupancy as determined by the International Building
Code as amended.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. 2515, passed 2-20-1991; Ord.
2687, passed 1-4-1995; Ord. O2006-14, passed 2-1-2006; Ord. O2010-32, passed
7-7-2010; Ord. O2011-37, passed 11-2-2011; Ord. O2017-016, passed
5-17-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-16.08  Off-street Loading Regulations.



   (A)   Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial or industrial
building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading
spaces.



      (1)   Loading spaces shall be not less than 12 feet in width,
40 feet in length, and with 14 feet in vertical clearance.



      (2)   Loading spaces shall be located and designed so that
trucks need not back into a street or alley. No part of an alley or street
shall be used for loading except for areas designated by the city for loading.



      (3)   When the lot upon which the loading spaces are located
abuts an alley paved to city standards, such loading spaces may have access
from the alley provided that said alley is not adjacent to a residential
district.



      (4)   No loading space for vehicles over two-ton capacity
shall be closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential zoning district
unless enclosed by a building or a solid fence or wall not less than six feet
in height.



      (5)   No loading berth shall be located within any minimum
required front or side yard.



      (6)   No loading space which is provided for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this chapter shall hereafter be eliminated,
reduced or converted in any manner below the requirements established in the
ordinance, unless equivalent facilities are provided in conformance to this
chapter.



      (7)   Space allocated for any off-street loading facilities
shall not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for
any off-street parking facilities, or portion thereof.



      (8)   Required off-street loading spaces shall be located on
the same site as the use being served.



   (B)   Loading spaces required.  At least the following amounts of
off-street loading space shall be provided for uses other than residential,
with adequate means for ingress and egress. The following Table No. 4 shall
include and apply to all structures in the city.



 


Table No. 4 - Loading Space Requirements



Total Square Feet of Building Space (Gross Floor Area)
 
Loading Spaces Required




12,500 up to and including 40,000
 
1


40,001 up to and including 100,000
 
2


100,001 up to and including 160,000
 
3


160,001 up to and including 240,000
 
4


240,001 up to and including 320,000
 
5


320,001 up to and including 400,000
 
6


For each additional 90,000 over 400,000
 
1 additional




 



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010) 
Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-16.09  Variances from the Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.



   (A)   The Hearing Officer shall have the power to grant variances
from the specific requirements of this section, provided that it finds that
the spirit and intent of these regulations have been substantially complied
with. However, this authority does not grant to the Hearing Officer the power
to waive all off-street parking and loading requirements.



   (B)   The Community Development Director shall also be authorized to
approve plans for the sharing of off-street parking and/or loading space by
two or more users of buildings or land, provided that each use of the shared
spaces shall function as if having been provided separately. In addition, a
legal agreement shall be prepared by and between property owners specifying
the conditions for sharing said space(s), and such agreement shall be filed
with the Department of Community Development and recorded against the
properties.



('80 Code, App. A, § 160)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 800, passed
5-17-1960; Ord. 1812, passed 2-7-1979; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)



§ 154-16.10  Permitted Reductions.



   (A)   Reductions for certain uses in areas designated in the
Redevelopment Element of the General Plan.



      (1)   Reduction based on on-street parking for certain
residential uses in areas designated in the redevelopment element of the
General Plan. On-street parking for single-family dwellings, small
Residential Care Facilities, small Child Care Services, and community gardens
may be counted on a space-for-space basis toward the total required amount of
parking up to 50% provided the parking is located on the same side of the
street as the use, does not extend beyond the street frontage of the subject
property, and on-street parking spaces are approved by the City of Yuma
Traffic Engineering. If a single-family dwelling meets the exception provided
for in § 154-16.07(FF), the single space required for the dwelling unit may
be provided on-street in accordance with this section.



      (2)   Reduction of parking lot dimensions for residential uses
in areas designated in the Redevelopment Element of the General Plan. Any
residential use located within an area designated in the Redevelopment
Element of the General Plan may reduce the minimum parking lot dimensions to
a stall length of eighteen feet and a stall width of nine feet.



      (3)   Reduction based on certain non-residential uses in areas
designated in the Redevelopment Element of the General Plan. Non-residential
uses located within an area designated in the Redevelopment Element of the
General Plan with a parking formula of one space per 300 square feet of gross
floor area or less intense formula are allowed a reduction of up to 10% of
the total required parking.



   (B)   Exemption based on maintenance of historic structure.
Non-residential uses with a parking formula of one space per 300 square feet
of gross floor area or less intense formula occupying a structure listed
individually on the National Register of Historic Places or listed as a
contributing property in a National Register Historic District, are exempt
from § 154-16.07 (Minimum Parking Spaces Required) provided the historic
designation of the contributing structure is maintained.



   (C)   Other permitted reductions.



      (1)   General requirements. The number of required motor
vehicle parking spaces may be reduced under the following conditions:



         a.   The project complies with one or more of the
permitted reductions in this Section.



         b.   The cumulative reduction does not exceed 20% of the
required number of spaces prior to any reduction.



         c.   If more than one reduction is applied, the parking
requirement is calculated based on the required number prior to any reduction.



         d.   The required number of spaces for individuals with
physical disabilities is based on the total number of motor vehicle parking
spaces required before the reduction.



      (2)   Reduction based on providing additional bicycle parking.
For every six nonrequired bicycle parking spaces the motor vehicle parking
requirement may be reduced by one space.



      (3)   Reduction based on providing parking for recharge of
electric vehicles. The number of spaces required may be reduced at a ratio of
one space for every one space for electrical vehicle parking spaces/recharge
station.



      (4)   Reduction based on landscaping and screening criteria.



         a.   The following reductions apply to existing
development:



            i.   The number of spaces required may be reduced
when the development is modified to comply with all applicable sections of
Article 20 (Landscape Regulations); or,



            ii.   For every two non-required trees provided in
the vehicular use area, the motor vehicle parking requirement may be reduced
by one space. The planting area for each tree must comply with the spatial
requirements of Article 20 (Landscape Regulations).



         b.   For comprehensive redevelopment or development of a
site, the motor vehicle parking requirement may be reduced by one space for
every three nonrequired canopy trees provided in the vehicular use area. The
planting area for each tree must comply with the spatial requirements of
Article 20 (Landscape Regulations).



(Ord. O2017-016, passed 5-17-2017)



Article 17 - Sign Regulations



§ 154-17.01  Purpose.



   (A)   The principal purpose of the sign regulations is to establish
basic design standards, administrative procedures and other criteria
pertaining to the time, manner and placement of both on-site and off-site
signage located within the city.



   (B)   Such controls are established in the interests of public
safety, community aesthetics and the public need for clear visual
communications. Visual distractions, impediments to traffic visibility and
competition with traffic control devices shall be prohibited.



   (C)   The standards and criteria of this chapter are intended to
accommodate a certain limited amount of signage in order to be
comprehensible, to promote traffic safety and to maintain community
aesthetics. As a result, visual clutter and competition between sign
structures shall be avoided to allow approved signage to convey visual
information to the public in a clear manner.



   (D)   It is also the intent of this chapter to secure the gradual
and eventual elimination, rather than expansion, of nonconforming signs and
nonconforming sign structures. Therefore, the number, size, height, location,
spacing, the means of installing and the manner of keeping signs and sign
structures shall be regulated in order to achieve these purposes.



   (E)   This sign code shall help further achieve the following Goals
and Objectives of the General Plan:



      (1)   Objective 3.2 of the Land Use Element: Achieve a high
standard of physical appearance and maintenance of land and buildings.



      (2)   Goal 2.0 of the Transportation Element: Develop
transportation corridors that are attractive and maintained to the highest
standards.



      (3)   Objective 2.1 of the Transportation Element: Protect
roadways designated as Gateway and Scenic/Historic routes from nearby
incompatible land uses, visual clutter and traffic congestion.



      (4)   Objective 2.3 of the Transportation Element: Enhance
roadways by reducing and minimizing visual clutter and obstructions.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



§ 154-17.02  Applicability and General Requirements.



   (A)   Scope. The regulations and provisions of this chapter shall be
applicable to the construction, establishment or addition of any new sign,
sign structure or sign face, whether on-site or off-site, as well as to the
relocation, enlargement, extension, reconstruction, replacement, maintenance
or continuance of any existing sign, sign structure or sign face. These
regulations shall be applicable within any existing or new development area
of the city, as well as within any area newly annexed to the city. Nothing
herein shall require any change or modification to any signage lawfully
established or constructed prior to the effective date of this section,
except as provided in division (C) below of this section and § 154-17.05(E)
of this chapter.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



   (B)   Responsibility.  The duty to erect and maintain signage in
the manner specified herein shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or
occupant(s) of the property upon which the signage is located.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



   (C)   Nonconforming signage.  Any sign or sign structure lawfully
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, whether on-site or
off-site and not meeting the standards and requirements specified herein,
shall be considered nonconforming and be subject to the following provisions.



      (1)   Continuance.  The lawful use of any nonconforming sign
or sign structure may be continued indefinitely, provided, however, that any
addition, enlargement or other alteration which would increase the degree of
nonconformity shall be prohibited. Any nonconforming sign or sign structure
which is abandoned for a period exceeding one year shall be subject to the
requirements of § 154-17.05(E) of this chapter pertaining to removal of
abandoned signage.



      (2)   Repairs and alterations.  Repairs and alterations which
do not increase the degree of nonconformity shall be permitted, except that
if any sign or structure is damaged or has deteriorated to an extent that the
cost of repair equals 50% of its replacement value if sound, or if the cost
of alteration exceeds 50% of the replacement value, it shall either be
rebuilt or replaced in conformance with the standards and requirements of
this chapter, or be removed altogether.



      (3)   Replacement of on-site signage.  At such time as the
name of an activity changes, any nonconforming on-site signage related to
such activity shall either be replaced or modified to meet the requirements
of this chapter, unless such signage was previously constructed with
interchangeable panels, letters or copy. An act of maintenance or repair, or
repainting a previously painted sign face, or repapering a previously papered
sign or other similar manner of changing a sign face, none of which would
increase the degree of nonconformity, shall not be deemed as replacement
hereunder and shall be permitted.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



   (D)   Conflict and severability.



      (1)   Where an action or requirement pertaining to signage is
specified by more than one section of the zoning ordinance, or by another
ordinance or regulation as may be adopted by the city, or by another state or
federal law or regulation where applicable, such action or requirement shall
be dictated by the applicable provisions of such regulations. In cases of
overlap between ordinances, regulations or laws, the more restrictive
provisions shall control.



      (2)   If any section, sentence, phrase or other portion of
this chapter is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or
unconstitutional for any reason, such portions shall be deemed as separate,
distinct and independent provisions, and such holdings shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



   (E)   Message substitution clause.  Subject to the consent of the
property owner or person in control or possession of the property, a
noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for all or part of the
commercial or noncommercial message on any sign allowed under this chapter.
No special or additional approval is required to substitute a noncommercial
message for any other message on an allowable sign, provided the sign
structure is already approved or exempt from the approval requirement and no
structural or electrical change is made. When a noncommercial message is
substituted for any other message, however, the sign is still subject to the
same design, locational and structural regulations (e.g., color, materials,
size, height, illumination, maintenance, duration of display and the like),
as well as all building and electrical code requirements, as would apply if
the sign were used to display a commercial message. In the event of any
perceived or actual conflict between the general provisions of this division
and any other specific provisions in this chapter, the provisions of this
division shall prevail.



(Ord. O2008-05, passed 2-20-2008)



   (F)   Sign face area.



      (1)   Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all
faces shall be included in determining the sign area, except that only one
face of a double-faced sign shall be considered where the angle between faces
does not exceed 30 degrees.



      (2)   Where the sign is a statue or similar three-dimensional
figure, the sign area shall be the sum of the four vertical rectangular faces
of the smallest polyhedron that entirely encloses such statue or figure.



(Ord. O2012-18, passed 10-3-2012)



   (G)   Additional sign regulations.  Signage regulations shall be
adhered to as they pertain to properties within the Aesthetic Overlay Zoning
District (§ 154-14.01(D)(3)) and within the Old Town Zoning District (§
154-10.03).



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-17.03  On-Site Signage.



On-site signage shall be permitted within any zoning district, subject to the
general requirements of this chapter and the design standards as specified in
this section.



   (A)   Address/nameplates.  One address and nameplate not exceeding
one square foot in area shall be allowed as a matter of right for any
building within any zoning district, and shall be in addition to the maximum
sign areas specified herein.



   (B)   Freestanding signage on shared premises.  Where more than one
user shares the same premises, not more than one permanent freestanding,
on-site sign shall be allowed for each street upon which the premises front,
in accordance with the design standards as specified herein.



   (C)   Standards and criteria for permanent on-site signage.



      (1)   Any permanent on-site signage proposed for installation
shall conform with the standards and criteria indicated in Table No. 5.  The
number of any permanent on-site sign structures and the amount of any
permanent on-site sign face area which already exists on any given premises
shall be counted in accordance with these standards and criteria when
determining the amount of permanent signage which may be added.



(Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010)



      (2)   Monument sign.  A freestanding sign, where the entire
bottom of the sign is affixed to the ground, provides a solid and continuous
background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign, which is
detached from a building, and the support structure is a base constructed of
a permanent material. The height of any monument base or other structure
erected to support or ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign
height. The sign shall be clad to the ground with a base not less than 75% of
the total sign width. The height of the structure erected to support or
ornament the sign shall be measured as part of the sign height. To encourage
design flexibility, the maximum height of the sign may be lowered in order to
decrease required setback from the street. No signs shall be permitted within
visibility sight triangles. Low profile signs shall be setback, at a minimum,
from the property line as follows:



 

(a)
 
Over 6 feet in height
 
12-feet setback;


(b)
 
4 feet to 6 feet in height
 
6-feet setback; and


(c)
 
4 feet or less in height
 
2-feet setback.



 



 


Table No. 5 - Standards and Criteria for Permanent On-Site Signage




Zoning District

 

Type of Sign/ Installation

 

Max. Total Area of All Sign Face(s)

 

Max. Area of Any Sign Face

 

Max. Number of Signs

 

Maximum Height




Within Street Setback

 

Outside of Street Setback





AG
 

F-S and W-M

 

24 sq. ft.

 

12 sq. ft.

 

1 each of each sign type per street frontage

 

F-S: 6 ft.



W-M: n/a

 

F-S: 12 ft.



W-M: (1)



SR, RE,

R-1, R-2

R-3, MH and R-MH
 





F-S and W-M

 

2 sq. ft. per dwelling unit

 

2 sq. ft.

 

1 per dwelling unit

 





F-S: 4 ft.



W-M: n/a

 





F-S: 6 ft.



W-M: (1)




50 sq. ft. per development

 

50 sq. ft.

 

2 per entrance




24 sq. ft. for each non- residential use

 

24 sq. ft.

 

1 of each sign per street frontage



TR
 

F-S

 

24 sq. ft.

 

24 sq. ft.

 

1 per street frontage

 

4 ft.

 

8 ft.



 
 

W-M

 

24 sq. ft. per building

 

24 sq. ft.

 

1 per tenant

 

n/a

 

(1)



 
 

U-C

 

2 sq. ft. per door entrance

 

2 sq. ft.

 

1 per door

 

n/a

 

(2)



PSC, B-1 and I-P
 

F-S

 

1 sq. ft. per 1 ln. ft. of street address frontage

 

300 sq. ft.

 

1 per street frontage

 

(c)  (d)



B-2, L-I

and H-I
 

F-S

 

1 sq. ft. per 1 ln. ft. of street frontage upon which the sign is
located(a)  (b)

 

300 sq. ft.

 

1 per street frontage

 

(c)  (d)



PSC, B-1, B-2, I-P, L-I and H-I
 

W-M

 

15% of primary building facade

 

300 sq. ft.

 

(e)

 

n/a

 

(1)




U-C

 

4 sq. ft. per front entrance

 

4 sq. ft.

 

1 per front entrance

 

n/a

 

(1)



Public Overlay
 

F-S and W- M

 

150 sq. ft.

 

F-S: 50 sq. ft.



W-M: 100 sq. ft.

 

F-S: 1 per street frontage



W-M: 1 per street frontage

 

4 ft.

 

19 ft.




Minimum Street Yard Setback - 12"



R-3, MH, RVS
 

Development which adjoins an interstate highway or prime arterial, one
additional freestanding on site sign shall be permitted outside of the
minimum required street yard setback, with a maximum sign face area of one
square foot per one linear of interstate or area frontage, up to a maximum of
300 square feet, and with a maximum 35 foot sign height.



Table No. 5 Legend:


(1)   A minimum distance below the top of the building’s wall equal to
10% of the height of the wall, or a distance equal to 25% the narrow
dimension of the sign, whichever is less restrictive; signs on a pitched roof
must be located a minimum distance below the roofline equal to 20% of the
building’s height.


(2)   Maximum height not applicable; however, a minimum 7 ft. vertical
clearance shall be required from walking grade to the bottom of the sign.


F-S   Freestanding sign


W-M   Wall-mounted sign


U-C   Under-canopy sign





n/a   not applicable


sq. ft.   Square foot


Footnotes: Table No. 5 and Table No. 6


(a)   In the event that more than one sign is erected on a parcel with
more than one street frontage as permitted herein, a minimum space shall be
required between signs equal to one-half the length of the total street
frontage. The spacing shall be measured along the street lines. In no event
shall more than one permanent freestanding, on-site sign be erected on any
street frontage, except as provided herein.


(b)   A freestanding, on-site sign structure may be erected at the corner
of any lot or parcel under one of the following options:


   1.   One corner sign with a maximum sign face area equal to the sum
of the two intersecting street frontages, up to 300 square feet maximum,
provided, however, that no other freestanding, on-site sign shall be erected
along either of the two intersecting frontages; or


   2.   One corner sign with a maximum sign face area equal to either
of the two intersecting frontages, up to 300 square feet maximum, provided,
however, that no other freestanding, on-site sign shall be erected along
whichever frontage is used for calculation purposes.


In the event that a lot or parcel has more than two street frontages, a
freestanding, on-site sign may be erected on each resultant corner, provided
that the total number of such signs shall not exceed the total number of
street frontages, and in no event shall any street frontage be counted more
than once for the purpose of calculating the maximum allowable sign face
area. Corner signs shall also be subject to all other design standards and
requirements of this chapter, such as height, setback, spacing between
on-site signs on the same parcel, shared premises, and the like, as may be
applicable.


(c)   The support structure for any signage shall be set back a minimum of
12 feet from any street right-of-way line, except that for any sign not
exceeding three feet maximum height, a minimum two foot setback from the
street right-of-way line shall be required.  The minimum setback from the
street right-of-way line to the leading edge of the sign face shall be
determined by the vertical clearance of the sign face as specified in
Illustrative Example 2 - Graph No. 1; provided, however, that no sign face
shall be set back less than two feet from the street right-of-way line, and
no vertical clearance shall be less than eight feet. 


(d)   The maximum allowable sign height shall be determined according to
the sliding scale indicated in Table No. 7, which specifies a maximum 20 foot
height for a 50 square foot sign face area, up to a maximum 35 foot height
for a 300 square foot sign face area.  Within this range, sign height may be
increased by six hundredths (.06) foot for each square foot of additional
sign face area permitted by this chapter.  The scale in Table No.7 is
calculated according to the following formula:



Sign Height = (X-50) x (.06) + 20, where X = the proposed sign face area



(e)   The maximum total sign face area as specified for this category may
be distributed among each building facade.




 



(Ord. 2314, passed 4-16-1986; Ord. O2000-55, passed 8-2-2000; Ord. O2010-09,
passed 2-3-2010; Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



   (D)   Temporary signage.  Any temporary signage proposed for
installation shall conform with the standards and criteria indicated in Table
No. 6 and the footnotes.



(Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



      (1)   Standards and criteria for temporary signage per Table
No. 6 (also see footnotes).



      (2)   In no event shall any temporary signage be erected more
than 60 days prior to, nor be allowed to remain more than ten days after, the
date of the activity, event or other temporary condition to which the sign
relates. For the purposes of this division, the measurement of time shall not
include such date or period of the activity, event or other temporary
condition.



      (3)   Lighting for temporary sign installations shall be
prohibited.



 


Table No. 6 - Standards and Criteria for Temporary Signage



Zoning District
 
Type of Sign/ Installation
 
Max. Area of Any Sign Face
 
Max. # of Signs
 
Maximum Height


Within Street Setback
 
Outside Street Setback




AG
 
Freestanding;

Wall-mounted
 
32 sq. ft.
 
1 per street frontage
 
6 ft.
 
12 ft.


SR, RE

R-1, R-2

R-3, MH and

R-MH
 


Freestanding; Wall-mounted
 
10 sq. ft. (less than 1 acre)
 
1 per lot or parcel
 
6 ft.
 
6 ft.


32 sq. ft. (1 acre or more)
 
1 per street frontage
 
6 ft.
 
8 ft.


TR
 
Freestanding; Wall-mounted
 
32 sq. ft.
 
1 per street frontage
 
6 ft.
 
8 ft.


B-1, B-2, PSC, I-P, L-I and H-I
 
Freestanding
 
100 sq. ft
 
1 per street frontage
 
A distance below the uppermost line of the wall upon which mounted, equal to
one-half the vertical dimension of sign


Wall-mounted
 
32 sq. ft.
 
1 per building facade




 



 


Table No. 7 - Sign Area and Sign Height



Permitted Sign Face Area (sq. ft)
 
Allowable Sign Height (ft.)




50
 
20


60
 
20.6


70
 
21.2


80
 
21.8


90
 
22.4


100
 
23


110
 
23.6


120
 
24.2


130
 
24.8


140
 
25.4




 



 


Table No. 7 - Sign Area and Sign Height



Permitted Sign Face Area (sq. ft)
 
Allowable Sign Height (ft.)




150
 
26


160
 
26.6


170
 
27.2


180
 
27.8


190
 
28.4


200
 
29


210
 
29.6


220
 
30.2


230
 
30.8


240
 
31.4


250
 
32


260
 
32.6


270
 
33.2


280
 
33.8


290
 
34.4


300
 
35




 



Example:  A sign face with a ten foot vertical clearance measured from
street grade of the nearest driving lane to the lowest line of the sign face
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the street right-of-way line.
No sign face shall be erected to achieve a vertical clearance less than eight
feet, unless the sign face is set back a minimum of 12 feet from the street
right-of-way line.




Illustrative Example 2 - Graph No. 1
















   (E)   Directional signage.  Signage provided for the sole purpose
of traffic circulation and direction on the premises shall be permitted
within any zoning district in the amount of ten square feet per street
entrance, and shall be permitted in addition to the maximum on-site sign
areas specified herein.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2314, passed
4-16-1986; Ord. 2533, passed 9-4-1991; Ord. O95-040, passed 9-5-1995; Ord.
O2002-46, passed 8-7-2002; Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010; Ord. O2011-05,
passed 2-16-2011; Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



   (F)   Signage examples.  The following are illustrative examples.



   Illustrative Example 3 - Signage Examples




Examples Of Monument Signs

















Examples Of Pedestal Signs

















Examples Of Pole Signs
















('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-17.04  Off-Site Signage.



Off-site signage shall be permitted in accordance with the specific standards
and criteria set forth in this section, as well as with the additional
requirements and provisions of this chapter pertaining to all signage.



   (A)   Required zoning districts and frontages.  Off-site signage
shall be permitted only on parcels zoned with a Light Industrial (L-I) or
Heavy Industrial (H-I) zoning classification which front along a principal
arterial or interstate highway, as classified by the 2014 Transportation
Master Plan, and successors.



   (B)   Standards and criteria for off-site signage.  Any off-site
signage proposed for installation shall conform with the standards and
criteria set forth in the following. The size and location of any off-site
signage which already exists shall be considered when determining the amount
and location of any new signage proposed for installation under these
standards.



      (1)   Sign face area.  The maximum sign face area shall not
exceed 300 square feet, except that such area may be increased to a maximum
of 400 square feet if located on a parcel which fronts along an interstate
highway.



      (2)   Sign height and vertical clearance.  The maximum sign
height shall not exceed 27 feet. In all cases, a minimum 15-foot vertical
clearance measured from street grade of the nearest driving lane to the
lowest line of the sign face shall be required.



      (3)   Setback.  The minimum setback from any portion of the
sign face or sign structure shall be either 55 feet from the centerline of
the arterial street right-of-way or 15 feet from the right-of-way line,
whichever produces the greater setback.



      (4)   Spacing.  A minimum 600 foot distance, measured as a
radius, shall be required between off-site sign installations. In addition,
no more than four off-site sign installations shall be located within a
linear mile measured along the same street, wherein the beginning point and
ending point of such mile coincide with a section line.



      (5)   Method of installation.  Each off-site sign shall be
erected as a freestanding sign installation as defined by this chapter. No
off-site sign shall be erected on the wall or roof of any building.



      (6)   Number of sign face(s). An off-site sign shall be
permitted no more than two sign faces; both of which may be either static or
digital.



      (7)   Orientation of sign face(s). Sign faces shall first be
oriented perpendicular to the roadway on which it is located. Then the sign
faces can be spread to a maximum angle of 30 degrees.



      (8)   Exterior sign lighting. Lighting fixtures used to
illuminate any off-site sign, shall be mounted on the top of the sign
structure. All such fixtures shall comply with the shielding requirements set
forth in Article 18 of this chapter.



      (9)   Hours of illumination. The electrical illumination of
outdoor off-site signs including those internally illuminated, is prohibited
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise.



      (10)   Digital billboards. In addition to the off-site sign
regulations, the following requirements will apply to all digital billboards.



         (a)   All digital billboard signs shall be limited to a
maximum surface luminosity limit of 6,500 NITS in full white mode during
daytime hours. After sunset and before 11:00 p.m., the surface luminosity
limit of signs smaller than 672 square feet shall be a maximum of 342 NITS in
full white mode, and a maximum 300 NITS in full white mode for signs larger
than 672 square feet. From 11:00 p.m. until sunrise, illumination shall be
extinguished. Digital billboards shall be equipped with an automatic device
to ensure the ability to dim the display through a photoelectric sensor that
detects ambient light levels and adjusts the display intensity automatically
to ensure the maximum NIT levels are enforced.



         (b)   All digital billboard signs shall provide for
automatic dimming based upon ambient lighting conditions, including evening
and overcast weather.



         (c)   It shall be prohibited for any digital billboard
sign to have an illuminance greater than 1.0 foot candle at the property line
of any adjacent property.



         (d)   The message or image of the digital billboard may
be static or change at specific or programmed time intervals. The change in
message or images shall occur no more frequently than once every eight
seconds and shall not have fade or dissolve transitions, or full animation or
video, or similar subtle transitions or frame effect that have the appearance
of moving text or images. The transition from one message to the next shall
be completed with one second.



         (e)   Message sequencing, the use of multiple digital
billboards in a row to convey a message, shall be prohibited.



      (11)   Embellishments. Embellishments may extend no more than
five feet above or below the horizontal edges and three feet beyond any
vertical edge of the sign face area.



      (12)   Replacement of non-conforming billboards. The lawful
use of any nonconforming sign or sign structure may be continued
indefinitely, provided, however, than any addition, enlargement or other
alteration which would increase the degree of nonconformity shall be
prohibited.



         (a)   Spacing non-conformity. Replacement shall not be
permitted if the billboard is considered non-conforming due to a spacing
and/or concentration issue. The sign must be removed:



            1.   If repairs and/or replacement of the sign or
sign portions equal 50% of its replacement value if sound; or



            2.   If the cost of alteration exceeds 50% of the
replacement value. Repairs that cumulatively reach the 50% point in any
consecutive ten-year period are not allowed.



         (b)   Zoning district non-conformity. Replacement may be
allowed if the billboard is considered non-conforming due to its location
within the General Commercial (B-2) District. Non-conforming billboards
eligible for replacement must be replaced with a standard billboard-sized
billboard which is at least 50% smaller in size than the billboard being
replaced; except non-conforming billboards measuring 5' by 11' may be
replaced in-kind.



            If the billboard being proposed is to be digital, the
company proposing the digital billboard must remove two non-conforming
billboards, each equal in size to the proposed digital billboard, and must
comply with all billboard regulations. Removed billboards shall only be
counted once and they must be removed within the month prior to the issuance
of a building permit for the replacement digital billboard.



   (C)   Prohibited locations.  Off-site signage shall be prohibited
at any of the following locations:



      (1)   Less than 150 feet from the nearest property line of any
residential zoning district;



      (2)   In any block where the front one-third of any lot or
parcels used for residential purposes comprises 50% or more of the block
frontage; or



      (3)   Less than 1,500 feet from the exterior boundary of any
federal, state, county or municipal historic park, monument or district.



   (D)   City approved sign programs installed within or as a part of a
development project are not subject to § 154-17.04(B).



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2015-05, passed 2-4-2015; Ord.
O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016)



§ 154-17.05  Additional Requirements and Provisions.



The following requirements and provisions shall be applicable to all sign
installations as regulated by this chapter, both on-site and off-site,
whether permanent or temporary.



   (A)   Construction and installation standards.  All signs, sign
structures and other components including electrical features, shall be
designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances and regulations previously adopted, or
subsequently adopted, by the city. Those codes and ordinances shall dictate
such standards as the means of structural support, allowable stresses,
construction materials, wind loads, vibration resistance, seismic loads,
electrical wiring and the like.



   (B)   Sign label.  The building permit number as required by the
City of Yuma Building Safety Division shall be permanently affixed to each
sign installation, whether permanent or temporary, for which a building
permit is required under this chapter. Any temporary signage for which no
permit is required under this chapter shall be affixed with the telephone
number of the sign owner. Such information shall be affixed by a weatherproof
label, inscription or other permanent means, in a manner legible upon close
inspection.



   (C)   Maintenance.  Every sign shall be maintained in a safe,
presentable and good structural condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, repainting, cleaning and other acts necessary
for the maintenance of said sign. If the sign is not made to comply with
adequate safety standards, the City Building Official may require its removal
in accordance with the provisions of division (E) below of this chapter.



   (D)   Damaged or deteriorated signage.  Any sign or structure which
is damaged or has deteriorated to an extent that the cost of repair equals
50% or more of the replacement value of the sign if sound, shall either be
rebuilt or replaced in conformance with the standards and requirements of
this chapter, or be removed altogether.



   (E)   Sign removal.  The Building Official shall cause the repair
or removal of any sign that endangers the public safety, such as materially
dangerous, electrically or structurally defective sign or an abandoned sign,
according to the following provisions. The following provisions pertaining to
notice, appeal and reoccurrence shall also apply to all signage which is
temporary signage extending beyond the permitted time limits according to the
criteria specified by § 154-17.03(D) of this chapter.



      (1)   Notice.  Written notice shall be sent to the owner of
the sign if it is an off-site sign, or to the owner of the premises upon
which an on-site sign is situated. Such notice shall identify any hazards,
defects and deficiencies of the sign or sign structure, and the specific
section(s) of this chapter or other applicable building code or ordinance
adopted by the city to which the violations pertain. Said notice shall
further indicate what repairs or other action, if any, would correct the
violation(s) as noted, and shall specify a period of 30 days for either the
repair or removal to be accomplished.



      (2)   Appeal.  The owner of the sign, or the owner of the
building or property, upon which it is situated, may appeal the order of the
Building Official for removal or repair, by filing a written notice with the
Building Official within ten days after receipt of the notice, for final
consideration by the appropriate city board. The Board of Appeals shall
consider appeals pertaining to the building code; the Electrical Advisory
Board shall consider appeals pertaining to the electrical code; and the Board
of Adjustment shall consider appeals pertaining to removal of abandoned
signage, as well as any appeals from any interpretation made by the Zoning
Administrator.



      (3)   Emergency.  Should the Building Official determine that
the sign or structure causes imminent danger to the public safety, contact
shall be made with the owner to require immediate removal or correction. In
the event that contact cannot be made with the owner, or the owner fails to
correct the danger, the Building Official shall correct the danger by
ordering the sign removal. Any sign removed by the Building Official pursuant
to such emergency shall be disposed of in the manner deemed appropriate by
City Council, upon recommendation by the Building Official. All costs
associated with removal of such sign by the city, including all incidental
costs, shall be considered a debt owed to the city by the owner of the sign
if it is an off-site sign, or the owner of the property if it is an on-site
sign, and shall be recovered in the following manner.



         (a)   The Building Official shall submit a report to the
City Clerk for public hearing by the City Council. Such report shall include
a description of the work done, an itemized account of all expenses incurred,
a legal description of the property upon which the signage is or was located,
and the name(s) and address(es) of the property owner and/or sign owner, if
reasonably ascertainable.



         (b)   The City Clerk shall cause notice of the public
hearing to be posted on the property involved, published once in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city, and served by certified mail to the
owner of the property if it is an on-site sign, according to the names and
addresses shown on the county assessment roll, and to the owner of the sign
if it is an off-site sign if such name and address are reasonably
ascertainable. Such notice as specified herein shall be given at least ten
days prior to the hearing, and shall further specify the day, hour and place
for the hearing.



         (c)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City
Council shall confirm or deny the report, with or without any modifications
as it deems appropriate, and shall determine whether the charges are to be
recovered by personal obligation of the property owner. Should Council order
that the charges shall be a personal obligation of the property owner and/or
the sign owner, the City Attorney shall be authorized to collect the same by
use of all appropriate legal remedies.



   (F)   Locations within right-of-way.  No sign shall be located
within any existing or prospective public street right-of-way as classified
by the circulation element of the Yuma General Plan, nor shall any portion of
a sign or sign structure overhang such right-of-way, except as provided in
this code.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2005-91, passed 10-5-2005) 
Penalty, see § 154-999



   (G)   Balloons and inflatable devices.  The following applies to
the use of balloons and other inflatable devices used as signs.



      (1)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of
balloons shall not be higher than the building located on the site.



      (2)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of
balloons shall be tethered to the ground a distance from the property line
equal to the balloon height.



      (3)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of
balloons are required to be maintained solely on the property of the business
for which it is advertising.



      (4)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings or
balloons are not allowed to cross into the right-of-way, whether in the air
or on the ground.



      (5)   Individual balloons/inflatable devices or strings of
balloons are not allowed to be cut loose or to blow away. The maintenance and
disposal of the balloons is the responsibility of the business that they are
advertising. Balloons must be removed and disposed of properly.



      (6)   The provision of § 154-14.02(C)(3) development
standards in the AutoCenter Overlay District does not apply to balloons and
inflatable devices.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2005-91, passed 10-5-2005;
Ord. O2007-52, passed 10-3-2007; Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-17.06  Prohibited and Exempt Signs and Restrictions.



   (A)   Prohibited signs.  The following types of signs shall be
prohibited:



      (1)   Portable signs as defined by this chapter;



      (2)   Streamers displayed for periods exceeding 15 days;



      (3)   Balloons exceeding four feet in diameter;



      (4)   Animated, flashing or indexing signs;



(Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



      (5)   Swinging signs;



      (6)   Signs which rotate more than six revolutions per minute;



      (7)   Banners, other than for identifying a special event for
a maximum period of 15 days;



      (8)   Any sign attached to a stand pipe or fire escape;



      (9)   Any sign which impedes access to any door, window or
fire escape;



      (10)   Signs on public property, unless otherwise allowed by
law;



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009; Ord. O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



      (11)   Any sign which facsimilates traffic control devices or
emergency vehicles by reason of shape, color or other feature;



      (12)   Any on-site sign attached to an off-site installation
which increases the existing sign face area;



      (13)   Any off-site sign attached to an on-site sign
installation; and



      (14)   Any other type of signage which does not comply with
the regulations and provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Exempt signage.  The following types of sign installations
shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter:



      (1)   Flags;



      (2)   Government signs for street names, traffic control or
other regulatory purpose of the government;



      (3)   Holiday decorations; and



      (4)   Signage located within the interior of any building or
other enclosure, and not visible from any public right-of-way or adjoining
property, provided, however, this provision shall not exempt such
installations from the requirement for any electrical permit, such as an
illuminated sign within an enclosed mall, any structural permit or other
requirement of an applicable building code or other regulation adopted by the
city.



      (5)   Temporary signs.



         (a)   Temporary signs are only permitted for licensed
businesses that are located onsite, whose access or visibility are currently
impacted by any type of undergoing active roadway construction, repair or
maintenance that is immediately occurring adjacent to/or in front of the
property and currently impacted by such.



         (b)   A temporary sign application is required to be
filed with the city to determine placement of such, prior to installation.



         (c)   The City Administrator or designee is authorized
and directed to promulgate regulations to effect this section.



(Ord.O2010-07, passed 1-20-2010)



      (6)   A sign on a truck, bus, boat, trailer, car or other
motorized vehicles and equipment provided the following conditions are
adhered to:



         (a)   Primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is
not the display of signs;



         (b)   Such signs are magnetic, decals or painted upon an
integral part of the vehicle or equipment as originally designed by the
manufacturer, and do not break the silhouette of the vehicle;



         (c)   Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition,
currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets when
applicable, and actively used in the daily function of the business to which
such signs relate;



         (d)   Vehicles and equipment are not used primarily as
static displays, advertising a product or service, not utilized as storage or
shelter; and



         (e)   During periods of inactivity exceeding 72 hours
such vehicle/equipment are not so parked or placed that the signs thereon are
displayed to the public. Vehicles and equipment engaged in active
construction projects and the on-premise storage of equipment and vehicles
offered to the general public for rent or lease shall not be subjected to
this condition.



   (C)   Signage for which no permits are required.  Permits shall not
be required for any of the following sign installations, provided, however,
that such installations shall meet all other requirements of this chapter as
may be applicable:



      (1)   Changing the copy of a sign previously designed with
interchangeable panels, letters or other graphics;



      (2)   Cleaning, repair, repapering, repainting a previously
painted sign or other maintenance, including replacement of a sign face
necessitated by damage or deterioration, none of which increases the existing
sign face area. No activity shall be contrary to the requirements of §§
154-17.02(C) and § 154-17.05(D) of this chapter;



      (3)   The painting of any on-site signage, whether permanent
or temporary, within a window of any building wall, or the installation or
modification, of any merchandise display within an existing window;



      (4)   Temporary signage not exceeding 32 square feet in area
and six feet in height; and



(Ord. O2008-06, passed 2-20-2008; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-014, passed 5-3-2017)



§ 154-17.07  Administration.



   (A)   Responsibilities.  The administration and enforcement of
these regulations shall be the responsibility of the City Zoning
Administrator and the Building Official, in accordance with the customary
duties and responsibilities of each official, respectively, and as further
provided by this subchapter and by Article 2; § 154-02.02.



   (B)   Issuance of building permits.



      (1)   Permits required.  A permit issued by the City of Yuma
Building Safety Division shall be required for the installation,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or replacement of all signs and sign
structures as specified in the following. Failure to obtain such permit shall
be considered a violation of this chapter. Approval of such permit by the
city shall not eliminate any requirement to secure a permit from the State of
Arizona pursuant to state law where applicable.



         (a)   Application.  All permit applications shall be in
the form prescribed by the Building Safety Division, and shall further
include the information required by this subchapter.



         (b)   Permanent signage.  A permit shall be required
for all permanent sign installations as regulated by this chapter, including
the painting or other attachment of any signage on the exterior of any
building, wall, roof, fence or other outdoor surface as a new sign
installation. In applying for such permit, the sign owner shall indicate in
writing whether the sign is to be an on-site or an off-site sign installation.



         (c)   Temporary signage.  A permit shall be required
for any temporary sign installation exceeding 32 square feet in sign face
area, and exceeding six feet in height, provided, however, that the installer
of any temporary sign exceeding ten square feet in sign face area shall
register its location, as permitted by this chapter, with the City of Yuma
Department of Development Services. In applying for such a permit for
temporary signage as required herein, the applicant shall indicate in writing
the date by which such signage shall be removed.



         (d)   Electrical permits.  If the sign or sign
structure is to be illuminated by electrical means, a separate electrical
permit shall be required in accordance with the standards and requirements of
the electrical code as adopted by the city.



      (2)   Requirements for permit applications.  Each application
for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a plan or plan(s) drawn to scale
which indicate the following:



         (a)   Complete dimensions to illustrate the sign face
area, the height of the sign structure if freestanding, or the dimensions of
the wall, roof or canopy upon which mounted or painted;



         (b)   The total amount of sign face area already
existing on the property, whether permanent or temporary, on-site and
off-site, and their locations;



         (c)   The location of the sign installation on the
property, as well as the location of all property lines, curb lines, curb
cuts and sidewalks pertinent to the sign location;



         (d)   The method of attachment, illumination and
structural support; any calculations as may be required by the Building
Official shall also be included; and



         (e)   The exact location of the property upon which the
signage is to be installed, either by address or legal description.



   (C)   Fees.



      (1)   Permit fee.  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a
sign installation, the Building Safety Division shall collect a permit fee in
the amount specified by Table No. 3A of the Uniform Building Code, current
edition, and any successors or amendments, as adopted by the city.



         (a)   Such fee shall be based on the total valuation of
the sign and sign structure, whether or not made locally, as calculated
according to the building valuation data maintained by the Building Safety
Division. The building valuation data include the unit cost per square foot
sign face area for illuminated and nonilluminated signage.



         (b)   For any addition to an existing sign or sign
structure, the valuation shall be based upon the square footage of the sign
face area to be added.



      (2)   Plan check fee.  In addition to the permit fee, a plan
check fee shall be collected by the Building Safety Division in the amount of
65% of the permit fee. The plan check fee shall be required at the time that
a permit is applied for and plans are submitted, and shall be paid whether or
not a permit is issued.



      (3)   Investigation fees.  Should there begin any work for
which a permit is required by this chapter, and no permit has been issued,
the Building Division shall conduct a special investigation prior to issuing
any permit for such work. The investigation fee shall equal, and be in
addition to, the permit fee.



         (a)   In addition, the party performing work shall be
subject to the penal provisions of this chapter, well as the applicable
provisions of any other code or ordinance adopted by the city.



         (b)   A re-inspection fee shall be assessed when the
work for which the inspection is called is not complete, or when corrections
previously noted have not been made. Such fee shall be $15 and shall be
collected by the Building Safety Division prior to conducting any further
re-inspections.



   (D)   Variances.  Variances may be granted by the appropriate city
board as specified herein, to allow relief from the design standards
specified by this chapter. However, no relief shall be granted to permit the
erection of signs which are prohibited by § 154-17.06(A) of this chapter.



      (1)   Requests for variances from the design criteria of this
chapter, such as, but not limited to, the size, height, location, spacing and
number of signs, as well as the requirements pertaining to the manner of
keeping, shall be considered by the City of Yuma Board of Adjustment. Such
variance requests, as well as any appeal from an interpretation made by the
Zoning Administrator, shall be considered in accordance with the requirements
and criteria of Article 2; § 154-02.02 of this chapter. However, since it is
the intent of this chapter to secure the gradual and eventual elimination,
rather than expansion, of nonconforming signs and sign structures, the Board
of Adjustment shall not grant any variance to increase the degree of
nonconformity for any existing signage.



      (2)   Requests for variances from the structural or mechanical
requirements of any building code as may be adopted by the city, or any
appeal from an interpretation made by the Building Official, shall be
considered by the appropriate board, such as the Board of Appeals or the
Electrical Advisory Board, in accordance with their adopted procedures.



('80 Code, App. A, § 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2193, passed
3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed 12-19-1984; Ord. O2010-09, passed 2-3-2010; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-17.99  Penalty.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation of, any provision of this article. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions in this article shall be guilty
of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or
both fine and imprisonment. If a violation of any provision of this article
constitutes an immediate threat to the health and safety of the general
public, each separate day or part thereof during which such violation of this
article occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



(Ord. O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016)



Article 18 - Outdoor Lighting Regulations



§ 154-18.01  Purpose.



The principal purpose of the outdoor lighting regulations is to create
standards for outdoor lighting which do not conflict with the reasonable use
and enjoyment of property within the city and with astronomical observations.
It is the intention of this subchapter to encourage the conservation of
energy while increasing night-time safety, utility, security and
productivity, through regulation of the types, kinds, construction,
installation and use of outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices,
lighting practices and systems.



('80 Code, App. A, § 180)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2396, passed
3-2-1988; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-18.02  General Requirements.



   (A)   Top-mounted.  Outdoor advertising sign lighting fixtures used
to illuminate an outdoor advertising sign shall be mounted on the top of the
sign structure. All such fixtures shall comply with the shielding
requirements in Table No. 8.



      (1)   This is the preferred light source to minimize
undesirable light emission into the night sky affecting astronomical
observations.



      (2)   Metal halide lighting used primarily for display
purposes shall not be used for security lighting after 11:00 p.m. Metal
halide lamps shall be installed only in enclosed luminaries. These lamp
fixtures shall be “filtered”, a glass, acrylic or translucent enclosure
of the light source (quartz glass does not meet this requirement).



      (3)   Outdoor advertising signs of the type constructed of
translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within, do not require
shielding. Dark backgrounds with light lettering and warm white and natural
lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects.



      (4)   For purposes of this subchapter, quartz lamps shall not
be considered an incandescent light source.



   (B)   Bottom-mounted.  An outdoor advertising sign illuminated by
any type of bottom-mounted outdoor lighting system or fixture, which is
installed at or on the lower portion of any outdoor advertising sign or
fixture shall be prohibited unless said lighting fixture is shielded to
confine the light to the sign face.



   (C)   Mercury vapor.  Mercury vapor lamps and fixtures are
prohibited for use as outdoor lighting. Mercury vapor lamps in use for
outdoor lighting on the effective date of this chapter shall not be used
after January 1, 2011.



   (D)   Searchlights.  Prohibited.



   (E)   Recreational facilities.  Public or private recreational
facilities, which are illuminated with outdoor lighting fixtures conforming
to these regulations may operate any time with such illumination. Outdoor
recreational facilities not conforming to these regulations shall not be
illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a specific recreational or
sporting event or any other similar activity conducted at or in the facility
which was in progress under such illumination; prior to 11:00 p.m.



   (F)   Outdoor advertising off-site signs.  The electrical
illumination of outdoor advertising off-site signs including those internally
illuminated, is prohibited between the hours of 12:00 a.m. midnight and
sunrise.



   (G)   Flagpoles.  Outdoor lighting fixtures used to illuminate a
flagpole shall be mounted on the top of the flagpole structure and adhere to
the shielding requirements outlined in Table No. 8. In cases where it is
impossible to light a flagpole structure from the top, bottom-mounted lights
shall be connected to a timer which extinguishes all but the minimal light
source necessary to illuminate the flag between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
sunrise.



('80 Code, App. A, § 180)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2396, passed
3-2-1988)  Penalty, see § 154-999



 


Table No. 8 - Shielding Requirements



Fixture Lamp Type
 
Shielding Requirements


Any light source of 70W or less
 
None


Fluorescent
 
Fully shielded (3)


Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, krypton
 
None


High pressure sodium
 
Fully shielded


Incandescent 150W or less
 
None



 



 


Table No. 8 - Shielding Requirements



Fixture Lamp Type
 
Shielding Requirements


Low pressure sodium (1)
 
Partially shielded


Metal halide (2)
 
Fully shielded


Quartz (4)
 
Fully shielded



 



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-18.03  Permanent Exemptions.



   (A)   Nonconforming fixtures.  Legally installed outdoor lighting
not conforming to the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed to remain,
provided such fixtures are extinguished between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
sunrise by automatic shut-off device.



   (B)   Fossil fuel light.  All outdoor light fixtures producing
light directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fossil fuels are
exempt from all requirements of this code.



   (C)   State and federal facilities.  Outdoor light fixtures
installed on, and in connection with those facilities and land owned or
operated by the federal government or the State of Arizona, or any
department, division, agency or instrumentality thereof, are exempt from all
requirements of this chapter. Voluntary compliance with the intent of this
chapter at those facilities is encouraged.



('80 Code, App. A, § 180)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2396, passed
3-2-1988; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-18.04  Submittal of Plans.



   (A)   Submittal contents.  The applicant for any permit required by
any provision of the laws of this jurisdiction in connection with proposed
work involving outdoor light fixtures shall submit (as part of the
application for permit) evidence that the proposed work will comply with this
chapter. The submittal shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the
type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors and other
devices;



      (2)   Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures,
lamps, supports, reflectors and other devices and the description may
include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings
(including sections where required); and



      (3)   Photometric data, such as that furnished by
manufacturers, or similar, showing the angle of cut off of light emissions.



   (B)   Subdivision plat certification.  If any subdivision proposes
to have installed street or other common or public area outdoor lighting, the
final plat shall contain a statement certifying compliance with the
regulations of this chapter.



('80 Code, App. A, § 180)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2396, passed
3-2-1988; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



Article 19 - Personal Wireless Communications



§ 154-19.01  Purpose.



The principal purpose for the personal wireless communications facilities
(PWCF) regulations is to create standards for the construction of a personal
wireless communications infrastructure that provides adequate communications
services for the citizens of the city while preserving the health, safety,
welfare and aesthetic values of the community. The city emphasizes the use of
the latest technologies that are sensitive to the minimization of visual
clutter, minimizes the impact on the design features of buildings, and will
preserve scenic view sheds and major gateways of the city. Individual
residential end users receiving communication signals at their home through
duly authorized unlicensed consumer electronic devices are exempt from these
regulations.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.02  General Application Requirements.



   All applications, unless specifically stated in this article, are
required to include:



   (A)   Service area map.  The applicant shall provide a map showing
their full personal wireless communications network within a mile radius of
the city. The map shall provide the location, mounting type and height of
each network structure. The map shall also include arterial streets, state
and federal highways and the locations of any proposed or potential new
locations for any personal wireless communication facilities for the
applicant’s network. Subsequent applications will require the submission of
any alterations made to the network map initially submitted to the city. The
horizontal location of all facilities shall be tied in/referenced to the
North American Datum of 1927 (NAD27). The vertical elevation of all
facilities shall be tied in/referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum of 1929 (NGVD29);



   (B)   Site plan drawn to 20:1 scale.  The site plan must show the
building(s) on the site, on-site parking, surrounding parcels, parcel
dimensions, property lines, right-of-way distances to centerline of the
adjacent street(s), names of all adjacent streets, distances between the
wireless facility and any structures and rights-of-way and easements within
150 feet, north arrow and scale, type and location of all landscaping and the
irrigation source;



   (C)   Easements.  Copies of any necessary, recorded easements for
accessing the property;



   (D)   Authorization from the property owner of record to use the
property.  To be authorized, the applicant must submit a copy of an executed
lease or a signed and notarized statement from the property owner;



   (E)   Environmental impact analysis.  All personal wireless
communication facilities located within a historic district, wetland area,
national heritage area or other environmentally sensitive location must
submit an environmental impact analysis that certifies that the facility
complies with the National Environmental Policy Act;



   (F)   Conformity to all applicable state and federal regulations. 
All personal wireless communications facilities must conform to all
applicable state and federal regulations; and



   (G)   Required information.  If the proposed facility transmits in
any way, the facility will require the review and written comment of the
Marine Corps Air Station (MCAS) if it is located within the specified
distances of MCAS and has the maximum power output delineated in Table No. 9.
In accordance with the safe operations of the Marine Corps Air Station
(MCAS), all transmitter applications that require the review of MCAS must
submit the following information:



      (1)   The longitude and latitude of the location of the
proposed personal wireless communications tower;



      (2)   The mean sea level (MSL) elevation of the site where the
communication tower will be located;



      (3)   The transmission frequencies to be used by the facility;
and



      (4)   The power output of the proposed facility.



 


Table No. 9 - Distance and Output (MCAS)




Distance to MCAS

 

Maximum Power Output




1.5 miles or less

 

2.5 watts or less




10 miles or less

 

2.5 watts to 5 watts




20 miles or less

 

5 watts to 25 watts




More than 20 miles

 

25 watts or greater




 



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2018-014, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 154-19.03  General Development Standards.



   (A)   All ground level base stations/equipment cabinets and
associated equipment, greater than 75 cubic feet, must be enclosed by a six
foot tall or higher painted or stucco masonry wall to screen it from view.
Screen walls shall be landscaped with a five foot wide perimeter area
according to the landscaping requirements for screening per § 154-20.04.



   (B)   All roof top mechanical and electronic devices, base stations
or similar equipment must be screened from view through the use of a masonry
screen wall, parapets or other architectural devices. Rooftop screening shall
be considered adequate if it screens all of the base station(s) and
associated mechanical and electronic equipment from the view of a pedestrian
located at any point on the sidewalk on the opposite side of any adjacent
street and at any point on the interior property lines of the subject parcel
that do not abut a public right-of-way.



   (C)   All personal wireless communications facilities must be
setback equal to the setback of the principal building on the site or 20 feet
from the proposed right-of-way line (as defined by the Major Roadways Plan),
whichever is greater.



   (D)   No personal wireless communication facilities are permitted on
any building designated as an individual landmark or are located within a
historic district unless such personal wireless communication facilities are
approved through the Design and Historic Review Commission.



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



   (E)   No personal wireless communication facilities are permitted on
any building within an Aesthetic Overlay (AO) Designation unless such
personal wireless communication facilities are approved through the Design
Review Commission.



   (F)   Panel, whip and other low impact antenna are encouraged.



   (G)   No signage, other than required identification and safety
signage, is permitted on any personal wireless communication facilities.



   (H)   Lighting of any personal wireless communication facility is
prohibited unless required by another public agency.



   (I)   The owner of any personal wireless communication facility must
provide the city with a copy of the notice to the FCC of intent to cease
operations. Any personal wireless communication facilities and all associated
materials not in use for one year must be removed by the owner and the site
must be returned to a state compatible with the surrounding vegetation and/or
structure at the owners expense.



   (J)   The owner of any personal wireless communications facility
shall notify the city of the change of ownership for any personal wireless
communications facility and the notice must include the contact name, address
and phone number of the new owner.



   (K)   The use of lattice towers is discouraged and towers requiring
guy wires are not permitted. Monopoles painted to reduce the visual impact
and contrast are preferred.



   (L)   Unless specifically stated, all personal wireless
communications facilities are limited by the height limitations of the
district in which the property is located.



   (M)   Legal nonconforming personal wireless communications
facilities established prior to this article may continue operation. However,
no expansion of the use is allowed until those facilities are brought into
compliance with this section. Any personal wireless communication facilities
and all associated materials not in use for one year must be removed by the
owner and the site must be returned to a state compatible with the
surrounding vegetation and/or structure at the owners expense. A change in
the principal use of the parcel will require the personal wireless
communications facility to be brought into compliance with this section.



   (N)   Co-location on public facilities cannot interfere with public
safety transmission purposes or diminish the security of public assets.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2018-014, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 154-19.04  New and Replacement Freestanding Monopoles and Lattice Towers.



   (A)   In addition to the general application requirements listed in
§ 154-19.02, the following information shall be submitted:



      (1)   A statement of intent to lease space for co-location for
any new or replacement monopoles or lattice towers over 40 feet in height.
Said statement is to contain the number of providers that can be accommodated
on the tower and list the number and type of additional antennas the tower
will support if any additional space is available; and



      (2)   Those structures requiring a conditional use permit only
are required to submit a visual study depicting “where within a 600 foot
radius any portion of the monopole or lattice tower could be seen” and a
narrative describing in layman terms the reasons for selecting a monopole or
lattice tower and a list of all feasible alternatives, including alternative
sites considered in the site search, attempts to co-locate on existing
buildings, rooftops, right-of-way structures or other structural features and
the factors that have eliminated their consideration.



   (B)   In addition to the general development standards listed in §
154-19.03, the following development standards shall apply:



      (1)   Limited to 100 feet in height as measured from the
lowest grade of the site adjacent to the tower to the highest point of the
device;



      (2)   A minimum separation of 600 feet distance shall be
maintained between the new monopole or lattice tower and any existing
freestanding towers or monopoles;



      (3)   All monopoles or lattice towers must be setback a
minimum one foot for every one foot in height of the structure (1:1) from any
residential use or zone, or any hillside;



      (4)   All equipment and monopoles or lattice towers must be
setback equal to the principal building on the site or at least 20 feet from
the proposed right-of-way line, as determined by the Major Roadways Plan,
whichever is greater; and



      (5)   All antenna arrays shall be limited to a maximum eight
foot diameter.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.05  Temporary Mobile Personal Wireless Communication Units.



   (A)   Permit length limitations.  The following permit length
limitations shall apply to temporary mobile personal wireless  communication
units. All temporary unit locations may be used for a period not to exceed 60
days. A request for an extension may be submitted in writing to the Zoning
Administrator for a one time 60-day extension. The provider may not locate
another temporary unit within a 600-foot radius of this location for one year
after the expiration of the temporary permit. All temporary units require
Zoning Administrator approval.



   (B)   Abbreviated application requirements.  Due to the temporary
nature of these units, the following abbreviated application requirements
apply:



      (1)   Site plan drawn to 20:1 scale.  The site plan must show
the building(s) on the site, on-site parking, surrounding parcels, parcel
dimensions, property lines, right-of-way distances to centerline of the
adjacent street(s), names of all adjacent streets, distances between the
temporary wireless facility and any structures and rights-of-way and
easements within 150 feet, north arrow and scale, and location of all
landscaping; and



      (2)   Written authorization.  The applicant shall provide the
city with written authorization from the owner of record to use the property.
To be authorized for use the applicant must submit a copy of an executed
lease or a signed and notarized statement from the property owner.



   (C)   Site and structural requirements for temporary mobile personal
wireless communication units.



      (1)   All temporary facilities must be setback from the
property line, zoning demarcation line or roadway right-of-way line a
distance of one foot  for every one foot in structure height from a
residential use or zone or an arterial street, state or federal highway.



      (2)   The temporary tower can be no higher than 65 feet in
height (measured from the lowest point of natural grade of the lot it is
located on to the highest point of the unit) and cannot interfere with any
required parking or access to the lot or surrounding lots.



      (3)   All antenna arrays are limited to a four foot maximum
diameter.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.06  Roof-Mounted Personal Wireless Communication Facilities.



   (A)   Information to be submitted.  In addition to the general
application requirements listed in § 154-19.02, the following information
shall be submitted:



      (1)   Elevations from each cardinal direction drawn to scale;



      (2)   A rooftop plan, drawn to scale, showing all
appurtenances, their dimensions and the percentage of the roof area used; and



      (3)   A visual study showing how the base station/equipment
cabinet will be screened from the view of a pedestrian on the opposite side
of any adjacent public rights-of-way and from any side and rear property
lines.



   (B)   Development standards.  In addition to the general
development standards listed in § 154-19.03, the following development
standards shall apply:



      (1)   No one antenna or base station can be greater than 10%
of the roof area and total roof appurtenances cannot exceed 25% of the roof
area;



      (2)   Roof-mounted base station and associated equipment must
be screened from the view of a pedestrian on the opposite side of any
adjacent public rights-of-way and from any side and rear property lines;



      (3)   A roof-mounted antenna or related base station may be 20
feet high or the height of the antenna or related base station may be equal
to or less than the value of 0.5% of the building footprint, whichever is
taller, not to exceed 100 feet total height or the building height
limitations of the zoning district, whichever is lower. The building
footprint is defined as the gross first floor square footage of the building.
Attached parking structures, shade structures and the like are not considered
a part of the building footprint unless they are enclosed by walls and a roof
structure (i.e., a building with a 10,000 square foot building footprint
would be permitted to install a 50 foot high wireless facility (0.005 x
10,000), subject to the height limits of the zoning district);



      (4)   Buildings which exceed the height limitations of the
district that they are located in at the time of the enactment of this
article, may place a personal wireless facility on the roof, not to exceed 20
feet in height above the roof, subject to the remaining requirements of this
article;



      (5)   No roof surface may be extended for the sole purpose of
achieving additional antenna height. An increase in the building footprint
may allow for additional antenna height; and



      (6)   All roof-mounted antenna arrays are limited to a four
foot maximum diameter except for those antennas located in Industrial
Districts where antenna arrays are limited to an eight foot maximum diameter.



   (C)   Encouraged and prohibited structures.



      (1)   Whip antennas and other unobtrusive antennas are
encouraged.



      (2)   Lattice towers are permitted for roof-mounted personal
wireless facilities only in Industrial Districts and the General Commercial
(B-2) District except when the Aesthetic Overlay District is applied to
properties with such zoning. In those instances lattice towers are not
permitted for roof-mounted personal wireless communications facilities and in
all other locations the use of lattice towers is prohibited.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.07  Wall-Mounted Personal Wireless Communication Facilities.



   (A)   In addition to the general application requirements listed in
§ 154-19.02, the following information shall be submitted:



      (1)   An elevation, drawn to scale, of the wall the antenna is
to be mounted to; and



      (2)   A cross section of the wall, drawn to scale, showing the
protrusion of the antenna and associated materials.



   (B)   In addition to the general development standards listed in §
154-19.03, the following development standards shall apply.



      (1)   All wall-mounted antennas, except for wall strapped
facilities, on any facade, may not protrude more than 12 inches from the wall
and must be painted and textured to blend with the wall that it is attached
to.



      (2)   All wall-mounted antennas on any facade, except for wall
strapped facilities, must be located a minimum of 12 inches below the roof
line.



      (3)   Wall strapping is permitted only in the Industrial
Districts and the General Commercial (B-2) District and size is strictly
limited to monopoles of a two inch diameter or less and lattice structures of
a 24-inch diameter or less (see permitted uses). The height of the strapped
structure may be 20 feet high or the height of the antenna or related base
station may be equal to or less than the value of 0.5% of the building
footprint, whichever is taller, not to exceed 100 feet total height or the
building height limitations of the zoning district, whichever is lower. Any
structures that are strapped to an exterior wall for support and exceed the
roof line must be located the greatest distance possible from any adjacent
public right-of-way.



      (4)   No existing roof line may be altered solely to
accommodate additional antenna height.



      (5)   Only panel or whip antenna are permitted for direct
mounting to a wall surface. Wall strapped facilities may use a wire
parabolic/dish antenna. Antenna arrays for wall strapped facilities shall be
limited to a two foot maximum diameter.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2002-09, passed 2-20-2002; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.08  Concealed/Disguised Personal Wireless Communication Facilities.



   (A)   In addition to the general application requirements listed in
§ 154-19.02, the following information shall be submitted. Elevations from
all exterior sides drawn to scale showing the building prior to and after
installation or elevations drawn to scale showing the plant or natural
feature that the facility will mimic from four cardinal directions.



   (B)   In addition to the general development standards listed in §
154-19.03, the following development standards shall apply:



      (1)   Must be capable of mimicking an indigenous plant form,
natural feature or existing architectural feature. All concealed and
disguised facilities are subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
The decision of the Zoning Administrator may be appealed to the Design and
Historic Review Commission;



(Ord. O2009-54, passed 10-21-2009)



      (2)   Concealed/disguised personal wireless communication
facilities may add up to 12 feet to the height to any architectural feature
and/or may increase the area of the structure up to 20% of its original size.
All altered architectural features are subject to the height limitations of
the zoning district in which the property is located;



      (3)   All disguised and concealed personal wireless
communications facilities must blend into the existing environment to the
greatest degree possible. Architecture or natural materials used to mimic
colors, plants or vegetation found native to southwest Arizona;



      (4)   All personal wireless communications facilities
disguised as natural features cannot exceed the normal size and bulk of the
mimicked plant or feature; and



      (5)   Any disguised freestanding towers must be set back a
minimum one foot for every one foot in height of the structure (1:1) from any
residential use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway or any
hillside (slope of 10% or greater).



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.09  Personal Wireless Communication Facilities, Wi-Fi Radio
Equipment, Microcell Equipment, and Small Cells on Public Rights-of-Way.



   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions apply:



      AFFILIATE. A person that directly or indirectly, through one or
more intermediaries, controls, is controlled by, or is under common control
with a cable operator or a telecommunications corporation.



      ALLOWED WI-FI RADIO EQUIPMENT. Radio equipment that uses only
unlicensed radio spectrum and that enables wireless communication with a
communications network for unlicensed services such as Wi-Fi service.



      CABLE OPERATOR. A person that is issued a license by the city
pursuant to City of Yuma Ordinance O95-077 to construct, operate, and
maintain a cable television system in public streets, roads and alleys.



      MICROCELL EQUIPMENT. Devices that are connected to the aerial
facilities of a person specified in division (C) of this section and that are
used solely for transmitting, processing and receiving voice and data
wireless telecommunications services. Microcell equipment does not include
any ground-based equipment.



      PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as defined in § 92-02 of the City
Code.



      PUBLIC HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as defined in § 92-02 of
the City Code.



      QUALIFIED SERVICE PROVIDER. A person that has all applicable
authorizations required to provide commercial mobile radio service using
microcell equipment.



      SMALL CELL. A personal wireless communication facility that meets
both of the following qualifications:



         (a)   Each individual antenna. excluding the associated
equipment (as defined below) that is part of the facility must fit within an
enclosure (or if the antenna is exposed, within an imaginary enclosure, i.e.,
one that would be the correct size to contain the equipment) that is
individually no more than three cubic feet in volume, and all antennas on the
pole are located inside an enclosure (or if the antennas are exposed, within
an imaginary enclosure, i.e., one that would be the correct size to contain
the equipment) of not more than six cubic feet in volume; and



         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the
facility is cumulatively not more than 21 cubic feet in volume. Vertical
cable runs for the connection of power and other services are the only types
of associated equipment that are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume for purposes of this definition.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CORPORATION. Has the same meaning as defined
in § 92-02 of the City Code.



      UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure and attached
appurtenances, including strand, that is designed for telecommunications,
cable, data, or electric functions.



   (B)   Antennas and personal wireless communications facilities. No
antennas or personal wireless communications facilities are allowed in public
highways, public streets, roads or alleys in the city, except for the
following facilities:



      (1)   Allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment;



      (2)   Microcell equipment;



      (3)   Small cells;



      (4)   Facilities that meet the requirements of eligible
facilities requests;



      (5)   Facilities that are granted waiver requests.



   (C)   The persons listed in divisions (C)(1) and (2) of this section
may install, operate and maintain allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment with approval
of an application if they satisfy the conditions in division (C)(3) and (4)
of this section below:



      (1)   A cable operator or its affiliate may attach allowed
Wi-Fi radio equipment to its cable television system in public streets, roads
and alleys in the city; and



      (2)   A provider that holds a wireless facilities license from
the city may attach allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment to existing facilities in
the public highways in the city to the extent allowed by the provider's
wireless facilities license.



      (3)   All of the allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment at a single
location shall fit within a fifteen-by-fifteen-by-fifteen-inch (15" x l5" x
l5") cube; and shall also meet at least one of the following conditions:



         (a)   Be contained entirely within a ground-mounted
pedestal otherwise allowed by the license;



         (b)   Be connected directly to and mounted at the same
height as one of the provider's or cable operator's aerial horizontal
conductors otherwise allowed by the license;



         (c)   Be connected directly to and co-located by the
provider on the provider's existing utility pole or similar structure
otherwise allowed by the license;



         (d)   Be connected directly to and mounted on existing
utility poles or similar structures that is used in whole or in part for
communications services, electric distribution, lighting or traffic signals;
or



         (e)   Be contained entirely within a ground-mounted
pedestal, with the authorization of the pole or pedestal owner.



      (4)   Other development standards. The allowed Wi-Fi radio
equipment must comply with general development standards in division (G).



   (D)   The persons listed in divisions (D)(1), (2) and (3) of this
section and their affiliates may install, operate, and maintain microcell
equipment in the city's public highways with approval of an application, if
they satisfy the conditions in divisions (D)(4), (5) and (6) of this section
below:



      (1)   A telecommunications corporation;



      (2)   A telecommunications corporation described in §
92-15(B) of the City Code; and



      (3)   A cable operator.



      (4)   The person's microcell equipment at each site is limited
to:



         (a)   Not more than two strand-mounted antennas and
radio pairs that are owned by a person specified in division (C) of this
section or a qualified service provider and that are used to provide
commercial mobile radio service.



         (b)   Related devices that are owned by a person
specified in division (C) of this section and that are mounted on strand
between utility poles, including power supplies, housings, cables and similar
supporting furnishings and improvements.



      (5)   Only a qualified service provider may use microcell
equipment to provide commercial mobile radio service.



      (6)   Other development standards. The microcell equipment
must comply with the general development standards in division (G).



   (E)   A small cell may be installed, operated, and maintained in the
public highways in the city with approval of an application, if the small
cell satisfies the following conditions:



      (1)   It is installed only on an existing utility poles or
similar structure that is used in whole or in part for communications
services, electric distribution, lighting or traffic signals;



      (2)   No new monopoles or replacement poles are proposed;



      (3)   There is no more than one small cell per pole;



      (4)   There is a minimum separation between small cells of 500
feet;



      (5)   All associated equipment is installed in an underground
vault;



      (6)   It complies with the general development standards in
division (G).



   (F)   Application requirements.



      (1)   Applications for allowed Wi-Fi radio equipment must
include:



         (a)   Make, model, dimensions, color, weight and
technical information of the proposed radio equipment;



         (b)   Specific information on the proposed location of
the installation (including nearest street address or intersection);



         (c)   Photo simulations and site plans drawn to 20:1
scale depicting the proposed installation;



         (d)   Evidence that the radio equipment complies with
FCC radio frequency emissions standards;



         (e)   Evidence the applicant meets the qualifications in
divisions (C)(1) or (2) of this section;



         (f)   A sworn statement that the radio equipment will
use only unlicensed radio spectrum;



         (g)   A sworn statement describing the services that
will be provided using the radio equipment;



         (h)   Evidence of authorization of the affected
strand/pole/pedestal owner, if the applicant is not the owner;



         (i)   The information required by § 154-19.02(A), (E),
(F), and (G); and



         (j)   If the applicant intends to make the same
installation at multiple locations within the same zoning district, the
applicant may submit a single application for up to 10 locations, provided
that the information required by divisions (b), (c) and (h) is submitted for
each location.



      (2)   Applications for microcell equipment must include:



         (a)   Make, model, dimensions, color, weight and
technical information of proposed microcell equipment specified in division
(D)(4) of this section;



         (b)   Specific information on the proposed location of
the installation (including nearest street address or intersection);



         (c)   Photo simulations and site plans drawn to 20:1
scale depicting the proposed installation;



         (d)   Evidence that the microcell equipment complies
with FCC radio frequency emissions standards;



         (e)   Evidence the applicant meets the qualifications in
divisions (D)(1), (2) or (3) of this section and has license or other
authorization to use the city's public highways for the proposed installation;



         (f)   A sworn statement that the microcell equipment
will be used by a qualified service provider solely for transmitting,
processing, and receiving voice and data wireless telecommunications services
that are commercial mobile radio services, and identifying such qualified
service provider(s);



         (g)   Identify the owner of the microcell equipment. If
the owner is not the applicant, provide evidence that the owner is a
qualified service provider;



         (h)   Evidence of authorization of the affected
strand/pole/pedestal owner, if the applicant is not the owner;



         (i)   The information required by § 154-19.02(A), (E),
(F), and (G); and



         (j)   If the applicant intends to make the same
installation at multiple locations within the same zoning district, the
applicant may submit a single application for up to 10 locations, provided
that the information required by division (b), (c) and (h) is submitted for
each location.



      (3)   Applications for a small cell must include:



         (a)   Make, model, dimensions, color, weight and
technical information of proposed small cell and associated equipment
specified in division (E) of this section;



         (b)   Specific information on the proposed location of
the installation (including nearest street address or intersection);



         (c)   Photo simulations and site plans drawn to 20:1
scale depicting the proposed installation;



         (d)   Evidence that the small cell complies with FCC
radio frequency emissions standards;



         (e)   A sworn statement that the small cell equipment
will be used by a qualified service provider solely for transmitting,
processing, and receiving voice and data wireless telecommunications services
that are commercial mobile radio services, and identifying such qualified
service provider(s);



         (f)   Identify the owner of the small cell. If the owner
is not the applicant, provide evidence that the owner is a qualified service
provider;



         (g)   Evidence the applicant has pertinent licensing
and/or certification required by federal and state licensing authorities,
which are required for said operators of small cells and to use the city's
public highways for the proposed installation;



         (h)   Evidence of authorization of the affected pole
owner, if the applicant is not the owner; and



         (i)   The information required by § 154-19.02(A), (E),
(F), and (G).



   (G)   General development standards applicable to all personal
wireless communications facilities in public highways.



      (1)   No personal wireless communication facilities are
permitted on public highways facing any building designated as an individual
landmark or located within a historic district unless such personal wireless
communication facilities are approved through the Design and Historic Review
Commission.



      (2)   No personal wireless communication facilities are
permitted on public highways facing any building within an Aesthetic Overlay
(AO) Designation unless such personal wireless communication facilities are
approved through the Design and Historic Review Commission.



      (3)   No signage, other than required identification and
safety signage, is permitted on any personal wireless communication
facilities on public highways.



      (4)   Lighting of any personal wireless communication facility
on public highways is prohibited unless required by another public agency.



      (5)   The owner of any personal wireless communication
facility must provide the city with a copy of any notice to the FCC of intent
to cease operations. Any personal wireless communication facilities and all
associated materials not in use for one year must be removed by the owner and
the site must be returned to a state compatible with the surrounding
vegetation and/or structure at the owner's expense.



      (6)   The owner of any personal wireless communications
facility shall notify the city of the change of ownership for any personal
wireless communications facility and the notice must include the contact
name, address and phone number of the new owner.



      (7)   Unless specifically stated, all personal wireless
communications facilities on public highways are limited to lesser of either:



         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place as of January 1, 2018. that is located within 300 feet of the proposed
location, and that is in the same right-of-way; or



         (b)   The height limitations of the zoning district in
which the public highway is located.



      (8)   All personal wireless communications facilities on
public highways must meet all applicable laws, codes, local code provisions
and regulations that concern public safety and accessibility.



      (9)   All personal wireless communications facilities on
public highways must be disguised and concealed to blend into the existing
environment to the greatest degree possible.



      (10)   All personal wireless communications facilities on
public highways must have a license to use the public highways.



   (H)   Waiver. A waiver from the restrictions or requirements in this
section may be granted by the city, upon the request of the applicant, where
the applicant demonstrates that such restriction or requirement unreasonably
discriminates among providers of functionally equivalent services pursuant to
the United States Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. §
332(c)(7)(B)(i)(I)) or prohibits or has the effect of prohibiting the
provision of wireless communications services pursuant to the United States
Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II)) or
otherwise violates state law.



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2018-014, passed 8-1-2018)



§ 154-19.10  Illustrative Examples and Table of Uses.



   Illustrative Example 4 - Types of Antennas



 




 



 






Panel Antenna

 

Whip Antenna

 

Parabolic Antenna











Illustrative Example 5 -  Use of Existing Vertical Elements Is Encouraged

















Illustrative Example 6 -  Use of Existing Building Height and Wall Mounting

















Illustrative Example 7 -  Types of Towers




 




 



 






Lattice

 

Guy Wire Not Permitted

 

Monopole











Illustrative Example 8 -  Typical Required Screening for Facilities
















 


Table No. 10 - Personal Wireless Communication Facilities Permitted Uses by
Zoning District



Zoning District
 
HP
 
AG and All Residential Districts (1)
 
OT (1), B-1, TR (1) and BP
 
B-2
 
L-I, H-I and IP
 
P (1)


Antennae Type


New monopole or tower
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted principal or accessory use (2)
 
Not permitted


Replacement tower/antenna
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted principal or accessory use (2)
 
Not permitted


Lattice
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted
 
Permitted
 
Not permitted


Roof-mounted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted accessory use (1)
 
Permitted accessory use
 
Permitted accessory use
 
Permitted accessory use



 



 

Table No. 10 - Personal Wireless Communication Facilities Permitted Uses by
Zoning District


Zoning District
 
HP
 
AG and All Residential Districts (1)
 
OT (1), B-1, TR (1) and BP
 
B-2
 
L-I, H-I and IP
 
P (1)


Antennae Type




Wall-strapping
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted
 
Permitted
 
Not permitted


Wall-mounted
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted accessory use (1)
 
Permitted accessory use (1)
 
Permitted accessory use
 
Permitted accessory use
 
Permitted accessory use


Concealed or disguised
 
Not permitted
 
Permitted accessory use (1)
 
Permitted accessory use (1)
 
Permitted accessory use
 
Permitted accessory use
 
Permitted accessory use


(1)   Permitted only in conjunction with legally established
nonresidential uses.


(2)   A CUP is required for any freestanding monopole or lattice tower
(see § 154-19.04) that meets the principal or accessory use criteria for
this industrial zoning district but is located within 300 feet of any
residential use or zone, arterial street, state or federal highway, a
designated scenic/historic or gateway route (as identified in the
Transportation Element of the City General Plan), or a future or existing
park area (as identified in the Parks and Recreation Element of the City of
Yuma General Plan).




 



(Ord. O2000-35, passed 6-21-2000; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-19.11  Eligible Facilities Requests.



   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, eligible
facilities requests, as defined in the Federal Communications regulation 47
C.F.R. § 1.40001(b)(3), as amended, implementing federal law 47 U.S.C. §
1455(a), as amended, shall be processed according to the requirements of 47
C.F.R. § 1.40001, as amended, and this section. The definitions in 47 C.F.R.
§ 1.40001, as amended, apply to this section.



   (A)   Application requirements. An application shall be submitted
for approval of eligible facilities requests containing at least the
following:



      (1)   A completed application form signed by the applicant,
and identifying a person who may be contacted regarding the application, and
that person's mail and email addresses and telephone number.



      (2)   A clear statement that the request is being made as an
eligible facilities request pursuant to this section and complies with all
requirements set forth therein.



      (3)   A clear description of the work proposed, including but
not limited to, a description of the excavation that may be associated with
the work, and a description of the base station elements or wireless support
structure elements that may be modified, and the modifications that will be
made; and the date(s) and time(s) during which the work will take place.



      (4)   Photographs and scale drawings showing the dimensions
and location of the base station, wireless support structure and accessory
facilities prior to performance of the work proposed, and photo simulations
and scale drawings showing the dimensions and locations of the same after the
work is performed. The drawings should include drawings of the wireless
support structure and base station as approved by the city (or as the
facility existed on February 1, 2012, if approved prior to that date); and
detailed drawings of the modifications proposed to the wireless support
structure or base station.



      (5)   A statement certifying that, before commencing, during
performance of, and upon completion of the work proposed, the permitted
wireless facility will comply with all applicable laws, regulations,
practices or other requirements under federal, state or local law, including
but not limited to, building and electrical codes.



      (6)   Written certification from a licensed professional
engineer certifying that the host wireless support structure or structure is
structurally and mechanically capable of supporting the proposed additional
antenna or configuration of antennas and other equipment, extensions and
appurtenances associated with the modification, and that the modification
will not cause the facility to violate existing fall zone requirements.



   (B)   Action upon receipt.



      (1)   Review. Upon receipt of an application for approval of
an eligible facilities request, the city shall review such application to
determine whether the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request
and is complete, and shall promptly notify the applicant if the application
is incomplete or is not an eligible facilities request within the time frames
specified in 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001, as amended. An application is incomplete
if it omits or withholds any required information, or fails to provide
information in sufficient detail to determine whether the application is for
an eligible facilities request, or to determine whether the work will be
performed in accordance with, and will result in a wireless facility that
complies with applicable safety codes.



      (2)   Approval. If the application is an eligible facilities
request and the application is complete, it shall be approved subject to this
section. This section shall be operative, and any approval issued pursuant to
this section shall remain in effect only so long as federal law, 47 U.S.C. §
1455, and implementing Federal Communications Commission regulations, 47
C.F.R. § 1.40001 regulations, require approval of an eligible facilities
request as defined herein. By approval, the city solely intends to comply
with a requirement of federal law and not to grant any property rights or
interests except as compelled by federal law.



      (3)   Denial. If the application does not satisfy requirements
for an eligible facilities request, or if the applicant fails to submit a
complete application after being notified that the application is incomplete
by a time specified by the city; or the application would otherwise result in
a wireless facility that does not comply with applicable federal state or
local laws, the application shall be denied within 60 days of receipt unless
the city and the applicant agree to a different date for action on the
application.



      (4)   Exceptions: effect of approval. The city may except
particular applications from approval, or may condition approval as
appropriate consistent with federal law. Without limitation, approval does
not exempt applicant from, or prevent city from opposing a proposed
modification that is subject to compliance under the National Historic
Preservation Act or the National Environmental Protection Act.



(Ord. O2018-014, passed 8-1-2018)



Article 20 - Landscape Regulations



§ 154-20.01  Purpose.



   (A)   The purpose of the landscaping regulations is to provide
minimum standards for the selection, location, maintenance, and installation
of landscape materials in order to maximize the benefit of such landscaping
for both the community and the individual property owner. It is intended that
the provision of trees, shrubbery, and groundcover shall be in accordance
with this article so as to:



      (1)   Provide shade to reduce the ground temperature and
building heat gain;



      (2)   Provide attractive landscaping to improve community
aesthetics for the promotion of tourism and economic development;



      (3)   Provide soil stabilization to control erosion;



      (4)   Provide ground cover to protect the ambient air quality
by reducing dust and loose soil;



      (5)   Provide plant material to visually buffer parking lot
masses;



      (6)   Provide planted screening between residential districts
and adjacent uses;



      (7)   Provide landscape plans to improve surveillance and
visibility for the promotion of safety and CPTED (Crime Prevention Through
Environmental Design) strategies; and



      (8)   Provide compliance with the landscaping regulation over
time as vacancies and changes occur with nonconforming land, buildings, and
uses.



   (B)   When provided in accordance with these regulations,
landscaping materials are intended to contribute to the community-wide goals
of beautification, energy conservation, and the conservation of the
community’s water resources through the use of drought tolerant plants,
efficient irrigation, reduced turf areas, and the fundamentals of xeriscape
landscaping.



   (C)   The regulations as set forth within this article shall be in
accordance with Chapter 192 of this code and are intended to be integrated
with that chapter so as to provide adequate on-site stormwater
detention/retention areas which are visually attractive and which provide for
the multiple use of stormwater detention/retention areas wherever possible.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)



§ 154-20.02  Applicability.



   Required landscaping shall apply as follows.



   (A)   Applicability in zoning districts. The regulations as set
forth in this article shall apply to all lots in all zoning districts.



   (B)   Change of use.



      (1)   When the use of a lot, parcel, land, building, or
structure changes, or after five years of vacancy, or upon expansion of any
building, parcel, structure, or use by an area or value of 50% or more, the
development standards as set forth in this article shall apply.



      (2)   If the gross floor area of an existing building is
increased by 50% or more cumulative after the effective date of this
amendment, the requirements of this article shall apply to the entire lot
upon which the building is located.



      (3)   If the land use of 50% or more of the gross floor area
on a lot is changed cumulative after the effective date of this amendment,
the requirements of this article shall apply to the entire lot upon which the
building is located.



      (4)   The requirements for landscaping and irrigation within a
parking lot (five or more spaces) as found in Article 16 of this chapter
shall be provided in the manner set forth in this article except that when
required to comply with development standards following the loss of a
nonconforming status or change of use a landowner or tenant shall not be
required to reduce the parking area by more than 10% or reduce the parking
area to a size which would not satisfy the minimum parking requirements for
any lawful use of such lot, parcel, or land.



   (C)   City landscaping guidelines. The city landscaping guidelines
shall be used in conjunction with this article to provide guidance for both
the commercial landscaping firm and the private property owner.



   (D)   Conflicts with other regulations.



      (1)   Where portions of this article are in conflict with
other portions of the zoning code, the more restrictive regulation shall
apply.



      (2)   Where portions of this article are in conflict with
federal or state-mandated requirements for airports (FAA and/or military
requirements for planting height limits and plant debris), or for the public
utility companies as defined in § 154-01.07, the Planning Director may waive
portions of the landscaping regulations to the extent of the conflict.



   (E)   Uses prohibited; alleys.



      (1)   Parking, loading activities, product display, and sales
shall not be permitted in any required landscape area.



      (2)   Required landscape areas shall be maintained free from
encroachment by any use, structure, vehicle, or feature not a part of the
landscaping design, except as specified in this article.



      (3)   Alleys may not be counted toward fulfillment of the rear
or side yard setback requirement. Rear or side yard setbacks along alleys
shall not be required to be landscaped.



   (F)   De minimus standards. In cases where site development occupies
5% or less net site area, the landscape development standards of this article
shall apply only to the developed area of the site.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. O2000-25, passed 5-3-2000; Ord.
O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)



§ 154-20.03  Landscape Design Standards.



   (A)   Landscape design.



      (1)   Recommended Plants List. Plant materials shall be
selected from the City of Yuma Recommended Plants List, as found in the
latest edition of the city landscaping guidelines.



      (2)   Xeriscape. Xeriscape landscaping incorporates
water-conserving designs that take into account soil and drainage factors,
microclimates, grouping of plants with similar water requirements, efficient
irrigation systems, native vegetation, paving permeability, and
low-water-using and drought tolerant vegetation. Xeriscape landscaping is not
limited to cacti, boulders, and gravel; nor shall “xeri” be interpreted
to mean “zero”.



      (3)   Irrigation required. All landscape areas shall include a
permanent, water efficient, underground irrigation system controlled by
automatic valves.



      (4)   Hydrozones. A key to the establishment of xeriscape
landscaping that conserves water is to arrange plants in appropriate
locations and not to interplant them with others that have different (i.e.
higher or lower) water requirements. This grouping of plants into hydrozones
is based on their water needs, and allows them to be irrigated and maintained
efficiently. Plants with similar water use should be grouped together in
distinct hydrozones.



      (5)   Existing trees. Existing trees preserved on a
development site where the area under the canopy remains undisturbed and
protected may be credited toward landscape tree requirements.



      (6)   Visibility triangles. Only landscape materials less than
30 inches in height are permitted in any visibility triangle, as defined in
the latest edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets
published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO).



      (7)   Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT)
right-of-way. Parkways within the Arizona Department of Transportation (ADOT)
rights-of-way shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and groundcover in
conformance with the ADOT regulations.



      (8)   Public utilities and fire facilities.



         (a)   A minimum of three-foot wide clear space shall be
maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants and Fire Department
Connections (FDC). Groundcover materials used within this three-foot wide
area shall be approved by the City of Yuma Fire Marshal.



         (b)   Trees shall not be planted directly under or over
utility lines nor shall they be planted within utility easements. Trees which
have a mature height of 25 feet or greater shall not be planted within 15
feet of overhead utility lines.



         (c)   A ten-foot clearance shall be maintained in front
of the facilities and appurtenances of any public utility and a three-foot
clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of any such facility
or appurtenance. Groundcover materials used within this area shall be
approved by the appropriate public utility.



      (9)   Protection of planted areas. Turf areas shall be
separated from other planting areas by a minimum four-inch by four-inch
concrete mow strip. Planted areas shall be separated from any adjacent paved
or unpaved vehicular parking or drive area by concrete curbing measuring at
least six inches by six inches above grade. Any plant material with a mature
height of 18 inches or greater shall be set back at least two feet from any
adjacent parking, aisle, or driveway.



      (10)   Provision of soil treatment. All non-vegetative
planting areas shall be prepared with treatments to eliminate native seed
germination. Typical methods for treatment include chemical pre-emergent
sprays, soil fabric, mechanical removal, or a one and one-half inch ABC base
beneath the non-vegetative groundcover.



   (B)   Plant and hardscape material.



      (1)   Trees.



         (a)   Purpose. Trees provide environmental, aesthetic,
safety, and economic benefits. Environmentally, trees provide shade which
reduces urban heat island effect, absorb carbon dioxide, and reduce
stormwater runoff. Aesthetically, trees provide visual enclosure to streets,
accentuate spaces, and add a human scale. Street trees serve to calm traffic
speeds and absorb noise. Trees are known to increase property values and
encourage pedestrian activity in retail environments. Trees are an important
component of achieving effective Complete Streets, a policy adopted by the
City in the Transportation Element of the City of Yuma General Plan.



         (b)   Types. Trees are classified in the City of Yuma
Recommended Plants List as follows:



            1.   Street trees. Street trees are those that
grow to an average mature height of 30 feet or more, generally have a high
branching pattern, and upright or rounded crown form. Street trees are
planted near the sidewalk or street to provide shade to pedestrians and
visual enclosure to the street. The best species for street trees are low
maintenance and produce low litter. Street trees shall be pruned and
maintained to allow for minimum of 12 feet of clearance over any roadway and
seven feet of clearance over any sidewalk.



            2.   Shade trees. Shade trees are those that grow
to an average mature height of 30 feet or more, an average spread of 30 feet
or more, and typically have a dense canopy that provides shade. The branching
structure can be more spreading, vase-shaped, or layered than street trees.



            3.   Accent trees. Accent trees are small,
ornamental trees that typically grow to a mature height of 15 to 20 feet.
Accent trees can be used near overhead utility lines where tall trees are
prohibited. Accent trees also include palm trees and saguaro cacti, although
palms may not be used near overhead utility lines. Accent trees can be used
to substitute required street or shade trees at a rate of two accent trees
for each required street or shade tree.



   FIGURE 1: Types of Trees







         (c)   Distribution and placement.



            1.    Street trees shall be placed at a maximum
interval of 35 feet along all street rights-of-way.



            2.   Street trees shall be placed four to eight
feet from the sidewalk or curb, and when space allows they shall be located
in the tree belt between the street and the sidewalk.



   FIGURE 2: Street Tree Placement







            3.   No tree shall be planted closer than four
feet from the sidewalk or curb or closer than eight feet from any vertical
structure or subdivision wall to avoid upheaval damage caused by the roots,
unless other structural soil or stabilization methods are implemented.



   FIGURE 3: Tree Placement to Avoid Upheaval







            4.   Trees may be clustered; however no tree shall
be located within 20 feet of another tree.



         (d)    Size. Required trees shall be planted at a
minimum size (height, width, and caliper) as specified in the latest edition
of the Arizona Nursery Association’s “Container Grown Tree Guide”, a
copy of which will be maintained on file by the Department of Community
Development. For every project, the container size for 50% of the required
trees shall be a minimum of 24 inch box and 50% shall be 15 gallon container.



         (e)   Minimum required uncompacted soil per tree. Each
tree well shall have a minimum of 150 cubic feet of uncompacted soil.
Provisions for the required uncompacted soil shall be reflected in the
landscape plan and details. If the minimum volume of uncompacted soil cannot
be provided, structural soils or structural planting aides may be used to
prevent compaction under paved surfaces.



         (f)   Staking. All trees shall be staked with two
lodgepole stakes seven feet in height above grade with wire ties protected
with rubber fittings. Staking details shall be shown on the plans submitted
for approval.



         (g)   Mix of species. As it is desirable to have a mix
of species and genera represented in the urban forest in order to protect
against the loss of trees due to disease, insects, or environmental
conditions, the following guidelines shall be used:



            1.   Plantings of five or fewer trees may all be
of the same genus;



            2.   Plantings of six to ten trees must use at
least two different genera, with roughly equal numbers of each;



            3.   Plantings of more than ten trees shall use no
more than 30% of trees in any one genus.



      (2)   Shrubs.



         (a)   Purpose. Shrubs serve to provide visual screening
between uses, create a colorful focal point, stabilize soils, cut glare, and
prevent evaporative water loss.



         (b)   Distribution and placement. Shrubs shall not be
placed in a planting area less than three feet wide, in either the width or
length dimension. Shrubs can be clustered at driveway entrances, building
entrances, property corners, and around signage to create distinct focal
points. Encroachment into the visibility triangles shall not be permitted.



         (c)   Size. Required shrubs shall have a minimum mature
growth height of 18 inches. For every project, the container size for a
minimum of 50% of the required shrubs shall be five gallon, and in no case
shall any shrub container size be less than one gallon.



      (3)   Groundcover. Required groundcover may be of two types,
vegetative or inert.



         (a)   Purpose. Groundcover serves to reduce dust,
stabilize soils, cut glare, and prevent evaporative water loss.



         (b)   Vegetative groundcover consists of living plant
materials generally characterized by primary horizontal growth, as well as
secondary vertical growth generally not exceeding 18 inches in height and
includes grass/turf. Vegetative groundcover is not required, but groundcover
plants of a one-gallon container size may be used to substitute required
shrubs at a rate of three groundcover plants per one required shrub. Refer to
the Recommended Plants List for groundcover plant species approved for use in
City of Yuma rights-of-way.



         (c)   Inert groundcover consists of landscape rock such
as gravel, decomposed granite, or crushed rock, with a minimum size of
one-quarter inch screened. Unscreened road base material is not an acceptable
material. Other materials, such as artificial turf, are also approved.



            1.   All non-turf areas shall be top dressed with
inert groundcover such as landscape rock or approved alternative and
supplemented and replaced as needed.



            2.   In all landscape areas, landscape rock of a
color other than Yuma Grey is preferred. Except in retention basins, if the
landscape rock is Yuma Grey, the following applies:



               i.   A minimum of 20% of the total required
landscape area must be rip rap of a color other than Yuma Grey. The size of
the rip rap is to be a minimum of three inches and a maximum of eight inches.



               ii.   One boulder is required for every 500
square feet of total required landscape area, with the boulders of a color
other than Yuma Grey. Minimum size of the boulders shall be 18 inches.



            3.   Colored gravel is required in all landscape
areas within special zoning district overlays, including: the Auto Center
Overlay, the Aesthetic Overlay, and the Historic District Overlay.



      (4)   Prohibited plants.



         (a)   The use of the following plant types is prohibited
due to their pollen and seeds which aggravate allergies and other health
problems:



            1.   Common Bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon);



            2.   Mulberry, female (Morus spp.); and



            3.   Olive (Olea europaea) except the male or
fruitless varieties.



         (b)   The use of the following plant types is prohibited
within the City rights-of-way areas due to their tendency to create
visibility problems as well as because of their invasive root structures.



            1.   Palms;



            2.   Ficus;



            3.   Elm; and



            4.   Eucalyptus.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010;
Ord.O2014-06, passed 2-19-2014; Ord. O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)  Penalty,
see § 154-999



§ 154-20.04  Required Landscape Areas.



   (A)   Single-family residential requirements.



      (1)   Single-family residential landscape installations on
lots equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet in size installed as part of
new construction or remodel are subject to the standards set forth herein.



      (2)   A minimum of one 15-gallon shade or street tree is
required within the front yard setback of all single-family residences and
provided with a permanent irrigation system. Tree requirement must be
fulfilled before the Certificate of Occupancy for the residence is issued.



         (a)   One saguaro cactus a minimum of eight feet in
height or three 5-gallon ocotillo plants may be used as a substitute the tree
requirement.



         (b)   The developer and/or homeowner may submit a signed
and dated Agreement for Installation of Landscape prior to the issuance of
the Certificate of Occupancy stating the tree will be installed within three
months following the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.



      (3)   When the single-family residence is adjacent to a tree
belt with a width of at least eight feet, a minimum of one street tree is
required to be planted in the tree belt, and provided with a permanent
irrigation system.



   (B)   Requirements for all other zoning districts. Required
landscape is classified into four categories: perimeter, off-street parking,
other areas, and retention basins, as outlined herein. Multiple categories
can apply to one property or parcel.



      (1)   Perimeter.



         (a)   Streetscape zone (including all streets
surrounding a subdivision). Abutting all public street rights-of-way shall be
a streetscape zone maintained exclusively as landscape areas with vegetation
and hardscape materials measured from the back of curb for the first 20 feet
or until the vertical plane of the building, whichever is less. The
streetscape zone shall be calculated regardless of public rights-of-way or
setback delineations. In residential districts, the streetscape zone is
required for all streets surrounding a subdivision and any non-residential
uses within the subdivision.



   FIGURE 4: Streetscape Zone Examples







            1.   Trees. Street trees are required to be
planted every 35 linear feet along the street right-of-way, as measured from
the center of the trunk. Street trees shall be planted in accordance with the
distribution and placement requirements of this article.



            2.   Shrubs. Along arterial and collector streets,
shrubs are required at a rate of four per required tree, except in certain
pedestrian-oriented streetscape zones where shrubs may be reduced.



            3.   Groundcover. For all landscape areas within
the streetscape zone, colored landscape rock shall be used as top dressing.
Vegetative groundcover is permitted, but not required. For any area to be
dedicated to the City of Yuma, no vegetative groundcover is permitted, but
artificial turf is allowed.



            4.   Building frontage/location.



               i.   If a building or structure is located
ten feet or less from the back of curb, no trees are required and all areas
located between the buildings and the back of curb must be either landscape
or hardscape.



               ii.   If a building or structure is located
at least ten feet from the back of curb, trees are required along that street
right-of-way.



            5.   Special landscape treatment, may be required
for Gateway and Historic/Scenic Routes as recommended in plans referenced in
the General Plan.



         (b)   Medians. Median width is measured from the back of
median curb to back of median curb. The minimum width for a landscaped median
is eight feet.



            1.   Trees. Trees are allowed only in medians with
a width of 15 feet or greater, shall be planted at a rate of one tree per 35
linear feet, and shall be located a minimum of five feet from the back of
median curb. Species shall be selected from the Recommended Plants List as
approved for medians. Trees shall be located so that the expected mature tree
canopy does not ultimately extend into the street right-of-way. Maintenance
access shall also be considered in relation to traffic movement.



            2.   Shrubs. Shrubs shall not be required for
medians, but may be planted, with the approval from the city, within medians
with a width of eight feet or greater. Mature size of the shrub shall be
carefully considered to avoid eventual encroachment into the street.



            3.   Ground cover. Colored landscape rock shall be
used as top dressing in all medians eight feet or wider. No vegetative ground
cover or living grass is permitted, but artificial turf is allowed. Any
portion of any median fewer than eight feet in width may be treated with
stamped concrete or other approved inert material.



         (c)   Screening between zoning districts. Required
screening setbacks between residential districts and adjacent uses shall
provide sufficient screening in order to mitigate the effects of potential
nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise, heat, and glare of lights. The
screening shall be composed of plant material and, depending on the zoning
district, a seven foot high solid masonry wall.



            1.   Trees. One per 35 feet (on center) of solid
perimeter screening or subdivision wall; 15-gallon container (non-deciduous).



            2.   Shrubs. One shrub per eight linear feet on
center.



            3.   Rear, service side, and/or loading docks.
Shall be screened from view by a masonry screening wall seven feet in height.



            4.   Screen row. A screen row of 15-gallon trees
(non-deciduous) planted 25 feet on center (or major fraction thereof), shall
be provided along any lot line for a lot on which a residential structure
greater than one-story in height is located with a lot line adjacent to any
other residential structure.



      (2)   Off-street parking. Incorporating trees and shrubs in
parking lots provides shade for people and cars, reduces the urban heat
island effect, intercepts stormwater, improves aesthetics, improves air
quality, provides visual screening, and creates a habitat for wildlife.



         (a)   Landscape within parking lots.



            1.   Trees. For parking lots with eight or more
spaces, one shade tree is required for every eight spaces or major fraction
thereof. Trees shall be evenly distributed within the parking lot in tree
wells with a minimum of 50 square feet of pervious area, or, when tree wells
are not possible, located within four feet of the perimeter of the parking
lot. At a rate of one and a half per required tree, trees may be planted
within five feet of the outer perimeter of the parking lot to meet this
requirement. Trees required for other landscape areas cannot be
double-counted to fulfill this requirement. Trees planted outside the
perimeter of the off-street parking lot but intended to count towards the
requirements for off-street parking areas shall be clearly identified as such
on the plan. Required trees may be eliminated for spaces located directly
under a covered parking canopy.



   FIGURE 5:  Parking Lot Design Options







         (b)   Screening for off- street parking. On the exterior
edge of an off-street parking lot containing 15 or more spaces, a planting
strip not less than five feet in width shall be provided parallel to any
street rights-of-way and planted with shrubs as specified below to achieve
80% visual screening with a minimal height of three and one-half feet at
maturity. This screening may also include walls, but in no case shall a
structure or shrub be placed within any visibility triangle for driveways or
streets.



            1.   Shrubs. Minimum of one per eight feet (on
center) of parking lot adjacent to a public right-of-way.



      (3)   Other areas. All other areas of the site not
specifically addressed in this section shall be landscaped. This includes all
parts of a site not devoted to decks, patios, structures, driveway and/or
parking improvements, lighting, sidewalks, signs, solid waste/recyclable
materials collection and storage, and similar improvements.



         (a)   For any landscape area adjacent to the streetscape
zone, inert groundcover is required as top dressing and shall match that used
in the adjacent streetscape zone.



         (b)   Future building pads in development projects
within the Transitional (TR), Limited Commercial (B-1) and General Commercial
(B-2) Districts. Top dressing shall be inert groundcover, vegetative
groundcover, or combination thereof. This helps control particulate matter
(PM10) and improves aesthetics.



      (4)   Retention basins.



         (a)   General requirements.



            1.   Retention basis shall be designed, graded,
and landscaped so as to aesthetically enhance the natural configuration of
the area. Plantings located in the basin shall be adaptable to periods of
submersion. Retention basins shall be shaped consistent with good landscape
design standards as well as meeting the stormwater retention requirements of
Chapter 192. Retention basins shall be designed in order to facilitate
multiple uses of the basin whenever possible.



            2.   Graded slopes shall be designed to provide
gentle, undulating contours (contour grading) and shall maintain an average
slope of 4:1 and shall not exceed a slope of 3:1. Trees, shrubs, or
vegetative groundcover shall not be planted on a slope greater than 4:1.



            3.   Trees and shrubs shall not be planted within
20 feet of inlets, outlets, or maintenance access ramps within any basin.



            4.   Gunite or concrete groundcover within
retention basins shall be prohibited, except as necessary for the primary
purpose of the basin and for walking paths. In all cases, the designed bottom
elevation of the retention basin shall be a minimum of one-foot above the
highest recorded ground water level.



            5.   Six-foot high wrought iron fences (designed
to discourage climbing), or equivalent as approved by the Zoning
Administrator, shall be installed around retention basins which have a
designed water depth greater than three and one-half feet, and shall allow
the basin to be visible at all times. Openings in the fence shall not allow
the passage of a six-inch sphere. Any pedestrian gates shall be of a
self-closing and self-latching type. In all cases, the requirements for the
visibility triangle shall be applicable.



            6.   Rip rap is required at the inlets and
outlets. Rip rap shall have filter fabric underneath.



            7.   Unless dedicated for use as a neighborhood
park, basins dedicated to the City of Yuma shall not have grass and shall be
planted with xeriscape plants chosen from the Recommended Plants List.



            8.   Major redesign of retention basins requires
submittal of a landscape plan in accordance with § 154-20.06(B) and must
comply with the stormwater retention requirements of Chapter 192.



         (b)   Requirements for retention basins by zoning
district. Using Figure 6: Flexible Point System for Retention Basin Design, a
project shall achieve a minimum number of points for each zoning district as
indicated below. Choose at least one option from each category shown in
Figure 6. These requirements apply only to basins not landscaped under
another requirement set forth in this code. For any portion of the retention
basin that is adjacent to a street, the landscape requirements for the
streetscape zone shall be applicable in addition to the requirements of this
section.



            1.   Residential zones.



               i.   Joint use retention basin/neighborhood
park. Must earn a minimum of 50 points, be a minimum of five acres, with
three acres of flat grass, and provide amenities. Must have approval from the
Parks and Recreation Director to provide long-term maintenance or another
funding mechanism for maintenance.



               ii.   Accessible basin. Must earn a minimum
of 25 points. For residential subdivisions developed in multiple phases and
as site planning constraints allow, the retention areas shall be co-located.



            2.   Commercial zones. Must earn a minimum of ten
points. If a basin is adjacent to a collector or arterial roadway, it must
earn an additional five points.



            3.   Industrial zones. Must earn a minimum of five
points. If a basin is adjacent to a collector or arterial roadway, it must
earn an additional five points.



            4.   Inaccessible Basins. In certain limited
instances as determined by the Zoning Administrator, basins completely
surrounded by a six foot or higher solid masonry wall shall be exempt from
providing vegetation. Inert groundcover is required.



   FIGURE 6: Flexible Point System for Retention Basin Design



 



Trees & Shrubs
 
1 shade tree per 6000 SF of basin (except flat turf area) and 4 shrubs per
tree
 

0



1 shade tree per 4000 SF of basin (except flat turf area) and 4 shrubs per
tree
 

5



Grass
 
No grass
 

0



More than 30% of total area
 

5



More than 60% of the total area
 

10



More than 60% of total area to be a minimum of 3 acres with slope between
3-5% for recreational use
 

15



Landscape Rock
 
100% Yuma Grey
 

0



Minimum 30% colored landscape rock
 

5



100% colored landscape rock
 

10



1 boulder per 5000 SF of basin
 

5



Colored rip rap at inlets/outlets
 

5



Amenities
 
None
 

0



Play area, natural/informal
 

5



Minimum 4’ wide concrete walking path traversing the basin
 

5



Minimum 4’ wide concrete walking path with a minimum length of 1000 linear
feet
 

10



Pedestrian-scale lighting around walking path
 

10



Ramada
 

15



Play structure
 

15



Basketball court
 

15



Creative Solutions
 
None
 

0



Parking islands designed to capture and filter stormwater
 

5



Bioretention facilities such as vegetated drainage swales or stormwater
planters
 

5



Retention capacity under parking lots (if 100% undergroun d, this chart does
not apply)
 

10





 



   FIGURE 7: Sample Design of Accessible Basin in Residential Zone







      (5)   Exceptions.



         (a)   Industrial lots larger than two acres. Industrial
lots which have an area greater than two acres shall provide a total
landscape area of 15% of the lot size or submit landscaping plans to the
Zoning Administrator or designee (per § 154-20.06) in lieu of meeting the
requirement to provide a total landscape area of 15% of the lot size. The
Zoning Administrator or designee is authorized to approve landscaping plans
that provide less than 15% of the lot size for industrial zoned property
provided such plans meet the spirit and intent of the landscape code.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2014-06, passed 2-19-2014; Ord.
O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)



§ 154-20.05  Maintenance.



   (A)   Maintenance required. Property owners are responsible for the
perpetual maintenance of all landscaped areas on their lot and adjoining
public right-of-way, except any portion(s) of the parkway maintained by
another entity. The owners of lots which do not have properly maintained
landscaped areas will be subject to penalties as set forth in this chapter.



      (1)   Lack of maintenance shall constitute a violation of this
article. The property owner and/or occupant or lessee shall be held jointly
and severally liable for any infraction of the requirements set forth in this
chapter.



      (2)   In the event a plant specified as required on an
approved landscape plan dies or is removed, the property owner, occupant or
lessee, and/or city are jointly responsible and shall replace the plant in
the next planting season with one of a similar species with a similar size as
specified in the approved landscape plan.



      (3)   Landscape plans shall designate whether plant material
is to be kept in either a natural state (minimal pruning) or a formal state
(regularly trimmed and pruned to a sculpted appearance). Plant materials
shall be maintained as designated.



   (B)   Irrigation system maintenance required. Irrigation systems
must be maintained and replaced as necessary to continue to conserve water.
Detection and repair of leaky or broken pipes, valves, and fittings and
malfunctioning and/or misaligned heads, emitters, and bubblers must be part
of a regular maintenance program for the site. Automatic Irrigation
Controllers are recommended to be reset a minimum of four times a year
(spring, summer, fall, and winter) to adjust for plant water requirements
that vary according to season. All irrigation systems shall be subject to the
Uniform Building Code requirements of the city and shall be installed only as
approved by permits issued by the Department of Community Development.



   (C)   Maintenance responsibility. All landscape areas must meet
minimum landscape standards as set forth herein, and shall be maintained by
home owners associations, maintenance districts, improvements districts,
private individuals or companies, and/or the City Parks and Recreation
Department and Public Works Department. For any streetscape or basin
landscaped in excess of the minimum standards, the city will not be
responsible for maintenance.



   (D)   City maintenance responsibility. The City of Yuma is
responsible to ensure that maintenance is performed on all landscape areas
located within dedicated parkways, medians, and retention basins. For any
areas the City of Yuma agrees to maintain, a plant palette and design intent
document shall be provided to the department in charge of maintenance.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. O2001-93, passed 11-20-2001;
Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-57, passed 11-17-2010; Ord.
O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)  Penalty, see § 154-999



§ 154-20.06  Administration.



   (A)   Landscape plan submittal requirements.



      (1)   Preliminary landscape plan.



         (a)   Applicability. If your project requires
discretionary review (preliminary submittal requirements), a preliminary
landscape plan is required with your site plan or use review application.



         (b)   Contents. A preliminary landscape plan shall
contain the location, description, number of proposed materials (including
new and existing trees, shrubs, and groundcovers), and the proposed group
responsible for maintenance.



      (2)   Final landscape plan.



         (a)   Applicability. A final landscape plan shall be
submitted as part of the application for Site Plan Review and Approval. A
final landscape plan shall be approved by the Director before the issuance of
a building permit or recordation of the final plat.



         (b)   Building permit application. One copy of the
landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Department of Community
Development at the time of building permit application or zoning clearance
(if applicable pursuant to this article). This plan shall be on file in the
Building Safety Division for 90 days after the certificate of occupancy is
issued and with the Community Planning Division thereafter.



         (c)   Contents. Final landscape plans shall contain the
following information:



            1.   Development name, site address, and
Assessor’s Parcel Number (APN);



            2.   Designer name, address, and phone number;



            3.   A minimum scale of not less than one-inch
equals 20 feet, represented numerically and graphically;



            4.   A north arrow;



            5.   Property lines, adjacent rights-of-way and
streets including names, zoning and use of adjacent properties, building
footprints, the edge of all eaves, roof overhangs and cantilevered
structures, parking lots, fences, driveways, intersection sight triangles,
signage and associated sight triangles, walkways, easements, utility lines,
poles and boxes, drainage structures, and other site improvements. All shall
be drawn to scale with appropriate dimensions and labeled as existing or
proposed;



            6.   Significant topographical features and the
existing and proposed contours based on the proposed grading plan. Contour
intervals of one-foot are preferred, but a maximum of two-foot contour
intervals will be accepted. Exceptions to contours may be made, as approved
by the Director;



            7.   Plant locations and spacing (including
staking and soil mix), represented at approximate size at maturity and
indicating proposed and existing, corresponding to the plant legend;



            8.   A plant legend that includes both common and
botanical plant names, sizes (size of plant at installation and size at
maturity), and the number of required and proposed trees, shrubs, and
groundcover quantities;



            9.   An irrigation design plan identifying system
layout and descriptions (e.g., automatic timing devices, backflow protection,
moisture sensors, hydrants, sprinkler and bubbler details, drip system layout
and specifications, and seasonal irrigation schedule);



            10.   A maintenance schedule, as defined in Ch.
154, Article 01.



            11.   If applicable, indications of proposed
common and open space areas on the plan; and



            12.   If a development is planned in phases,
required landscaping must be completed in sequence with development phases.
These phases must be shown on the landscape plan.



   (B)   Encroachment permits required. Those projects which include
use of the public right-of-way for landscaping shall include a request for an
encroachment permit with a copy of the landscaping plan following building
permit approval. If approved, the encroachment permit shall be issued by the
City Engineer concurrently with building permit issuance by the Building
Safety Division.



   (C)   Assurance of installation. Landscaping and irrigation systems
shall be installed as approved on the submitted plans prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. An assurance of installation in a form approved by
the city and executed by the lot owner and the financial institution for an
amount sufficient to guarantee the installation of the approved landscaping
plans within six months of occupancy shall be accepted by the Planning
Director in lieu of immediate installation of the landscaping.



   (D)   Variances. The Hearing Officer shall have the power to grant
variances from the specific requirements of this article, provided that it
finds such a variance request to be in substantial compliance with the spirit
and intent of these regulations. Should the variance requested constitute not
more than a 20% difference in the code requirement, the request may be
considered a minor variance, and reviewed under the applicable code
provisions by the Minor Variance Committee. However, this authority does not
grant the Hearing Officer or the Minor Variance Committee the power to waive
all landscaping requirements.



('80 Code, App. A, § 181)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 2584, passed
9-16-1992; Ord. O96-77, passed 8-7-1996; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.
O2017-024, passed 8-2-2017)



Article 21 - Nonconforming Provisions



§ 154-21.01  Extending Existing Uses or Structures.



   (A)   Any existing nonconforming use which is not otherwise unlawful
may be hereafter extended throughout any part of a building or structure
which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of the
enactment of this chapter, but no building or structure containing a
nonconforming use shall, except as may be authorized by a certificate of
occupancy, be hereafter extended or enlarged except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   No building or structure in which a nonconforming use is
abandoned for a period of exceeding two years or is superseded by a permanent
conforming use subsequent to the enactment of this chapter, shall again be
devoted to any prohibited use.



   (C)   In no instance shall legally established nonconforming
manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks and/or recreational
vehicle cooperatives be expanded to increase the number of manufactured home
spaces or recreational vehicle spaces.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-21.02  Replacing Nonconforming Buildings or Structures.



   (A)   Any nonconforming building or structure which is hereafter
damaged to an extent exceeding 50% of its reproduction value, exclusive of
foundations, by fire, flood, earthquake, war, riot or so-called act of God,
may not be restored, reconstructed or used for any other than a purpose
permitted under the provisions of this chapter governing the district in
which the building or structure is located.



   (B)   The replacement and installation of manufactured home units
and recreational vehicle units within a legally established nonconforming
manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park and/or recreational vehicle
cooperative shall meet the minimum placement standards for the individual
unit as required by the Manufacturing Housing Park (MHP) District.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-21.03  Nonconforming Airport District Overlay.



   (A)   Nonconforming uses.  Any use of land, building or structure
lawfully existing at the time the Airport Overlay District or amendments
thereto become effective may be continued even though such use does not
conform with the regulations of the zoning ordinance or amendments thereto
for the Airport Overlay District in which it is located. These special
provisions for continuation and reconstruction of legal nonconforming uses
shall only apply to uses, structures and buildings which become nonconforming
through the adoption of the Airport Overlay District. These special
provisions for nonconforming uses will apply since the Airport Overlay
District has a large impact area, considerable development presently exists,
and a substantial economic hardship would be created if those properties were
required to comply with the provisions of the Airport Overlay District and
other sections of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Discontinuance of legal nonconforming uses.



      (1)   In the event that a legal nonconforming use of land,
building or structure is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive months,
any future use thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the
Airport Overlay District and the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   In the event that a legal nonconforming nonresidential
use of land, building or structure is destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake,
war, riot or so-called act of God to the extent of 75% of its value,
according to the appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, then and without
further action by the City Council, the future use thereof shall, from and
after the date of such destruction, be subject to all the regulations of the
Airport Overlay District in addition to the provisions of the other sections
of the zoning ordinance.



      (3)   In the event that a legal nonconforming residential use
of buildings or structures is destroyed to any extent by fire, flood,
earthquake, war, riot or so-called act of God, it may be reconstructed,
except that such reconstruction shall comply with the provisions of the other
sections of the zoning ordinance and other applicable city ordinances,
regulations and codes. Such reconstruction shall be limited to 100% of the
destroyed structure.



   (C)   Expansion of a legal nonconforming use.



      (1)   Nonresidential.  A nonresidential legal nonconforming
use of land, building or structure shall not be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed or structurally altered unless such enlargement, extension,
reconstruction or structural alteration, and further use of such property
conform with the regulations of the Airport Overlay District in which such
property is located, other sections of the zoning ordinance and other
applicable city ordinances, regulations and codes. In the event that the
above-described nonconformity involves a building or structure, said building
or structure shall not be permitted to be relocated elsewhere on the property
or enlarged or extended by separate and detached construction.



      (2)   Residential.  A legal nonconforming residential
structure may expand if such expansion does not exceed 50% of the floor area
of the original structure provided that the expansion is in conformance with
the regulations of the district applicable immediately prior to the effective
date of the Airport Overlay District, other sections of the zoning ordinance
and other applicable city ordinances, regulations and codes. This provision
shall not permit the construction of separate and detached residential
structures or the relocation of such structure elsewhere on the property.



      (3)   Accessory structures.  The construction, expansion and
alteration of accessory structures, such as garages, barns, swimming pools
and fences shall be permitted. Said construction, expansion or alteration
shall conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning district.



   (D)   Change of legal nonconforming use.  If no structural
alterations are made, any legal nonconforming use of land, building or
structure may be changed to another legal nonconforming use provided the
proposed use is of the same or more restricted classification, upon review
and approval by the Building Official and Planning Director. Under no
circumstances shall a nonresidential legal nonconforming use be converted to
a residential nonconforming use.



('80 Code, App. A, § 122)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord. 1837, passed
6-20-1979; Ord. 2352, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



§ 154-21.04  Nonconforming Signage.



Any sign or sign structure lawfully existing prior to the effective date of
this chapter, whether on-site or off-site, and not meeting the standards and
requirements specified herein, shall be considered nonconforming and be
subject to the following provisions.



   (A)   Continuance.  The lawful use of any nonconforming sign or
sign structure may be continued indefinitely, provided, however, that any
addition, enlargement or other alteration which would increase the degree of
nonconformity shall be prohibited. Any nonconforming sign or sign structure
which is abandoned for a period exceeding one year shall be subject to the
requirements of § 154-17.05(E) of this chapter pertaining to removal of
abandoned signage.



   (B)   Repairs and alterations.  Repairs and alterations which do
not increase the degree of nonconformity shall be permitted, except that if
any sign or structure is damaged or has deteriorated to an extent that the
cost of repair equals 50% of its replacement value if sound, or if the cost
of alteration exceeds 50% of the replacement value, it shall either be
rebuilt or replaced in conformance with the standards and requirements of
this chapter, or be removed altogether.



   (C)   Replacement of on-site signage.  At such time as the name of
an activity changes, any nonconforming on-site signage related to such
activity shall either be replaced or modified to meet the requirements of
this chapter, unless such signage was previously constructed with
interchangeable panels, letters or copy. An act of maintenance or repair, or
repainting a previously painted sign face, or repapering a previously papered
sign or other similar manner of changing a sign face, none of which would
increase the degree of nonconformity, shall not be deemed as replacement
hereunder, and shall be permitted.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010)



Article 22 - Non-Profit Medical Marijuana Dispensaries



§ 154-22.01  Purpose.



   Marijuana in any form, including medical marijuana, is illegal under
federal law pursuant to the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C §811). 
However, under Arizona State law, the Arizona Medical Act (Proposition 203,
passed by the voters in 2010) allows a qualifying patient who has an
identified debilitating medical condition, to obtain and use marijuana to
treat or alleviate the qualifying debilitating medical condition or its
associated symptoms. Proposition 203 also contains provisions for
dispensaries to provide medical marijuana to qualifying patients. This change
in state law means that it is possible that medical marijuana dispensaries
could be operating in the City of Yuma. The city has a duty to ensure that
the dispensaries are located and operated in a manner that least harms the
health, safety and general welfare of its citizens. The purpose of this
article is to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
Furthermore, the City of Yuma does not condone the use of medical marijuana
or violation of federal law.



(Ord. O2011-06, passed 3-2-2011)



§ 154-22.02  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENCLOSED, LOCKED FACILITY. A closet, room, greenhouse or other enclosed
area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by
a cardholder.



   MEDICAL MARIJUANA. All parts of any plant of the genus cannabis,
whether growing or not, and the seeds of such plant.



   NON-PROFIT MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A not-for-profit entity that
acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures, delivers, transfers,
transports, supplies, sells or dispenses marijuana or related supplies and
educational materials to cardholders. A nonprofit medical marijuana
dispensary may receive payment for all expenses incurred in its operation.
For the purposes of this article, a medical marijuana dispensary and medical
marijuana cultivation, together, are considered one use.



(Ord. O2011-06, passed 3-2-2011)



§ 154-22.03  Location Restrictions and Operating Provisions.



   Medical marijuana cultivation and dispensing are subject to the
following location restrictions and provisions:



   (A)   A non-profit medical marijuana dispensary may contain
cultivation, infusion, and/or dispensing of medical marijuana, or any
combination thereof, at one location.



   (B)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall be permitted
uses in the B-2 and L-I zones, subject to conditions and limitations
identified in this article. Nonprofit medical marijuana distribution
facilities shall not be permitted in any Heavy Industrial District by way of
a CUP (from a Light Industrial District).



   (C)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall not be
permitted on any site that has any of the following Zoning Overlays: Historic
District Overlay, Aesthetic Overlay (and all properties that have a
development agreement requiring the Aesthetic Overlay standards), Auto Center
Overlay, or Bed and Breakfast Overlay designation.



   (D)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries must meet the
following distance separation requirements:



      (1)   Must be located at least 1,000 feet from a residentially
zoned property, regardless if the residential property is located in the city
or the county. This distance shall be measured in a straight line from the
exterior walls of the building (or portion thereof in which the medical
marijuana dispensary and cultivation business is conducted or proposed to be
conducted), to the zoning boundary line of the residentially zoned property.



      (2)   Must be located at least 1,000 feet from all public and
private: preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, secondary or high
schools; any place of worship; any public park, adult-oriented businesses,
large and small day care facilities, or public community center, regardless
if these uses are located in the city or the county. This distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the exterior walls of the building (or
portion thereof in which the medical marijuana dispensary and cultivation
business is conducted or proposed to be conducted), to the property line of
the protected use.



      (3)   Must be located at least 5,280 feet from another medical
marijuana dispensary and cultivation business, regardless if the medical
marijuana dispensary and cultivation business is located in the city or the
county. This distance shall be measured from the exterior walls of the
building or portion thereof in which each of the medical marijuana businesses
are conducted or proposed to be conducted.



   (E)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries are not allowed as
an accessory use in any zone.



   (F)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries are not allowed as a
home occupation in any zone.



   (G)   The number of non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall
be limited to one for each 50,000 population within the City of Yuma, with
the population determined by the most recent Decennial Census reported by the
U.S. Census Bureau.



   (H)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall only be
located in permanent structures on properties that front on roadways
classified as expressways, as identified in the adopted City of Yuma General
Plan.



   (I)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall be located in
a permanent building/structure affixed to a permanent foundation. Non-profit
medical marijuana dispensaries shall not be located in any other type of
non-permanent structure such as, but not limited to, a trailer, cargo
container, or motor vehicle.



   (J)   The retail aspect of any non-profit medical marijuana
dispensary shall be limited in physical size based on the building code
requirements for a structure that has only one exit door.



   (K)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall have operating
hours not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and not later than 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, noon to 5:00 p.m. on Sunday.



   (L)   Drive-through services are prohibited.



   (M)   No use or consumption in any manner of marijuana is permitted
on the premises of any non-profit medical marijuana dispensary.



   (N)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries must comply with
City of Yuma sign code regulations.



   (O)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall have interior
lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place that members of
the public are permitted access, with overhead light fixtures that have an
illumination of not less than two foot-candles as measured at the floor
level, when the dispensary is open to the public.



   (P)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall have exterior
lighting of sufficient intensity and number to illuminate every portion of
the property with an illumination level of not less than one foot-candle as
measured at the ground level, including, but not limited to, landscaped
areas, parking lots, driveways, walkways, entry areas, and refuse storage
areas, at all times between sunset and sunrise.



   (Q)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall be configured
such that there is an unobstructed view of every public area of the premises,
unaided by closed circuit cameras or any other means, by a manager. No public
area shall be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror, or other
device. A manager shall be in the public portion of the dispensary at all
times it is in operation or open to the public, in order to enforce all rules
and regulations.



   (R)   If windows exist in the building that houses a non-profit
medical marijuana dispensary, there shall be an unobstructed view through
those windows, from the outside of the building in.



   (S)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall provide for
proper disposal of marijuana remnants or by-products, and shall not be placed
within the facility's exterior refuse containers.



   (T)   Non-profit medical marijuana dispensaries shall comply with
all other applicable city, state and federal regulations.



   (U)   Business licenses for non-profit medical marijuana
dispensaries shall not automatically renew. Annual staff review and approval
is required.



(Ord. O2011-06, passed 3-2-2011)



Penalty



§ 154-999  Penalty.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Unless otherwise
specifically provided for in this chapter, any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or both fine and
imprisonment. Each separate day or part thereof during which any violation of
said sections occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



('80 Code, App. A, §§ 114 and 161)  (Ord. 583, passed 9-16-1952; Ord.
2125, passed 5-4-1983; Ord. 2193, passed 3-21-1984; Ord. 2243, passed
12-19-1984; Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord. O2010-64, passed 12-15-2010;
Ord. O2011-05, passed 2-16-2011; Ord. O2016-028, passed 10-5-2016)



Appendix A:  Cielo Verde Specific Plan



   (A)   Purpose.  Provide resident and regionally supported
commercial sites on the north portion of the property. Provide an attractive
living environment for permanent homeowners as well as seasonally retired,
second home and vacation home buyers and renters on the south portion of the
property. Provide protected development rights through the adoption of a
specific plan, which works in conjunction with a development agreement and
the platting process.



   (B)   Project description.



      (1)   Cielo Verde is a 382-acre mixed-use master planned
development, providing a variety of commercial uses and housing types in a
pedestrian-oriented, neighborhood-focused community planned primarily for
adult living.



      (2)   The project takes advantage of the existing topography
of the site by providing a linear park, which follows existing drainage
contours of the site. The land plan minimizes major earth moving for
stormwater control and provides a significant community amenity which doubles
as a recreation area for its residents and guests.



      (3)   Designated areas are planned to contain open space,
ramadas, security lighting, landscaping and linear walking paths throughout
the project. Other active recreation activities and structures (putting
greens, tennis courts, a recreation center, for example) may be added.
Alternate uses are contemplated in most areas to provide flexibility in order
to respond to evolving market demands in the future.



      (4)   There are two distinct commercial areas:
resident-supported commercial sites line the central entry road leading into
the residential portion of the project, and more community/regional
commercial areas along 32nd Street provide for accommodation of larger retail
and service establishments.



      (5)   A maximum of 1,932 residential lots can be developed on
approximately 317 acres of the property designated for residential uses.
There are a range of residential lot sizes and dwelling unit types provided.
Minimum residential lot sizes range from 1,800 square feet for the RV park
lots, to 6,000 square feet for the manufactured home/site built lots.
Multi-family units are limited to lower density townhomes and apartment
clusters. Within individual neighborhoods, lot sizes can be considerably
larger than the minimum permitted area.



      (6)   The development of the master community shall be
achieved in stages as market demands arise. Parcels may be developed or
further subdivided to meet these demands. The developer’s credit assurances
required for the public facility improvements outlined in the development
agreement shall not be posted until each parcel is replatted for the final
development or a building permit is issued for any given parcel. The
improvements shall include the improvements adjacent to the parcel being
developed, in accordance with the provisions of this specific plan, the
development agreement, and the individual plats, as well as any improvements
that need to be in place in order to provide road, fire and utility access to
the parcel.



   (C)   Policies.



      (1)   Project policies.



         (a)   To create a development which offers a variety of
housing types with support commercial facilities and a centrally located
park/ recreation area within convenient walking or biking access from all
areas of the community;



         (b)   To provide the necessary infrastructure and
services for residential and commercial uses;



         (c)   To create an aesthetically cohesive community by
providing a common desert landscape theme;



         (d)   To create distinct neighborhoods throughout the
plan linked by pedestrian and non-automotive personal vehicular pathways; and



         (e)   To create community identity readily associated
with the Cielo Verde Specific Plan Community.



      (2)   Design policies.



         (a)   To create a sense of community and neighborhood
identity;



         (b)   To use open space, landscaping and urban design to
strengthen identity and image;



         (c)   To use fences, walls, landscaping and berms on the
perimeter of neighborhoods to provide privacy screening, define property
limits, separate use areas and provide security;



         (d)   To promote building height and bulk appropriate to
the size, shape and topography of the site and in harmony with its setting;



         (e)   To utilize a variety of site sizes to encourage
efficiency in design and to facilitate a mixture of housing product types and
densities;



         (f)   To provide designated automotive parking areas
which facilitate both vehicular and pedestrian movements;



         (g)   To utilize landscaping and screening making
parking areas visually attractive and compatible with their surroundings;



         (h)   To use appropriate signage for the purpose of
identification and direction. The design of permitted signs should be
consistent with and architecturally integrated into building and streetscape
design themes;



         (i)   To place outdoor lighting in such a way that it
accents architectural features and outdoor spaces while minimizing glare or
excessive light spillage on neighboring sites; and



         (j)   To maintain the design objective of creating human
scale spaces and buildings that do not appear monumental or monotonous in the
context of the community.



   (D)   Concepts.



      (1)   Neighborhood concept.



         (a)   Cielo Verde is a master-planned development
designed to create a sense of traditional community. While streets are amply
designed to accommodate circulation of the largest recreation vehicles and
delivery of manufactured housing units, as well as fire and municipal service
vehicles, the emphasis is on pedestrian and other non-automotive
transportation modes.



         (b)   A secondary network of walking and biking paths is
incorporated into some street sections and also follows a branching central
linear park to connect smaller-scale residential neighborhoods with
recreation and social activity facilities and local shopping and commercial
services.



            1.   Commercial development.



               a.   The commercial site has business
frontage on 32nd Street and Interstate 8 (I-8) at the city’s eastern
“gateway” interchange. In addition to providing a regional center for
highway-oriented retail activity, the commercial development will create a
buffer between the highway and adjoining residential neighborhoods while
providing an important amenity for local residents.



               b.   The central entry road leading into the
residential site passes through a neighborhood-scale shopping area which is
intended to be a place for local retail shops and services, located within
walking and bicycling distance of all of the housing neighborhoods. The
neighborhood shopping area at the entrance to Cielo Verde will present a
variety of shops and services for local residents, and once fully developed
will help to reduce the amount of vehicular traffic entering and exiting onto
32nd Street as many of the residents needs will be met on-site.



            2.   Residential development.



               a.   Targeted to the seasonal visitor and
retiree markets, Cielo Verde presents an opportunity for transitional
lifestyles. The alternative of rental occupancy is presented in each housing
type in order to provide choice and to permit new residents to try out the
community before making a long-term commitment. The presence of site built
housing within Cielo Verde will also give a greater range of choice for
second-home buyers and will provide a supply of lots to local builders who
may wish to participate in development of the community.



               b.   A variety of residential housing forms
will be created, clustered in discreet neighborhoods of approximately 50 to
100 homes. The co-existence of site built and manufactured homes along with
RV units and so-called “Park Models” has already been demonstrated to
work effectively, from a market viewpoint, in the Foothills community in east
Yuma. In addition, multi-family units including low-density townhomes as well
as clustered rental apartment units may be offered in the project, if
warranted by market conditions.



               c.   Cielo Verde will complement existing
housing supply by offering a range of lot sizes, many larger than the minimum
required for each housing type, with a variety of premium features.



      (2)   Streetscape/circulation concept.



         (a)   While the major collector roads within the
development are consistent with local standard and with precedent well
established in the city, street sections within and between the individual
residential neighborhoods are generally narrower than commonly found in other
comparable local developments. Resulting reduced traffic speed and emphasis
on pedestrian circulation will contribute to safety and help to create the
character of a traditional town.



         (b)   Pedestrian and non-automotive “unique vehicle”
uses are provided by attractive and fun to use sidewalks and pathways within
some road sections. Elsewhere, a system of off-street pathways follows the
contour of the linear park system, branching into each neighborhood.



         (c)   Ample street widths and turning radii are provided
in all cases for fire and municipal service vehicles as well as for mobile
vacation vehicles and manufactured home deliveries.



      (3)   Open space/recreation concept.  As presently envisioned
in the Master Plan, community facilities may include a recreation center with
indoor/outdoor pool, wading pools, rooms for crafts and social functions,
dance floor, auditorium and stage with outdoor bandstand seating, tennis,
shuffleboard, volleyball and baseball playing areas, and playgrounds and
other social and athletic facilities. Designated areas accessible to and
available for use by all the residents include a linear park significantly
exceeding the minimum required proportionate amount of site area, which
connects the neighborhoods with walking and bicycling trails.



   (E)   Densities.



      (1)   Maximum residential project density.  A maximum density
of six units/acre independent of higher densities permitted in multi-family
districts located on commercial and residential portions of the site, shall
not be considered in calculating overall lot density. The Cielo Verde
Specific Plan is allowed a total maximum of 1,932 dwelling units, exclusive
of multi-family housing.



      (2)   Multi-family residential density.  Multi-family
residential density shall be in accordance with city standard and shall be
determined independent of overall residential density limits.



      (3)   Density averaging permitted.  Densities shall be
calculated by averaging residential units over the Cielo Verde development
site, excluding the multi- family site area. The multi-family units permitted
as an alternative use within a portion of the residential and commercial
development area will not be used in determining overall density on the
single-family residential portion of the site.



   (F)   Cielo Verde Commercial District.



      (1)   Primary uses.  Primary uses permitted in the Cielo
Verde Commercial District include the following:



         (a)   Retail sale, rental or repair of goods, materials
and equipment, including wholesale activities, provided that wholesale items
are available for retail sale to the general public;



         (b)   Hotel, motel, guest lodging or entertainment
establishment and associated business;



         (c)   Any business providing a service or installing a
product for individuals, households or other businesses;



         (d)   High-density multi-family development;



         (e)   Indoor or outdoor restaurants, cocktail lounges,
tourist lodging, theaters and any form of commercial recreation and
entertainment conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except no
adult-oriented businesses shall be allowed;



         (f)   Enclosed self-storage facilities;



         (g)   Retail motor fuel sales and convenience markets,
including automotive service and repair within such facilities;



         (h)   Grocery stores, neighborhood grocery stores,
convenience markets and specialty food and beverage stores;



         (i)   General offices such as banks and other financial
establishments;



         (j)   Drive-through facility for any restaurant, banks,
retail store or service business;



         (k)   Shops and salons providing services for personal
grooming and apparel;



         (l)   Religious institutions including related buildings
and activities;



         (m)   Residential care facility, small or large;



         (n)   Membership-based lodging;



         (o)   Miscellaneous social services;



         (p)   Offices and clinics; medical;



         (q)   Nursing and personal care, small or large;



         (r)   Hospitals;



         (s)   Medical and dental labs;



         (t)   Home health care services;



         (u)   Miscellaneous health and allied services; and



         (v)   Health clubs and gymnasiums.



      (2)   Accessory uses.  Accessory uses permitted in the Cielo
Verde Commercial District include the following:



         (a)   Fabrication, assembly or craftsmanship of such
goods and materials which are sold on the premises; provided, however, that
such activity is clearly incidental and essential to a principal retail or
service use as provided herein; and further provided that the area devoted to
such activity shall not exceed 40% of the gross floor area of the principal
use. Any other manner of fabrication, manufacturing, processing or other type
of industrial activity shall be prohibited; and



         (b)   Sidewalk sales and promotional events which are
temporary and incidental to any principal use permitted herein; provided,
however, that such activity does not displace any required parking or
landscaped area as specified by this chapter.



   (G)   Development standards for the Cielo Verde Commercial District.



      (1)   Minimum lot area.  Twelve thousand square feet.



      (2)   Maximum building height.  Forty feet.



      (3)   Yards.



         (a)   Fifteen-foot setback abutting public or private
street;



         (b)   Twenty-foot setback with solid six-foot high
screening (landscape/wall) adjacent to residential areas; and



         (c)   Zero-foot setback between lots of the same zoning.



      (4)   Noise limitations.  Noise limitations shall be in
accordance with § 154-15.11 of the city zoning ordinance.



      (5)   Parking and loading.  Off-street parking and loading
shall be provided in the manner specified in Article 16 of the city zoning
ordinance.



      (6)   Lighting.  All exterior lighting fixtures shall be
arranged and located as to direct the light away from any public or private
street right-of-way or adjoining residential district.



      (7)   Landscaping.  Any required yard fronting on a public or
private street right-of-way shall be landscaped as set forth in Article 20 of
the city zoning ordinance and shall not be used for parking, loading,
maneuvering aisle or product display.



      (8)   Design review.  All developments proposed in the
Commercial District shall be subject to Design Review by DCD staff. DCD staff
shall use the development standards of § 154-14.01(D) of the Aesthetic
Overlay District for review guidelines.



   (H)   Cielo Verde Residential District.



      (1)   Purpose.  Individual neighborhood developments may be
produced in the form of subdivided lots or as operating rental parks. These
alternate forms of development are intended to provide flexibility in order
to respond to evolving market demands in the future. Operating rental parks
may be subdivided into lots at future times in compliance with City of Yuma
Subdivision Regulations. Subdivided lots may be rented and collectively
operated as rental parks, with individual lots owned by the developer or by
the homeowner.



      (2)   Primary uses permitted in the Cielo Verde Residential
District include the following:



         (a)   Recreational vehicle subdivisions;



         (b)   Park models, including such units exceeding 400
square feet. currently referred to as “super park models” or “vacation
homes”;



         (c)   Manufactured homes;



         (d)   Site built dwellings;



         (e)   Lot size requirements and square feet per unit
type, are subject to development standards;



         (f)   Low and medium density multi-family dwellings;



         (g)   Small and large residential care facilities;



         (h)   Home occupations;



         (i)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses such as a
vestibule, carport, garage, noncommercial storage facilities, boat and trail
storage areas;



         (j)   Accessory uses of buildings or structures
incidental to any permitted use;



         (k)   Golf courses, community swimming pools, tennis
courts, shuffleboard courts, softball and volleyball areas and any other
recreational or community facilities, as may be warranted by community
interests;



         (l)   Open space, parks, linear parks, outdoor
performance amphitheater, outdoor/indoor seasonal festival activities and
recreational facilities;



         (m)   Municipal water production and storage facilities;
municipal sewage treatment plants; municipal facilities for the collection,
transfer and disposal of solid waste;



         (n)   Stormwater storage facilities and retention areas;



         (o)   A religious institution, including related
buildings and activities, located on Parcel 15 only of the recorded Cielo
Verde plat, at the southwest corner of 36th Street and Avenue 8-1/2 E;



         (p)   Recreational vehicle parks; and



         (q)   Manufactured home parks.



      (2)   Development standards.



         (a)   Minimum parcel sizes/area per unit.



            1.   Recreation vehicle, park model.  One
thousand eight hundred square feet;



            2.   Manufactured home or multi-family lot size. 
Two thousand four hundred square feet;



            3.   Site built residence lot size.  Six thousand
square feet;



            4.   Minimum site area for a recreation vehicle
subdivision.  Three acres; and



            5.   Dwellings on lot.  More than one dwelling
unit may reside on a lot, as long as the lot size includes the combined
minimum square footage for each dwelling type. For example, if a recreation
vehicle (1,800 square feet) and a site built residence (6,000 square feet)
are on one lot, that lot will have to be a minimum of 7,800 square feet.



         (b)   Minimum lot widths.



            1.   RV, park model, manufactured home or
multi-family lot width.  40 feet;



            2.   Site built lot width.  50 feet; and



            3.   Lots with circle driveways or dual
driveways.  60 feet.



         (c)   Minimum setbacks.



            1.   Front yard setback.



               a.   RV, park model, manufactured home. 
Ten feet;



               b.   Site built or multi-family.  Twenty
feet; site built single-family homes may be constructed with a 15-foot front
yard setback, but shall maintain an increased rear yard setback as shown in
division (H)(2)(c)3. below. Front entry garages shall maintain a minimum
20-foot front yard setback.



            2.   Side yard setback.



               a.   RV, park model, manufactured home, site
built.  Seven feet; and



               b.   Multi-family.  Zero feet.



            3.   Rear yard setback.  Ten feet; site built
single-family homes constructed with a 15-foot front yard setback shall
maintain a minimum 15-foot rear yard setback.



            4.   Street side setback.  Ten feet.



            5.   Setback between dwellings.  Fourteen feet.



         (d)   Lot coverage.  Fifty percent maximum.



         (e)   Off-street parking.  One parking space, as
defined in Article 16 of this chapter, shall be provided for each parcel for
a recreation vehicle subdivision use, and shall not be located within any
public or private drive or street or other access way. Said parking shall be
paved with a durable, dust-free surface, and shall be located within either
50 feet of the residential use being served or within a designated parking
area. No parking space shall be located within the minimum street setback as
specified herein. A minimum of one visitor parking space shall be provided
for each five recreation vehicle subdivision parcels. All other uses shall
provide off-street parking as required by Article 16 of this chapter.



         (f)   Lighting.



            1.   In order to carry out the overall development
concept and theme of Cielo Verde, the lighting of the project will accentuate
the project features.



            2.   The open spaces will be lighted for
pedestrian utilization. The lighting of these areas will be by pedestrian
scale lights that will provide low-level light to the major pathway system.



            3.   The individual residencies will light the
residential neighborhoods. Each residence will have illuminated address for
ease of visitor way finding and emergency vehicle response.



            4.   Interior street will have limited lighting.
Intersections will be lighted.



         (g)   Streets.



            1.   Street corners.  Twenty-five feet minimum
radius.



            2.   Local street width.  Twenty-two feet of
driving surface. Local streets shall accommodate “eyebrow” parking spaces
for guest and residential overflow parking.



            3.   Ring Road Street with medians shall have 60
feet of right-of-way. Included in the right-of-way will be a five foot
meandering sidewalk on one side, one 12 foot asphalt driving lane in each
direction, an eight foot paved shoulder between the travel lane and face of
curb and a six foot raised, center median.



            4.   Ring Road without medians shall have 60 feet
of right-of-way. Included in the right-of-way will be two 12 foot asphalt
driving lanes, excluding gutter and five foot meandering sidewalks on both
sides of the roadway.



            5.   Thirty-Sixth Street shall have 80 feet of
required right-of-way. Cross sections shall be the same as the Ring Road
cross sections with appropriate modifications approved by staff to
accommodate left turn bays.



         (h)   Driveway standards.  Twelve feet wide, four feet
from property lines.



         (i)   Curbing.  City standards or modified wedge curb
and gutter (see detail).



         (j)   Stormwater drainage.  Drain to master drainage
areas in parks and recreational area set aside for such use.



         (k)   Utilities.  The following utilities, as available
to the site, shall service each residential parcel:  electricity, telephone,
cable service, natural gas, city water, city sewer or city approved
alternative wastewater collection and treatment system.



         (l)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be located
along streets at 500-foot intervals, subject to review of the City Fire
Department.



         (m)   Walls and fences at exterior boundaries.  Walls
or fences shall be located at exterior boundaries adjacent to arterial
streets.



         (n)   Landscaping.



            1.   The landscaping of Cielo Verde will set the
visual tone of this unique community. The character of the landscape will
utilize a blend of native and cultivated-drought resistant plants in
accordance with the city’s approved plant list. These will be arranged in
groupings that replicate natural settings.



            2.   For the right-of-way areas, the density and
sizes of materials as stated in the ordinance will be utilized. However, the
landscape materials will be arranged in natural groupings and spacing. The
plants will not be placed on specific center-to-center dimension.



            3.   The major open spaces will utilize the same
concept as above. The informal groupings of arid adapted plants will be
combined with accent areas of turf. Turf will be utilized in small areas that
will be useful and functional to the residents. The quantity and sizes of the
plantings will conform to the city landscape ordinance requirements (Article
20) but the groupings will be natural in appearance.



         (o)   Design.  Side entry garages for site built
single-family homes shall incorporate additional architectural treatments
such as windows, pop-outs or other architectural features to enhance the
street-side appearance. The design shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Department of Community Development.



   (I)   Cielo Verde Manufactured Housing Park District.



      (1)   Primary uses.



         (a)   Manufactured home parks;



         (b)   Recreational vehicle parks;



         (c)   Private parks, recreation areas and facilities;



         (d)   Recreational vehicle cooperatives;



         (e)   Public schools, parks and recreation facilities;



         (f)   Child day care services, small;



         (g)   Residential care facility, small; and



         (h)   Nursing and personal care facility, small.



      (2)   Accessory uses.



         (a)   Accessory buildings, structures and uses in
manufactured home parks such as vestibule, carport, garage, storage or
recreation facilities and joint boat and trailer storage areas;



         (b)   Overflow recreational vehicle parking (dry camps),
not to exceed 20% of the total number of manufactured home and recreational
vehicle spaces; and



         (c)   Home occupation.



      (3)   Development standards.



         (a)   Minimum park area.  Three acres (A lot, parcel or
tract of land less than three acres may be rezoned if it adjoins existing
similar zoning).



         (b)   Maximum one unit per lot.  There shall be not
more than one manufactured home per each manufactured home space. The
location of recreational vehicles on a manufactured home space for human
occupancy is permitted provided it is the only occupied unit on the space,
and also provided that the unit is self-contained or that restrooms and
shower facilities are provided.



         (c)   Minimum services and equipment.  All manufactured
homes shall be equipped with toilet, bath and kitchen facilities and shall be
connected to a sanitary sewer. Water, electrical and telephone service shall
be provided.



         (d)   Unit rental space sizes.



            1.   Manufactured home park.



               a.   Minimum per space.  One thousand eight
hundred square feet minimum per manufactured home space;



               b.   Minimum width.  Thirty feet; and



               c.    Minimum depth.  Sixty feet.



            2.   Recreational vehicle park and recreational
vehicle cooperative.



               a.   Minimum per space.  Minimum area of
1,200 square feet per recreational vehicle space;



               b.   Minimum width.  Twenty-five feet; and



               c.   Minimum depth.  Forty-eight feet.



         (e)   Streets.



            1.   Local street width.  Twenty-two feet; and



            2.   Street corners.  Twenty-five feet.



         (f)   Curbing.  City standards or modified wedge curb
and gutter.



         (g)   Off-street parking.



            1.   For manufactured housing parks.  Minimum two
parking spaces per lot; and



            2.   For recreational vehicle parks and
recreational vehicle cooperatives.  Minimum one parking space per lot.



         (h)   Walls and fences at exterior boundaries.  Walls
surrounding the exterior perimeter of manufactured home park neighborhoods
shall be provided at a minimum height of six feet.



         (i)   Utilities.  The following utilities, as available
to the site, shall service each residential parcel: electricity, telephone,
cable service, natural gas, city water, city sewer or city approved
alternative wastewater collection and treatment system.



         (j)   Fire hydrants.  Fire hydrants shall be located
along streets at 500-foot intervals, subject to review of the City Fire
Department.



         (k)   Washroom and laundry facilities.  Washroom and
laundry facilities shall be provided in enclosed structures.



         (l)   Park manager accommodations.  One dwelling unit
or manufactured home will be permitted for the use of the park manager or
cooperative; such building may also include a management office.



         (m)   Refuse collection areas.  Shall be provided at
centralized locations for convenient access.



         (n)   Minimum recreation areas.  Open space and
recreational areas to be not less than 5% of total area devoted to
manufactured home development.



         (o)   Lighting.



            1.   Lighting for this district will continue the
theme of Cielo Verde. The park pathways and some selected areas of the open
spaces will be illuminated with low-level pathway lights.



            2.   The individual residences will have
illuminated addresses to light the residential areas.



            3.   Interior streets will have limited lighting.
All intersections will be lighted.



         (p)   Stormwater drainage.  Stormwater drainage shall
be provided in accordance with final approved plat plan.



         (q)   Management.  The park manager or cooperative
association shall be responsible for the management and maintenance of all
private streets and facilities as specified herein.



         (r)   Setbacks from the periphery of the park.



            1.   Front yard.  Five feet;



            2.   Side yard (including street side).  Five
feet; and



            3.   Rear yard.  Five feet.



         (s)   Separation.  As required in the Building Safety
Code or by development agreement.



         (t)   Maximum height.  Maximum height of buildings is
20 feet.



         (u)   Visibility.  All structures located at the corner
of public streets shall comply with the visibility triangle requirements of
the zoning code. See § 154-06.04(F)(5) through (F)(9).



         (v)   Tie downs.  All manufactured homes and park model
recreational vehicles in manufactured home or recreational vehicle parks
shall be anchored to comply with wind and seismic standards as adopted by the
city.



         (w)   Landscaping.  Landscaping for this section of the
project will maintain the same character as  the rest of Cielo Verde.
Planting will utilize the same plant palette, informal groupings and
densities. Densities of plants and sizes will be as required by the city
landscape ordinance (Article 20). Spacing of the plants will be based upon
natural groupings and the growth characteristics of each plant.



(Ord. O2010-32, passed 7-7-2010; Ord.O2014-16, passed 8-27-2014)




Cielo Verde Specific Plan










 



(Ord.O2014-16, passed 8-27-2014)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




Chapter 155: [Repealed]



Chapter 156:  Erosion and Sediment Control



Section




   156-01   Findings of fact





   156-02   Purpose





   156-03   Definitions





   156-04   Permits and fees





   156-05   Review and approval





   156-06   Erosion and sediment control plan





   156-07   Design requirements





   156-08   Inspections





   156-09   Enforcement





   156-10   Project information sign





   156-11   Exemptions




§ 156-01 Findings of Fact.



   During construction activities, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by
wind and water. This soil poses a serious threat to endangered species and
limited water resources, by reducing water quality and causing the siltation
of aquatic habitat for fish, aquatic life and native riparian vegetation.
Eroded soil also results in the accelerated need to clean storm drains, clear
and clean ditches, and dredge lakes and river backwaters. In addition,
clearing and grading during construction cause the loss of native vegetation
necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat and for retarding and reducing
stormwater runoff.



(Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-02 Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property,
and prevent damage to the environment from the polluted stormwater runoff
from construction sites as defined below. This chapter will also promote the
public welfare by guiding, regulating and controlling the design,
construction and use of any development or other activity that disturbs one
acre or more in public and private projects or one-half acre or more in the
City-owned linear projects within the City's jurisdiction.



(O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-03 Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates of requires a different meaning.



   ADEQ.  The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.



   AZPDES CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT (CGP). AZPDES General Permit No.
AZG2003- 001 for Stormwater Discharges from Large and Small Construction
Activity in Arizona, except for those in Indian Country. This permit is
administered by ADEQ.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to prevent and reduce the discharge of pollutants to the waters of
the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.



   BUILDING PERMIT.  An official document or certificate issued by the
City of Yuma, which authorizes the performance of a specific construction
work, grading or alteration of ground features to create certain improvements
and structures.



   CITY.  The City of Yuma, being in Yuma County, State of Arizona.



   CITY ENGINEER.  The City Engineer or firm or person, and their
properly authorized assistants and inspectors, designated by the City to
prepare plans and administer the construction of work.



   CLEARING.  Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.



   CONSTRUCTION. Any repair, construction, reconstruction, upgrading or
enhancing of a structure, grading or landscaping that disturbs one or more
acres of land in public or private development; or, a City-owned linear
project disturbing one-half acre or more of land.



   DESIGN CRITERIA. Those requirements and criteria set forth by the City
of Yuma Standard Construction Specifications and the Erosion Control Drainage
Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona, as amended.



   DESIGN ENGINEER.  A registered civil or environmental engineer in the
State of Arizona, who prepares plans and administers construction of public
or private development.



   DRAINAGE WAY.  Any waterway that conveys surface water throughout or
from the site.



   EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by running water, wind or
other geological agents. Often the eroded debris (silt or sediment) becomes a
pollutant via stormwater runoff. Erosion occurs naturally but can be
intensified by human-made activities such as development, farming and
agriculture.



   EROSION CONTROL.  A measure or activity that prevents erosion.



   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN (ESCP). A set of plans with design
calculations prepared by or under the direction of a Design Engineer
indicating the specific measures and sequencing to be used to control erosion
and sediment migration on a construction site before, during and after
construction. The ESCP may be included as a part of the SWPPP.



   GRADING.  Excavation of or fill placement of material upon a land
surface to create a desired slope or elevation.



   LINEAR PROJECT. A Capital Improvement Program (C.I.P.) project that may
involve construction of streets, roadways, water lines, sanitary and storm
sewer facilities. Such projects typically have large length and small width
with a higher pollution potential when compared to conventional construction
projects.



   MAJOR MODIFICATION.  Any addition to or cancellation of the originally
submitted SWPPP and their impacts, as deemed by the City Engineer, that may
result in increased flood hazards or sediment track out to the public roads
and/or to the City's storm sewer system.



   MAJOR STORM.  Any storm that drops 0.50 inch or more of rainfall.



   PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the City, which
authorizes the performance of a specific construction work, demolition,
repair, reconstruction, upgrading or enhancing of a structure, grading or
landscaping or alteration of ground features to create certain improvements
and structures and is subjected to the requirements of this chapter as
defined in CONSTRUCTION above.



   PERIMETER CONTROL OR SEDIMENT CONTROL. A physical barrier that prevents
sediment from leaving a site by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting
it to a sediment trap or basin.



   PHASING.  Construction on a parcel of land in a distinct sequence of
areas, with the stabilization of each area completed before construction of
the next.



   QUALIFIED STORMWATER PERSON.  A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls and who possesses the skills
to assess conditions at the site that could impact stormwater quality and the
effectiveness of the BMPs selected to control the quality of stormwater
discharges. Preferred to be a Certified Professional in Stormwater Quality
(CPSWQ) or Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC).



   SEDIMENT.  Soil particles, both mineral and organic, that are in
suspension, are being transported, or have been removed from its site of
origin by air, water, and gravity and have come to rest on the earth's
surface.



   SEDIMENT BASINS AND SEDIMENT TRAPS.   Temporary (or permanent) ponding
areas formed by constructing an earthen embankment with a stone outlet used
to detain and collect sediment and to prevent damaging erosion on site, which
may cause silt-laden runoff from the site.  Basins are generally larger in
size than traps and serve ten acres or more of a disturbed area at one time.



   SITE. A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
construction work is performed as a single, unified or phased operation.



   STABILIZATION. An erosion control technique, practice or procedure used
to prevent or minimize exposed soil from eroding. Stabilization practices
include but are not limited to: Pre-watering, applying dust-suppressant,
vegetation (temporary and permanent seeding), gravel application, mulching,
soil stabilizers, plastic covers and tarps.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including but not limited to land operation such as
clearing, grubbing, grading, and filling; installation of streets and
walkways; excavation for footings, piers and foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings, such as garages.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan that is required
by the City and includes site map(s), an identification of
construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants in the
stormwater, and a description of measures or practices to control these
pollutants. The SWPPP must include an ESCP.



   WATERCOURSE. Any body of water, including, but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water delineated by the State of
Arizona and/or the United States of America.



   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. All waters that are currently used, were
used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign
commerce, including all waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tide.
Waters of the United States include all interstate waters and intrastate
lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sand
flats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or
natural ponds.



(Ord. O2004-72, passed 12-1-04; Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-04 Permits and Fees.



   (A)   Development and construction for all sites falling under the
authority of this chapter shall submit a SWPPP that contains an ESCP for
review and approval by the City. The City shall not grant any permit for site
development or improvement activity that would fall under this chapter
without first having reviewed and approved the applicant's SWPPP and ensured
that ADEQ has granted the applicant an AZPDES CGP permit coverage.



   (B)   No SWPPP is required for the following site
development/improvement activities:



      (1)   Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for
the protection of life, property or natural resources.



      (2)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted
as permitted or accessory use.



   (C)   Each application shall bear the name (s) and address (es) of
the owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by
the applicant's principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee as set by the City Engineer.



   (D)   Each application shall include a statement that any land
clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall
be in accordance with the ESCP and shall require a qualified stormwater
person to visit site on days when construction or grading activity are taking
place,



   (E)   The applicant shall pay the City during any and all
construction phases, and if a major modification is required, the costs for
engineering plan review and inspection visits, as specified in §156-08, as
follows:



      Application                  Fees



      SWPPP inspection            $177 for the first ten
acres, plus an



                        additional $19 for each
additional five



                        acres.



      SWPPP plan review            $168 for the first ten
acres, plus an



                        additional $ 28 for each
additional five



                        acres.



An annual update in the above fees is to be made each subsequent July 1 equal
to the change of the previous year West Urban Consumer Price Index.



(Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-05 Review and Approval.



   (A)   The City will review each application for certain types of
permits to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
After receiving an application, the City shall respond in one of the
following ways:



      (1)   Approve the permit application; or



      (2)   Approve the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the
objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these
conditions; or



      (3)   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the
reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/ or
submission.



   (B)   If the City does not act on an original or revised
application, within 30 calendar days of the submittal, the applicant may
assume approval of application, and request issuance of the permit, unless
additional agreements have been created between the applicant and the City.



(Ord. O2006-38. passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-06 Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.



   (A)   The City will require the submittal of a SWPPP that contains
an ESCP for all projects that fall under the requirements of this chapter,
except if the project qualifies for an AZPDES CGP waiver for small
construction sites and a copy of the waiver is provided to the City.



   (B)   Regardless of the area disturbed, the City will require the
submittal of stormwater BMPs, by a qualified stormwater person, and in
accordance with the Design Criteria as defined above. The BMPs must contain
the necessary control measures that will be taken to protect the MS4 if a
land-disturbing activity is located within 50 feet or less from any component
of the City's stormwater collection system.



   (C)   The ESCP shall include the following:



      (1)   A map identifying soil type, vegetation cover, and
resources protected under other sections of this chapter. This map shall be a
normal engineering scale and should be at a scale no smaller than 1"=100',
and no larger than 1"=10'.



      (2)   Temporary sediment basins are preferred to serve
disturbed areas of at least ten acres and must have a volume adequate to
contain the runoff calculated using the local two-year, 24-hours storm, as
described in Chapter 192 of the Yuma City Code, and runoff coefficient from
each disturbed acre drained.



      (3)   Temporary sediment basins may be utilized in the
post-construction phase as retention or detention basins provided that all
sediment have been removed from beds and disposed properly.



      (4)   Temporary sediment basins shall be designed to contain
the higher of the following values:



         (a)   V=CPA



            Where:   V:  Volume in cubic feet.



               C:  Runoff Coefficient as described in Chapter
192 of Yuma City Code.



               P:  2-year, 24-hour rainfall in inches.



               A:  Drainage area in acres; or



         (b)   Volume (cubic feet) =  3600 x Area (acres)



      (5)   Construction schedule prior to any site development,
including stripping and clearing; rough grading; construction of utilities,
infrastructure and buildings; and final grading and landscaping. The schedule
shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated
duration of exposure of cleared areas, areas of clearing, installation of
temporary erosion and sediment control measures, and establishment of
vegetative plantings.



      (6)   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to
meet the objectives of this chapter and any additional state or federal
requirements throughout all phases of construction and after completion of
development of the site. Depending on the complexity of the project, the
drafting of intermediate plans may be required before starting any phases of
construction.



      (7)   Calculations to show sediment loads and yields before
and after the application of erosion and sediment control measures for
pre-construction, during construction and post-construction phases, with the
maximum permissible soil loss as five tons per acre per year. Sediment
calculations may be performed using the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation
(RUSLE) or the Modified Universal Soil Loss Equation (MUSLE) or any other
method adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service.



      (8)   For development other than subdivisions, and wherever
applicable, seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, irrigation requirements, type and rate
of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for
both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures.



      (9)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities,
including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance for
post-construction stage,



      (10)   The ESCP is a part of the SWPPP required by the City.



   (D)   Modifications to the SWPPP shall be processed and approved or
disapproved in the same manner as § 156-05, may be authorized by the City by
written authorization to the permittee, and shall include:



      (1)   Major amendments of the SWPPP submitted to the City.



      (2)   Field modifications of a minor nature.



      (3)   A fee for each modified submittal that involves a major
modification, as per the table mentioned in § 156-04.



(Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-07 Design Requirements.



   (A)   Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control
practices, and waterway crossings shall be constructed in accordance with the
design criteria set forth by the City Standard Construction Specifications
and the Erosion Control Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona,
as amended, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from
the site as approved by the City Engineer. Cut and fill slopes shall be no
greater than 4:1, except as approved by the City Engineer to meet other
community or environmental objectives.



   (B)   Clearing, and grading of natural resources, such as natural
desert and wetlands, shall not be permitted, except when in compliance with
all other sections of this chapter. Clearing techniques that retain natural
vegetation and drainage pattern as described in the City Standard
Construction Specifications and the Erosion Control Drainage Design Manual
for Maricopa County, Arizona, as amended, shall be used and are subject to
approval by the City Engineer.



   (C)   Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control
devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been
installed and have been stabilized.



   (D)   Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than
40 acres, with the size of each phase to be established as a part of the plan
review process and as approved by the City Engineer.



   (E)   Erosion control requirements shall include the following:



      (1)   Soil stabilization shall be completed within 14 days of
clearing or inactivity in construction.



      (2)   If seeding or another vegetative erosion control method
is used, such erosion control method shall become established within three
weeks or the City shall require the site to be reseeded or a non-vegetative
option employed.



      (3)   Special techniques that meet the design criteria
outlined in the City Standard Construction Specifications and the Erosion
Control Drainage Design Manual for Maricopa County, Arizona, as amended, on
steep slopes or in drainage ways shall be used to ensure stabilization.



      (4)   Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end
of each workday if a major storm is expected.



      (5)   The entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch
layer or another method that does not require germination to control erosion.



      (6)   Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of
dust or sediment from the site.



      (7)   Techniques that retard and divert upland runoff past
disturbed slopes shall be employed.



   (F)   Sediment control requirements may include:



      (1)   Sediment basins, sediment traps, or tanks and perimeter
controls.



      (2)   Sediment basins that are designed in a manner that
allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management, if required by
the City Engineer.



      (3)   Protection for the adjacent properties by the use of a
vegetated buffer strip or perimeter controls.



   (G)   Waterway and watercourse protection requirements shall include:



      (1)   A temporary stream crossing installed and approved by
the State or the City, if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly during
construction.



      (2)   Stabilization of the watercourse channel before, during
and after any in-channel work.



      (3)   All on-site stormwater conveyance channels designed
according to the criteria outlined in the Yuma City Code Title 19 Chapter 192.



      (4)   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion located at the
outlets of all pipes and paved channels.



   (H)   Construction site access requirements shall include:



      (1)   A temporary stabilized access road provided at all sites.



      (2)   Other measures as required by the City or Design
Engineer in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets
by construction vehicles or washed into storm drains.



(Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-08 Inspections.



   (A)   The City shall make site inspections for SWPPP compliance for
the City-owned projects that are subjected to the AZPDES CGP as hereinafter
stipulated and either shall approve the work or shall notify the applicant
whether the SWPPP appears to be compliant with the State's requirements. The
City shall, also, make site inspections for its own SWPPP for all public
regulated projects within its jurisdiction as per § 156-04. For private
projects, the City may monitor and advise the applicant of any apparent
remarks for their SWPPP. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and
filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the City Engineer shall be
maintained at the site during the progress of the work. To obtain
inspections, the permittee shall notify the City at least two working days
before the day of inspection for:



      (1)   Start of construction.



      (2)   Completion of site clearing and rough grading.



      (3)   Completion of final grading.



      (4)   Completion of final landscaping.



   (B)   A permittee's qualified stormwater person shall make regular
inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection
schedule outlined on the approved SWPPP. The aim of such inspections will be
to determine the overall effectiveness of the SWPPP and the need for
additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written
form and submitted to the City at the time interval specified in the approved
permit.



   (C)   The City/Design Engineer or a designated agent shall enter the
property of the permitee as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to
ensure the validity of the reports filed under § 156-08.



   (D)   The permittee shall maintain at the site, during the progress
of work and until the final stabilization is achieved, an approved copy of
the SWPPP.



(Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-09 Enforcement.



   (A)   Stop-work order; revocation of permit.  In the event that any
person holding any type of permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms
of the permit or implements site development in such a manner as to adversely
affect the environment, health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood or development site, so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare, environment, or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the City may suspend or revoke the building
permit.



   (B)   Violation and penalties.  It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain
any demolition, grading, excavation, or fill, or cause such actions, contrary
to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or
both fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or part thereof, during which
any violation of said sections shall be punishable as herein provided.



(Ord. O2004-72, passed 12-1-04; Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-10 Project Information Sign.



   For all sites with a building or grading permit that are one acre or
larger, except for routine maintenance, the owner and/or operator shall erect
and maintain a project information sign in accordance with Standard No.
8-100, Work Zone Identification Sign, Sign WZIS-1, of the City of Yuma
Construction Standard Detail Drawings, that is readable by the public at the
main entrance.  Such sign shall have a white background, have black block
lettering that is at least four inches high, and shall contain at least all
of the following information:



   (A)   Project name and permit holder.



   (B)   Building or grading permit number.



   (C)   Name and phone number of person(s) responsible for conducting
the project, and



   (D)   Text stating: "Dust Complaints"- Call the City of Yuma Public
Works Department (insert the current/accurate phone number or the complaint
phone line).



(Ord. O20004-72, passed 12-1-04; Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



§ 156-11  Exemptions.



   The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: normal
farm agricultural practices under A.R.S. §§  49-457 and 49-504.4, and open
areas, vacant lots, unpaved parking lots, and unpaved roadways that are not
located at sources that require any permit under these rules.



(Ord. O2004-72, passed 12-1-04; Ord. O2006-38, passed 6-21-06)



Chapter 157: City of Yuma Development Fees



Section



   157-01   Development fees; purpose and intent, definitions, land use
assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and fee study; applicability



   157-02   Procedures for imposition, calculation, credits, and
collection of development fees; waivers



   157-03   Establishment of development fee accounts; appropriation of
development fee funds; and refunds



   157-04   Appeals




   157-05   Annual report, amendments, Infrastructure Improvements Plan
updates





   157-06   Parks and recreation facilities development fee





   157-07   [Repealed]





   157-08   [Repealed]





   157-09   Police facilities development fee





   157-10   Fire facilities development fee





   157-11   General government facilities development fee





   157-12   [Repealed]





   157-13   Streets facilities development fee










   157-99   Penalty




§ 157-01 Development Fees; Purpose and Intent, Definitions, Land Use
Assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan and Fee Study; Applicability.



   (A)   Purpose and intent.  The purpose and intent of these
development fee procedures are:



      (1)   To establish uniform procedures for the imposition,
calculation, collection, expenditure and administration of development fees
imposed on new development;



      (2)   To ensure that new development contributes only its
proportionate share towards the costs of public facilities reasonably
necessitated by such new development;



      (3)   To ensure that new development receives a beneficial use
from the expenditure of development fees on necessary public services
included in the infrastructure improvements plan;



      (4)   To ensure that all applicable legal standards and
criteria are incorporated into these procedures; and



      (5)   To ensure that all applicable procedures and
requirements of A.R.S. § 9-463.05, as amended, have been met.



   (B)   Definitions.  Except as otherwise indicated herein, the words
or phrases used in this chapter have the meaning prescribed in Chapter 157 of
the City Code.



      APPLICANT.  Any person who files an application for a
construction permit with the City of Yuma.



      APPROPRIATE or TO APPROPRIATE.  An action by the City Council to
identify, through the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, specific public
facilities for which development fee funds may be utilized. Appropriation
includes execution of a contract or other legal encumbrance authorized by the
City Council for construction of a public facility using development fee
funds in whole or in part; and/or actual expenditure of development fee funds
through payments made from a development fee account.



      BIENNIAL CERTIFIED AUDIT.



         (a)   An audit, conducted by one or more qualified
professionals who are not employees or officials of the City of Yuma and who
did not prepare the infrastructure improvements plan, that reviews the City
of Yuma's:



            1.   Land use assumptions, including determining
whether the land use assumptions conform with the City of Yuma's general plan;



            2.   The progress of the infrastructure
improvements plan, including the collection and expenditures of development
fees for each project in the plan;



            3.   Development fees, including evaluating any
inequities in implementing the infrastructure improvements plan or imposing
the development fee.



         (b)   BIENNIAL CERTIFIED AUDIT shall not mean an audit
conducted pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-481 or require certification by a certified
or licensed public accountant.



      CITY. The City of Yuma, Arizona.



      CITY ADMINISTRATOR. The City Administrator of the City or the
City Administrator's designee.



      CITY CODE. Yuma City Code.



      CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City.



      CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. An approval by the City to undertake any new
development, including but not limited to a building permit, plumbing permit,
mechanical permit, electrical permit, encroachment permit or certificate of
occupancy.



      COORDINATOR. The Development Fee Coordinator designated by the
City Administrator.



      CREDIT. A reduction of certain required development fees in
exchange for the dedication of public facility sites and improvements
included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, for which the development
fee is assessed.



      DEDICATION. The actual conveyance date or the date an
improvement, facility or real or personal property is placed into service,
whichever occurs first.



      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement between the City and an
applicant or other party enacted in accordance with A.R.S. § 9-500.05.



      DEVELOPMENT FEE. A fee adopted pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05
which is imposed on new development on a proportionate share basis in
connection with and as a condition of the issuance of a construction permit
and which is calculated to defray all or a portion of the costs of the public
facilities required to accommodate new development at City-designated level
of service (LOS) standards, and the expenditure of which provides a
beneficial use to new development.



      DEVELOPMENT FEE STUDY or FEE STUDY.  A report titled
"Development Fees" dated January 4, 2012 prepared pursuant to A.R.S. §
9-463.05, which sets forth the proportionate share development fees necessary
to offset new development's demand for necessary public services and facility
expansions.



      EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT. The construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure that does
not add or increase the number of service units.



      FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of an existing
facility that serves the same function as the otherwise new necessary public
service in order that the existing facility may serve new development.
FACILITY EXPANSION does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or
expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development.



      FINAL APPROVAL.  For a non-residential or multifamily
development, the approval of a site plan or, if no site plan is submitted for
the development, the approval of a final subdivision plat. For a
single-family residential development, the approval of a final subdivision
plat.



      GENERAL PLAN. The General Plan of the City of Yuma.



      INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. A written plan that identities
each necessary public service or facility expansion that is proposed to be
the subject of a development fee and otherwise complies with the requirements
of A.R.S. § 9-463.05.



      LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS. A written projection of changes in land
uses, densities, intensities and population for a specified service area over
a period of at least ten years and pursuant to the City of Yuma General Plan.



      NECESSARY PUBLIC SERVICE. Any of the following, subject to all
limitations and exceptions contained in A.R.S. § 9-463.05, that has a life
expectancy of three or more years and is owned and operated by or on behalf
of the City: street facilities; fire and police facilities; general
government facilities; and parks and recreational facilities.



      NEW DEVELOPMENT. The subdivision of land; the construction,
reconstruction, change of use, conversion, structural alteration, relocation
or enlargement of any structure that adds or increases the number of service
units; or any use or extension of the use of land that increases the number
of service units.



      NON-RESIDENTIAL. Any use or development that is not a residential
use.



      PUBLIC FACILITY. Capital facilities associated with a necessary
public service or facility expansion and included in the City's
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, which are necessary to accommodate new
development, including land, land improvements, buildings, and vehicles.
PUBLIC FACILITIES include, but are not limited to, parks and recreation
facilities, fire facilities, police facilities, street facilities, and
general governmental facilities. PUBLIC FACILITIES do not include
site-necessitated capital facilities.



      PUBLIC FACILITY EXPENDITURES. Amounts appropriated in connection
with the planning, implementation, design, engineering, and construction of
public facilities; including planning, legal, appraisal, and other costs
related to the acquisition of land, financing, and development costs; the
costs of compliance with purchasing procedures and applicable administrative
and legal requirements; and all other costs necessarily incident to provision
of public facilities, including updates to the land use assumptions,
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and fee study. PUBLIC FACILITY EXPENDITURES
do not include costs associated with operation, repair, maintenance,
personnel or administrative expenses, upgrades necessary to meet stricter
regulatory standards, upgrades to enhance LOS standards associated with
public facilities, or financing costs not attributable to the portion of
bonds or debt used to finance facilities in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.



      RESIDENTIAL. Any use or development that includes or results in
the creation of a dwelling unit.



      SERVICE AREA. Areas within the boundaries of the City specified
by this chapter, in which new development will be served by necessary public
services or facility expansions and within which a substantial nexus exists
between the necessary public services or facility expansions and the
development being served as prescribed in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.



      SERVICE UNITS. A standardized measure of consumption, use,
generation or discharge attributable to an individual unit of residential or
non-residential development, calculated pursuant to generally accepted
engineering or planning standards for a particular category of necessary
public services or facility expansions.



      SITE-NECESSITATED CAPITAL FACILITY. A public improvement, whether
on- or off-site, that is not included in the City's Infrastructure
Improvements Plan and that is necessary to offset impacts attributable to a
particular development; including but not limited to, direct access
improvements, rum lanes, median openings, and frontage roads.



      WAIVER. A partial or full reduction of development fees that
meets specific criteria for the application, has been approved by City
Council and an alternative funding source other than development fees has
been provided.



   (C)   Incorporation of the land use assumptions, Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, and fee study. The City Council has reviewed and accepted,
and incorporates into this chapter by reference, the land use assumptions,
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and fee study, which, among other things:



      (1)   Estimates the public facility capacity required as a
result of new development in each service area including parks and recreation
facilities, fire facilities, police-facilities, general government
facilities, and streets facilities;



      (2)   Forecasts the costs of infrastructure, improvements,
real property, financing, and other costs associated with meeting those
future needs;



      (3)   Forecasts the revenue sources that will be available to
fund the public facilities necessitated by new development;



      (4)   Establishes a proportionate share development fee by
service area and service unit to offset new development's demand for
additional public facility capacity and facility expansions; and



      (5)   Includes a map of the service areas.



   (D)   General provisions; applicability.



      (1)   Term. This chapter and the procedures established herein
are in effect unless and until repealed, amended or modified by the City
Council, in accordance with applicable state law and the City Code,
ordinances, and resolutions.



      (2)   Affected area.



         (a)   Applicability. Development fees are imposed on
residential and non-residential new development within the City as further
provided in §§ 157-06 through 157-13.



         (b)   Service areas. Development fees are imposed and
are to be appropriated, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
within the service areas established in §§ 157-06 through 157-13.



         (c)   Change in boundaries of the City.  In the event
of annexation of unincorporated county land by the City, the annexed area
will be included in a particular service area based on the land use
assumptions and Infrastructure Improvements Plan's methodology.



      (3)   Type of development affected. Except as provided in the
following subsection, this chapter applies to all new development as further
provided in §§ 157-06 through 157-13.



      (4)   Type of development not affected. This chapter does not
apply to:



         (a)   Previously-issued construction permits and
previously paid development fees. No development fee is to be imposed on new
development for which a construction permit was issued prior to the original
effective date of this chapter or for which development fees were paid
pursuant to a prior construction permit after the original effective date.



         (b)   Exempt development.



            1.   No net increase in dwelling units. No
development fee is imposed on any new residential development that does not
result in the creation of a new dwelling unit, unless said new development
increases the demand for public facilities for which development fees are
being imposed.



            2.   No net increase in non-residential square
footage. No development fee is imposed on non-residential new development
that does not result in the creation of new square footage, unless said new
development increases the demand for public facilities for which development
fees are being imposed.



            3.   Other uses. No development fee is imposed on
a use, development, project, structure, building, fence, sign or other
activity, whether or not a construction permit is required, which does not
result in an increase in the demand for public facilities.



         (c)   Development agreements. No development fee, for a
particular public facility category, is imposed on development projects that
are the subject of an existing development agreement, executed pursuant to
A.R.S. § 9-500.05, containing provisions in conflict with this chapter, but
only to the extent of the conflict or inconsistency.



         (d)   Development by school districts or charter
schools. Pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-500.18, no development fee, other than a
transportation development fee, is collected from a State of Arizona school
district or a charter school; provided, however, that the City may seek to
negotiate the construction of public facilities or the provision of services,
or to negotiate the payment of development fees, pursuant to a development
agreement or intergovernmental agreement with such entities.



      (5)   Effect of payment of development fees on other
applicable City regulations.



         (a)   The payment of development fees does not entitle
the applicant to a construction permit unless all applicable land use,
zoning, planning, platting, subdivision, and other related requirements,
standards, and conditions have been met. Such other requirements, standards,
and conditions are independent of the requirement for payment of development
fees.



         (b)   Neither this chapter nor the specific development
fee ordinances for particular public facilities affect, in any manner, the
permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and
improvement standards or other applicable standards or requirements of the
City Code, which remain operative and in full force and effect without
limitation.



      (6)   Effect of imposition of development fees in a community
facilities district. In calculating and imposing a development fee applicable
to land in a community facilities district established under A.R.S., Title
48, Chapter 4, Article 6, the City will take into account all public
infrastructure provided by the district and capital costs paid by the
district for necessary public services and will not assess a portion of a
development fee that would result in duplicate costs imposed by the district
on new development.



(Ord. 02005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. 02010-14, passed 3-3-10; Ord. O2012-10,
passed 5-2-12; Ord. O2014-38, passed 12-17-14; Ord. O2017- 029, passed 9-6-17)



§ 157-02 Procedures for Imposition, Calculation, Credits, and Collection of
Development Fees; Waivers.



   (A)   In general. The City will notify an applicant of applicable
development fee requirements at the time of application for a construction
permit. The City calculates development fees at the time of application for a
construction permit and the applicant must pay the fees due at the time of
and prior to the issuance of a construction permit.



   (B)   Calculation.



      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a construction
permit, the City determines:



         (a)   Whether the proposed use is a residential or
non-residential use;



         (b)   The specific category of residential or
non-residential development, if applicable;



         (c)   The number of new service units, if for a
residential use, in dwelling units, and, if for a non-residential use, in new
or additional square feet of gross floor area; and



         (d)   The service area in which the new development is
located.



      (2)   Upon receipt of an application for a construction
permit, the City determines whether the development proposed involves a
change in use. In such cases, the development fee due is based on only the
incremental increase in the fee for the additional public facilities needed
for the change in use.



      (3)   After making these determinations, the City calculates
the demand for the public facility created by the proposed new development
for each public facility category for which a development fee is being
imposed, and calculates the applicable development fee by multiplying the
service units proposed by the amount of the applicable development fee per
service unit, incorporating any applicable credit.



      (4)   If the type of land use proposed for new development is
not expressly listed in the particular development fee ordinance, the
Coordinator:



         (a)   Identifies the most similar land use type listed
and calculates the development fee based on the development fee for the land
use identified;



         (b)   Identifies the broader land use category within
which the proposed land use would apply and calculates the development fee
based on the development fee for that land use category; or



         (c)   Determines the basis used to calculate the fee
pursuant to an independent impact analysis as provided for below.



            In the event that the Coordinator is required to
determine the proper classification of a proposed new development pursuant to
subsections (a) or (b) above, the Coordinator's determination must be based
on a generally-accepted land use classification system (e.g., the North
American Industry Classification System, the Land-Based Classification
Standards (APA), and/or ITE's Trip Generation Manual) and consistent with the
land use assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and fee study.



      (5)   In the event an applicant believes that the impact to
public facilities necessitated by new development is less than the
development fee imposed in §§ 157-06 through 157-13, the applicant may,
prior to issuance of a construction permit, request that the City have
prepared an independent impact analysis based on the proposed development to
arrive at an alternative development fee calculation.



         (a)   All costs incurred by the City in the preparation
of an independent impact analysis shall be borne by the applicant and no
construction permit shall be issued until the independent impact analysis is
complete and a determination as to the appropriate fee is made by the
Coordinator.



         (b)   Upon the request of an applicant, the Coordinator
shall have prepared an independent impact analysis consistent with the
requirements of this section.



         (c)   The independent impact analysis must be calculated
for that land use type analyzed for the applicable service area and based on
data, information, or assumptions contained in this chapter, the land use
assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and fee study, or an
independent source, provided that:



            1.   The independent source is a
generally-accepted standard source of demographic and planning data; or



            2.   The independent source is a local study
supported by a database adequate for the conclusion contained in the
independent impact analysis and performed pursuant to a generally-accepted
methodology.



         (d)   If a previous applicant has submitted a local
study consistent with the criteria for an independent impact analysis, and if
such study is determined by the Coordinator to be current, the impact upon
the public facilities as described in such prior local study shall be
presumed to exist for a similar land use proposed by a subsequent applicant.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that an independent impact analysis
conducted more than three years earlier is invalid.



         (e)   If the Coordinator determines that the independent
impact analysis complies with the requirements of this section and the
alternative development fee is less than the fees set forth in §§ 157-06
through 157-13, then the alternative fee shall be paid by the applicant. If
the alternative development fee is greater than the fees set forth in §§
157-06 through 157-13, the fees set forth in §§ 157-06 through 157-13 shall
be due.



      (6)   An applicant may request a non-binding estimate of
development fees due for a particular new development at any time by filing a
request on a form provided for such purpose by the Coordinator; provided,
however, that such estimate may be subject to change when a formal
application for a construction permit for new development is made. Such
non-binding estimate is solely for the benefit of the prospective applicant
and in no way binds the City nor precludes it from making amendments or
revisions to any provisions of this chapter or the specific development fee
implementing ordinances.



      (7)   The calculation of development fees due from a
multiple-use new development is based upon the aggregated demand for each
public facility generated by each land use type in the new development.



      (8)   The calculation of development fees due from a phased
new development is based upon the demand generated by each specific land use
within each phase of development for which a separate construction permit is
requested.



      (9)   Development fees are calculated based on the development
fee amount in effect at the time of application for a construction permit.



      (10)   No new or modified development fee shall be assessed
against a development for 24 months after the date that the City issues the
final approval for a commercial, industrial or multifamily development, or
the date that the first building permit issued for a residential development
pursuant to an approved site plan or subdivision plat, provided that no
subsequent changes are made to the approved site plan or subdivision plat
that would increase the number of service units. If the number of service
units increases, the new or increased portion of a modified development fee
shall be limited to the amount attributable only to the additional service
units. The 24 month period shall not be extended by a renewal or amendment of
the site plan or the final subdivision plat that was the subject of the final
approval. If, after the date of the municipality's final approval of a
development, the municipality reduces the development fee assessed on
development, the reduced fee shall apply to the development.



      (11)   For applications for a construction permit for a
building shell where the actual use of the building is unknown, the
development fee shall be calculated based on the lowest intensity land use
allowed within the applicable zoning district. At the time the certificate of
occupancy is issued and the permanent use is established, the applicant shall
be assessed additional fees if the actual use of the property results in a
higher fee.



   (C)   Credits.



      (1)   Eligibility.  Credits against the amount of development
fees due for a proposed new development may be given, pursuant to the terms
outlined below, either:



         (a)   By the City Council, pursuant to a development
agreement, for dedications of land or actual construction, by a developer of
all or part of a public facility necessary to offset the impacts of a new
development; or



         (b)   By the Coordinator, where an applicant
demonstrates that excess public facility capacity was provided previously
pursuant to subsection (a) above.



         (c)   Credits against development fees must be given for
dedications of public facilities the Infrastructure Improvements Plan that
are required by the City, However, any improvement that must be built or
dedicated by a developer or applicant that is not on the City's
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, but substitutes for or otherwise reduces
the need for public facilities in the IIP, shall be eligible for a credit
against development fees. In the event the City grants a credit for such an
improvement, the City will amend the Infrastructure Improvements Plan to
include the subject replacement facility and will make any other amendments
to the IIP to ensure consistency with Arizona law.



      (2)   Credits for dedication or construction. Applications for
a credit for the dedication or construction of public facilities must be made
on a form provided by the Coordinator for such purposes. The application must
be accompanied by a proposed development agreement as provided herein.



         (a)   Requirements.  In order to be eligible for
development fee credits, the public facility proposed for dedication or
construction must be:



            1.   Credited only against the same public
facility category of development fee as the public facility being proposed
for dedication or construction; and



            2.   Subject to an executed development agreement,
as provided herein, prior to the issuance of a construction permit for which
a credit is sought.



         (b)   Procedure.



            1.   Upon receipt of a complete application and
proposed development agreement, the Coordinator, City Attorney, and other
appropriate staff must review the application and proposed agreement, as well
as such other information and evidence as may be deemed relevant, and the
Coordinator must forward to the City Council a report as to whether a credit
is proper based on the provisions of this chapter.



            2.   Based on the report of the Coordinator, the
provisions of this chapter, the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the General
Plan, adopted City budget, and the CIP, the City Council must make a final
decision to accept, reject, or accept with conditions the proposed dedication
or construction and development agreement in exchange for a credit against
development fees owed.



         (c)   Calculation of the value of dedication or
construction.



            1.   The amount of the credit to be given as a
result of the dedication or construction of a public facility is to be
calculated as the lower of the following:



               a.   The amount of the development fee due
pursuant to this chapter;



               b.   The costs assumed in the City's
Infrastructure Improvements Plan; or



               c.   The actual verified costs of dedication
or construction.



            2.   If the actual verified costs are used, the
credit shall be calculated as follows:



               a.   Construction of facilities and
provision of equipment. The credit must be equal to the actual cost of
construction or equipment, as evidenced by receipts and other sufficient
documentation provided by the developer of the public facility and verified
by the Coordinator.



               b.   Dedication of land. The credit is to be
based on the fair market value of the land as determined by a certified
property appraiser hired and paid for by the applicant. If the City rejects
the applicant's appraisal, the City may hire and pay for a second appraiser
to appraise the property. If either party rejects the second appraisal, a
third appraisal may be performed by an appraiser chosen by the first and
second appraisers, the costs of which are to be shared equally by the City
and the applicant. The third appraisal is binding on both parties. All
appraisals must be consistent with generally-accepted appraisal techniques
and the date of valuation must be the date of transfer to the City.



         (d)   Development agreement requirements. No dedication
or construction project may be accepted in exchange for a credit except
pursuant to an executed development agreement between the City and the
provider of the dedication or construction, which must include the following:



            1.   A schedule for the initiation and completion
of the construction of the proposed public facility;



            2.   The amount of the development fees, by type,
proposed to be credited by the City;



            3.   Where excess capacity is provided:



               a.   The amount, nature, and location of
excess capacity being provided;



               b.    The eligibility for such excess
capacity to be used for credits against development fees owed by subsequent
applicants;



               c.   The amount of such credits and their
duration;



               d.   The geographic area within which such
credits would be awarded based on the excess capacity benefit created by the
dedication or construction; and



               e.   The mechanism for transferring the
excess credits to properties within the geographic benefit area of the
dedication or construction.



            4.   A provision that all construction will be in
accordance with City specifications and all regulations set forth in the City
Code; and



            5.   Such other terms and conditions as deemed
necessary by the City.



         (e)   Transferability. Credits granted pursuant to this
section may be transferred from the applicant to property owners within the
original development. However, in order to transfer credits from the original
development to another development, but within the same service area, an
application must be made pursuant to subsection (3) below.



      (3)   Credits to subsequent applicants. An applicant may be
given a credit against a development fee upon demonstration that, after the
date of this chapter, a public facility was dedicated or constructed,
pursuant to subsection (2) above, which will mitigate the impacts of the
proposed new development on the particular public facility for which the
dedication or construction was made.



         (a)   Requirements.  In order for a credit to be given
pursuant to this section, the applicant must demonstrate that:



            1.   The public facility provided pursuant to
subsection (2) above had sufficient excess capacity to offset the impacts of
the applicant's proposed new development;



            2.   The public facility provided pursuant to
subsection (2) above reduced the overall need for public facilities otherwise
created by the proposed new development;



            3.   The proposed new development complies with
all conditions of acceptance of the public facility provided pursuant to
subsection (2) above, including time and geographic limitations for
eligibility;



            4.   The public facility provided pursuant to
subsection (2) above was for the same type of development fee as is being
proposed for a credit; and



            5.   The applicant has secured a right to an
allocation of capacity equal to the development fee owed by the applicant.



         (b)   Procedure.



            1.   Applications for a credit, based on a
previously dedicated or constructed public facility, must be made on a form
provided by the Coordinator for such purposes. The application must be
accompanied by evidence of a transfer of credit granted pursuant to
subsection (2) above.



            2.   Upon receipt of a complete application, the
Coordinator must review the application, as well as such other information
and evidence as may be deemed relevant, and determine whether a credit is
proper based on the provisions of this chapter, the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan, the General Plan, the CIP, and/or other relevant evidence.



            3.   If the Coordinator determines that a credit
is appropriate, the Coordinator shall so indicate on the appropriate form and
the credit shall be given upon the calculation and collection of the required
development fee at the time of issuance of a construction permit.



   (D)   Collection.  The City collects all applicable development
fees at the time of issuance of a construction permit and issues a receipt to
the applicant for such payment unless:



      (1)   The applicant is entitled to a full or partial credit;



      (2)   The applicant and the City have entered into a
development agreement that provides for payment at a later time, but no later
than 15 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy;



      (3)   The applicant is not otherwise subject to the payment of
a development fee; or



      (4)   The applicant has filed an appeal and a bond or other
surety in the amount of the development fee, as calculated by the City and
approved by the City Attorney and Finance Director.



   (E)   Waivers.



      (1)   Generally. An applicant proposing a development for
which development fees are due may be eligible for a partial or full waiver
from the requirements of this chapter, only as specifically provided for in
this section.



      (2)   Application for waiver. Applications for waiver shall be
filed with the Coordinator on forms provided by the City for such purpose.



      (3)   Eligibility for waiver. Partial or full waiver from the
payment of development fees as required by this chapter may be made only for
the following types of uses:



         (a)   Affordable housing. Defined as projects that meet
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development housing
affordability guidelines for low and moderate income households.



         (b)   Redevelopment and infill. Defined as projects that
meet redevelopment efforts to combat blight and unsafe conditions and are
located within City Council adopted redevelopment plans, in accordance with
A.R.S. §§ 36-1471 through 36-1491 or projects that meet infill efforts to
encourage development in older, historic, and established areas of the city
and are located within the Infill Overlay District.



      (4)   Review of an application for waiver. Upon receipt of a
complete application for waiver, the Coordinator shall review the proposed
new development and shall make a recommendation to the City Council as to
whether the new development qualifies for a waiver pursuant only to the
provisions in subsection (3) above. Based on the recommendation of the
Coordinator and the criteria set forth in subsection (3), the City Council
shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny a proposed waiver request.



      (5)   Notification to appropriate departments and
Infrastructure Improvements Advisory Committee. If the City Council
determines that the proposed development qualifies for a waiver, the
Coordinator shall notify the Finance Director that the waiver has been
approved and that a funding source other than development fees shall be used
to fund public facilities in accordance with the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan. Within 30 days of the waiver approval, the Coordinator shall provide
notice to the Infrastructure Improvements Advisory Committee established
pursuant to § 157-05(B).



      (6)   Effect of grant of waiver.  If the City Council grants
a waiver of development fees otherwise due, the Finance Director shall
transmit funds equal in amount to those waived, from a source other than
development fees, into the appropriate development fee account within one
year of the grant of the waiver. The City shall not increase the amount of
development fees payable under this chapter to replace any revenue lost on
account of the waivers granted.



(Ord. 02005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. 02010-14, passed 3-3-10; Ord. 2012- 10,
passed 5-2-12; Ord. O2017-029, passed 9-6-17)



§ 157-03 Establishment of Development Fee Accounts; Appropriation of
Development Fee Funds; And Refunds.



   (A)   Development fee accounts. The City must establish and maintain
a separate development fee account for each category of public facility for
which a development fee is imposed. Each such account must be clearly
identified as to the category of public facility for which the development
fee has been imposed. Subaccounts must be established for individual service
areas, as applicable. The City must deposit all development fees collected
into the appropriate development fee account or subaccount, which must be
interest bearing. All interest earned on monies deposited to such account
must be credited to and considered funds of the account. The funds of each
such account must be capable of being accounted for separately from all other
City funds. The City must establish and implement necessary accounting
controls to ensure that the development fee funds are properly deposited,
accounted for, and appropriated in accordance with this chapter, A.R.S. §
9-463.05, and any other applicable legal requirements.



   (B)   Appropriation of development fee funds.



      (1)   In general.  Development fee funds, including accrued
interest, may be appropriated only for public facilities, public facility
expenditures, and for the payment of principal, interest, and other financing
costs on contracts, bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by the City to
finance public facilities that provide a beneficial use to new development.
Development fee funds may be appropriated only for project improvements on
the City's Infrastructure Improvements Plan in accordance with §§ 157-06
through 157-13. All appropriations from development fee accounts must be
detailed on a form provided for such purpose and filed with the Finance
Department. Development Fees shall be deemed to be appropriated in the order
in which they are received by the City.



      (2)   Development fees may be appropriated only:



         (a)   For the category of public facility for which they
were imposed, calculated, and collected; and



         (b)   Within the service area where collected.



      (3)   Development fees collected for a purpose other than as
authorized by SB 1525 (2011), shall be used for the purpose for which they
were collected on or before January 1, 2020, after which, if not spent, shall
be distributed equally among the categories of necessary public services
authorized by SB 1525 (2011).



      (4)   Restrictions on appropriations. Development fees may not
be appropriated for:



         (a)   Maintenance or repair of public facilities;



         (b)   Operational, administrative, or personnel expenses
associated with the provision of public facilities;



         (c)   Upgrading, updating, expanding, correcting, or
replacing existing public facilities in order solely to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; or



         (d)   Upgrading, updating, expanding, correcting, or
replacing existing public facilities in order to provide a higher level of
service to existing development.



   (C)   Procedure for appropriation of development fee funds.



      (1)   The City must maintain an Infrastructure Improvements
Plan for each public facility for which development fees are collected, which
program identifies public facility projects necessitated by new development.
The Infrastructure Improvements Plan represents the City Council's plan for
providing public facilities in a manner consistent with the General Plan and
the Council's ability to provide public facilities in an efficient and
fiscally-responsible manner. Based on the annual report prepared by the
Coordinator, the Infrastructure Improvements Plan must identify the source of
funding for each planned improvement and identify the portion of each planned
public facility attributable to and that will provide a beneficial use to new
development. The Infrastructure Improvements Plan must include improvements
sufficient to provide public facilities to new development at the level of
service set forth in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



      (2)   Each year the City must identify public facility
projects anticipated to be funded in whole or in part with development fees
in the coming fiscal year.



      (3)   The recommendations must be consistent with the
provisions of this chapter, the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, the City's
Capital Improvement Program, the particular public facility development fee
ordinance, A.R.S. § 9-463.05, other applicable legal requirements, and any
guidelines adopted by the City Council.



      (4)   The City Council may authorize public facilities funded
by development fees at such other times as it deems necessary and appropriate
by a majority vote of the City Council in order to comply with the
requirements of law.



      (5)   The City Council must verify that adequate development
fee funds are or will be available from the appropriate development fee
accounts at the time of appropriation in order to assure a beneficial use to
new development.



   (D)   Refunds.



      (1)   Eligibility.



         (a)   Expiration or revocation of construction permit. 
An applicant who has paid a development fee for a new development for which
the necessary construction permit has expired, or for which the construction
permit has been revoked prior to construction, is eligible to apply for a
refund of development fees, on a form provided by the City for such purpose.



         (b)   Failure of City to appropriate development fee
funds within time limit. For fees paid after July 31, 2014, a current real
property owner may apply for a refund of development fees paid by an
applicant if the City has failed to appropriate the development fees
collected from the applicant within the time limit identified in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, but in no event longer than ten years from
payment of the fees. The refund application is made in writing on a form
provided by the City for such purpose.



         (c)   Failure to provide service. For fees paid after
July 31, 2014, a current real property owner may apply for a refund of
development fees paid by an applicant if the City has failed to provide
immediate service from any existing facility with available capacity if the
available capacity has not been reserved or pledged in connection with the
construction or financing of the facility.



         (d)   Partial refund for actual cost savings. If the
development fee was collected for the construction of all or a portion of a
specific public facility expenditure, and on completion of the facility, the
City determines that the actual cost of construction was less than the
forecasted cost of construction on which the development fee was based and
the difference between the actual and the forecasted cost is greater than
10%, the current owner may apply for and receive a refund of the portion of
the development fee equal to the difference between the development fee paid
and the development fee that would, have been due if the development fee had
been calculated at the actual construction cost.



         (e)   Abandonment of development after initiation of
construction. An applicant, who has paid a development fee for a new
development for which a construction permit has been issued, but for which
construction is not begun or is abandoned prior to completion, is eligible
for a refund if no construction began or any uncompleted building is
demolished.



      (2)   To whom. Notwithstanding any hypothecation, assignment
or reservation of rights by the applicant to the contrary, except as provided
in subsections (l)(a) and (e) above, the City shall make refunds only to the
current owner of real property for which the development fee was paid.



      (3)   Processing of applications for a refund. Applications
for a refund are made on a form provided by the City for such purposes. Upon
receipt of a complete application for a refund, the City must review the
application and documentary evidence submitted by the applicant, as well as
such other information and evidence as may be deemed necessary, and make a
determination as to whether a refund is due.



      (4)   Application requirements - due to expiration,
revocation, or abandonment. Applications for refunds due to expiration,
revocation, or abandonment of a new development prior to completion must be
made within 180 days following expiration or revocation of the construction
permit. The applicant must submit the following: 



         (a)   Evidence that the applicant paid the development
fee for which a refund is sought, or is the duly designated agent of said
person;



         (b)   The amount of the development fees paid by public
facility category and receipts evidencing such payments; and



         (c)   Documentation evidencing the expiration or
revocation of the construction permit or approval of demolition of the
structure pursuant to a valid City-issued demolition permit.



            Failure to apply for a refund within 180 days
following expiration or revocation of the construction permit or demolition
of the structure constitutes a waiver of entitlement to a refund. The City
will not pay interest on refunds made due to abandonment or construction
permit expiration or revocation.



      (5)   Application requirements - due to timeliness.
Applications for refunds due to the failure of the City to provide service or
appropriate development fees within the time limits established herein are
made on forms provided by the City. The current property owner must submit:



         (a)   Evidence of current ownership or designated agency
for the current property owner; and



         (b)   The amount of the development fees paid, by public
facility category, and receipts evidencing such payments.



(Ord. 02005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. 02010-14, passed 3-3-10; Ord. 2012-10,
passed 5-2-12)



§ 157-04 Appeals.



   (A)   Initiation.



      (1)   An appeal from any of the provisions of this chapter or
the decision of the Coordinator or other City official pursuant to this
chapter may be made to the City Administrator by filing a written appeal, on
the appropriate City form, with the City Clerk within 60 days following the
decision being appealed.



      (2)   The filing of an appeal does not stay the imposition or
the collection of the development fee as calculated by the City unless an
appeal bond or other sufficient surety, satisfactory to the City Attorney and
the Finance Director, has been provided.



      (3)   If the notice of appeal, is accompanied by an appeal
bond or other sufficient surety, in any amount equal to the development fee
calculated to be due, a construction permit may be issued to the new
development.



   (B)   Burden of proof. The appellant has the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the decision of the City official is erroneous.



   (C)   Contents. All appeal applications must detail the specific
grounds therefor and all other relevant information as required by the City.



   (D)   Decision.



      (1)   The City Administrator must:



         (a)   Determine whether there is an error in an order,
chapter requirement, or decision made by a City official in the enforcement
of this chapter; and/or



         (b)   Determine whether a provision of this chapter or a
decision by a City official made pursuant to this chapter results in a taking
of private property or otherwise violates the constitutional or statutory
rights of the applicant pursuant to Arizona or federal law.



         (c)   Based on the information provided, reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, or decision of
the City official appealed, and make such order, requirement, decision, or
determination as necessary, including amendments to the provisions of this
chapter.



      (2)   The City Administrator must render a decision on the
appeal within 90 days after the filing of the appeal.



      (3)   The appellant may appeal the City Administrator's
decision to the City Council, or its designated hearing officer, pursuant to
the following:



         (a)   The appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within 30 days of the City Administrator's, rendering of a decision;



         (b)   The appeal must be filed by a letter to the City
Clerk setting forth the basis for the appeal; and



         (c)   A decision regarding the appeal shall be made
after a public hearing and opportunity for the appellant to present evidence
and be heard on the matter.



(Ord. 02005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. 02010-14, passed 3-3-10; Ord. 2012-10,
passed 5-2-12)



§ 157-05 Annual Report, Amendments, Infrastructure Improvements Plan Updates.



   (A)   Annual report.



      (1)   Within 90 days following the end of each fiscal year,
the City shall file a copy of an annual report with the City Clerk. Copies of
the annual report shall be posted to the City's website and made available to
the public on request. The annual report may contain financial information
that has not been audited. If the annual report is not filed with the City
Clerk and posted to the City's website as provided by this section, the City
shall not collect development fees until me annual report is filed.



      (2)   The annual report must include the following:



         (a)   The amount assessed by the City for each type of
development fee by service area;



         (b)   The balance of each development fee account
maintained for each type of development fee assessed as of the beginning and
end of the fiscal year;



         (c)   The amount of interest or other earnings on the
monies in each development fee account as of the end of the fiscal year;



         (d)   The amount of development fee monies used to repay:



            1.   Bonds issued by the City to pay the cost of a
public facility project that is the subject of a development fee assessment,
including the amount needed to repay the debt service obligations on each
facility for which development fees have been identified as the source of
funding and the timeframes within which the debt service will be repaid.



            2.   Monies advanced by the City from funds other
than development fee accounts established for development fees in order to
pay the cost of a public facility project that is the subject of a
development fee assessment, the total amount advanced by the municipality for
each facility, the source of the monies advanced and the terms under which
the monies will be repaid to the municipality.



         (e)   The amount of development fee monies spent on each
public facility project that is the subject of a development fee assessment
and the physical location of each public facility project.



         (f)   The amount of development fee monies spent for
each purpose other than a public facility project that is the subject of a
development fee assessment.



      (3)   The annual report may include any or all of the
following:



         (a)   Recommendations for amendments, if appropriate, to
this chapter or to specific ordinances adopting development fees for
particular public facilities;



         (b)   Proposed changes to the General Plan and/or the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, including the identification of additional
public facility projects anticipated to be funded wholly or partially with
development fee funds;



         (c)   Proposed changes to the boundaries of a service
area, including any made necessary as a result of annexation;



         (d)   Proposed changes to development fee schedules as
set forth in §§ 157-06 through 157-13;



         (e)   Proposed changes to level of service standards for
particular public facilities;



         (f)   Proposed changes to any development fee
calculation methodology;



         (g)   Proposed changes to the land use assumptions; or



         (h)   Other data, analysis, or recommendations as the
Coordinator may deem appropriate, or as may be requested by the City Council.



      (4)   Based on information provided in the annual report, the
City Council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including, but not
limited to, requesting additional data or analyses and holding public
workshops and/or public hearings.



   (B)   Amendments. Development fees for any particular public
facility pursuant to this chapter may be amended from time to time by the
City Council pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05(C). Development fees may not be
updated until the City has updated the land use assumptions and
Infrastructure Improvements Plan pursuant to A.R.S § 9-463.05(D). Before
amending the land use assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan, or
development fees the City shall either:



      (1)   Appoint an Infrastructure Improvements Advisory
Committee pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05(G)(l);or



      (2)   In lieu of creating an Infrastructure Improvements
Advisory Committee, provide for a biennial certified audit of the City's land
use assumptions, Infrastructure Improvements Plan, and development fees
pursuant to A.R.S. § 9-463.05(G)(2).



   (C)   Infrastructure Improvements Plan updates. At least every five
years, starting from the date of adoption of the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan, the City shall update the land use assumptions and the Infrastructure
Improvements Plan pursuant to the process described in A.R.S. § 9-463.05(D).



(Ord. 02005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. O2011-11, passed 4-20-11; Ord. 2012-10,
passed 5-2-12)



§ 157-06 Parks and Recreation Facilities Development Fee.



   (A)   Definitions.



      PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES.  A public facility, including
but not limited to parks, swimming pools, and related facilities. PARKS AND
RECREATION FACILITIES do not include vehicles, equipment or that portion of
any facility that is used for amusement parks, aquariums, aquatic centers,
auditoriums, arenas, arts and cultural facilities, bandstand and orchestra
facilities, bathhouses, boathouses, clubhouses, community centers greater
than 3,000 square feet in floor area, environmental education centers,
equestrian facilities, golf course facilities, greenhouses, lakes, museums,
theme parks, water reclamation or riparian areas, wetlands, or zoo facilities.



      PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE.  A development
fee imposed to offset the impacts of new development on parks and recreation
facilities set forth in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, subject to the
limitations set forth in this chapter



   (B)   Service area.  There are hereby established two service areas
for parks and recreation facilities development fees as follows:



      (1)   North Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located north of and including 56th Street; and



      (2)   South Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located south of 56th Street.



   (C)   Applicability and appropriation of development fees.  Parks
and recreation facilities development fees shall only be assessed against
only residential development, as further provided in this chapter. Parks and
recreation facilities development fees may be appropriated for public
facilities included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



   (D)   Parks and recreation facilities development fee schedule for
residential development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Dwelling Unit


Single-Family
 

$1,011



Multi-Family
 

$797



All Other Housing
 

$612




 



(Ord. O2005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. O2007-28, passed 5-16-07; Ord. O2012-06,
passed 3-21-12)



§ 157-07 [Repealed].



§ 157-08 [Repealed].



§ 157-09 Police Facilities Development Fee.



   (A)   Definitions.



      POLICE FACILITIES.  A public facility, including but not limited
to vehicles and equipment, that are used by City law enforcement to preserve
the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest criminal offenders,
protect the rights of persons and property, regulate and control motorized
and pedestrian traffic, train sworn personnel, and/or provide and maintain
police records, vehicles, equipment, and communications systems. POLICE
FACILITIES do not include vehicles and equipment used to provide
administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes or any facility used for
training officers from more than one station or substation.



      POLICE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE.  A development fee imposed to
offset the impacts of new development on  police facilities set forth in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, subject to the limitations set forth in
this chapter.



   (B)     Service area.  There are hereby established two service
areas for police facilities development fees as follows:



      (1)   North Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located north of and including 56th Street; and



      (2)   South Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located south of 56th Street.



   (C)   Applicability and appropriation of development fees.  Police
facilities development fees shall be assessed against both residential and
non-residential development as further provided in this chapter. Police
facilities development fees may be appropriated for public facilities
included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



   (D)   Police facilities development fee schedule for residential
development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Dwelling Unit


Single-Family
 
   $506


Multi-Family
 
   $399


All Other Housing
 
   $306



 



   (E)   Police facilities development fee schedule for non-residential
development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Square Foot


Commercial/retail
 
$0.949


Office/Institutional
 
$0.468


Light Industrial
 
$0.296


Warehousing
 
$0.211


Manufacturing
 
$0.162


Hotel (per room)
 
$239.00



 



(Ord. O2005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. O2007-28, passed 5-16-07; Ord. O2012-06,
passed 3-21-12)



§ 157-10 Fire Facilities Development Fee.



   (A)   Definitions.



      FIRE FACILITIES.  A public facility, including but not limited
to fire stations, fire equipment, fire vehicles and all appurtenances for
fire stations. FIRE FACILITIES do not include vehicles or equipment used to
provide administrative services, or helicopters or airplanes, and do not
include any facility used for training firefighters from more than one
station or substation.



      FIRE FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE.  A development fee imposed to
offset the impacts of new development on fire facilities set forth in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, subject to the limitations set forth in
this chapter.



   (B)     Service area.  There are hereby established two service
areas for fire facilities development fees as follows:



      (1)   North Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located north of and including 56th Street; and



      (2)   South Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located south of 56th Street.



   (C)   Applicability and appropriation of development fees.  Fire
facilities fees shall be assessed against both residential and
non-residential development as further provided in this chapter. Fire
facilities development fees may be appropriated for public facilities
included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



   (D)   Fire facilities development fee schedule for residential
development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Dwelling Unit


Single-Family
 
   $339


Multi-Family
 
   $267


All Other Housing
 
   $205



 



   (E)   Fire facilities development fee schedule for residential
development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Square Foot


Commercial/retail
 
$0.152


Office/Institutional
 
$0.258


Light Industrial
 
$0.171


Warehousing
 
$0.068


Manufacturing
 
$0.132


Hotel (per room)
 
$33.00



 



(Ord. O2005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. O2007-28, passed 5-16-07; Ord. O2012-06,
passed 3-21-12)



§ 157-11 General Government Facilities Development Fee.



   (A)   Definitions.



      GENERAL GOVERNMENT FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE.  A development
fee imposed to offset the impacts of new development on on City Hall, as
described in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan, subject to the limitations
set forth in this chaper.



   (B)     Service area.  There are hereby established two service
areas for general government facilities development fees as follows:



      (1)   North Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located north of and including 56th Street; and



      (2)   South Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located south of 56th Street.



   (C)   Applicability and appropriation of development fees. General
government facilities development fees  may be appropriated solely for
payment of principal and interest on the portion of the bonds, notes, or
other debt service obligations issued before June 1, 2011 to finance
construction of the City Hall, as provided in the Infrastructure Improvements
Plan.



   (D)   General government facilities development fee schedule for
residential development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Dwelling Unit


Single-Family
 
   $20


Multi-Family
 
   $15


All Other Housing
 
   $12



 



   (E)   General government facilities development fee schedule for
non-residential development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Square Foot


Commercial/retail
 
$0.013


Office/Institutional
 
$0.022


Light Industrial
 
$0.015


Warehousing
 
$0.006


Manufacturing
 
$0.011


Hotel (per room)
 
$3.00



 



(Ord. O2005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. O2007-28, passed 5-16-07; Ord. O2012-06,
passed 3-21-12)



§ 157-12 [Repealed].



§ 157-13 Streets Facilities Development Fee.



   (A)   Definitions.



      STREETS FACILITIES. A public facility, including arterial or
collector streets or roads, traffic signals, rights-of-way, and improvements
thereon, bridges, culverts, irrigation tiling, storm drains, and regional
transportation facilities.



      STREETS FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE. A development fee imposed to
offset the impacts of new development on streets facilities set forth in the
Infrastructure Improvements Plan, subject to the limitations set forth in
this chapter.



   (B)   Service area.  There are hereby established two service areas
for streets facilities development fees as follows:



      (1)   North Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located north of and including 56th Street; and



      (2)   South Service Area:  All lands within the City of Yuma
located south of 56th Street.



   (C)   Applicability and appropriation of development fees.  Streets
facilities development fees shall be assessed against both residential and
non-residential development as further provided in this chapter. Streets
facilities development fees may be appropriated for public facilities
included in the Infrastructure Improvements Plan.



   (D)   Streets facilities development fee schedule for residential
development in the North Service Area.



 


Development Type

 
Fee Per Dwelling Unit


Single-Family
 
   $696


Multi-Family
 
   $479


All Other Housing
 
   $363



 



   (E)   Streets facilities development fee schedule for
non-residential development.



 

Development Type
 
Fee Per Square Foot


Commercial/retail
 
$0.804


Office/Institutional
 
$0.436


Light Industrial
 
$0.276


Warehousing
 
$0.196


Manufacturing
 
$0.151


Hotel (per room)
 
$223.00



 



 



(Ord. O2005-74, passed 9-7-05; Ord. O2007-28, passed 5-16-07; Ord. O2012-06,
passed 3-21-12; Ord. O2013-31, passed 6-5-13)



§ 157-99  Penalty.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter.  Any person, firm or
corporation violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or both
fine and imprisonment.  Each separate day or part thereof during which any
violation of said sections occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute
a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein
provided.



(Ord. O2012-06, passed 3-21-12)



Title 17:  Parks and Recreation



   Chapter



      170.   Parks and Recreation



Chapter 170:  Parks and Recreation



Section



General Provisions



   170-01   Desert Hills Golf Course hours



   170-02   Park closing regulations



   170-03   Consumption of alcohol in parks; glass beverage containers
prohibited



   170-04   Civic Center rules and regulations adopted; amendments



 



   170-99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to provide for lighting of public places, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(8)



   Power of city to enclose, improve, protect public grounds, plant trees,
see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(9)



   Power of city to lay out, establish, regulate the use of parks, see
A.R.S. § 9-276(A)(1)



   Power of city to engage in business enterprises of public character,
see A.R.S. §§ 9-511 et seq.



Cross reference:



   Parks, Arts, and Recreation Commission, see §§ 50-01 through 50-07



General Provisions



§ 170-01  Desert Hills Golf Course hours.



   The Desert Hills Municipal Golf Course shall be open to the public as
follows:



   (A)   Summer (May 1-September 30):  6:00 a.m. to dark (daily)
Wednesday through Monday; closed Tuesdays.



   (B)   Winter (October 1-April 30):  7:00 a.m. to dark (daily)
Monday through Sunday.



('80 Code, § 21-2)  (Ord. 2094, passed 10-20-82)



§ 170-02  Park Closing Regulations.



   (A)   All city parks, inclusive of all adjoining parking areas which
are provided for parking for park users, are closed to the public from 11:00
p.m. to one hour prior to sunrise daily.



   (B)   All city athletic fields and recreation centers and gymnasiums
which may be located adjacent to park properties are excluded from this
provision when they are being provided for programs and/or activities which
are co-sponsored or sponsored by the City of Yuma Special Services Department.



   (C)   Special permits granted by the city for overnight camping in
parks are not subject to this section.



   (D)   A CITY PARK is defined as an area of land owned, leased, or
operated by the city and developed for recreational use by the general public
within the city limits.



('80 Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. 2337, passed 11-19-86; Ord. 2609, passed
4-21-93)  Penalty, see § 170-99



§ 170-03  Consumption of Alcohol in Parks; Glass Beverage Containers
Prohibited.



   (A)   Alcoholic beverages defined.  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES shall
encompass all those items falling within the definition of BEER, SPIRITUOUS
LIQUOR, and WINE, as defined in A.R.S. § 4-101.



   (B)   Park classifications.



      (1)   Mini-park.  Local and close to home space. 
Specialized facilities that serve a concentrated or limited population or
specific group such as tots or senior citizens.  Service area for this type
of park is less than one-fourth mile.  The size of the park is less than one
acre.  The desirable characteristics are close to neighborhoods and in close
proximity to apartment complexes.



      (2)   Neighborhood park.  An area for intense recreational
activities such as field games, court games, crafts, playground apparatus
area, skating, picnicking, wading pools, and the like.  Service area for
this type of park is between one-fourth to one-half mile radius to serve a
population up to 5,000 people in a neighborhood.  The desirable size is from
one to 15 acres.  The desirable characteristics are suited for intense
development and easily accessible to the neighborhood population
geographically centered with safe walking and bike access.  May be developed
as a school park facility.



      (3)   Community parks/specialized facilities.  An area of
diverse environmental quality.  These parks may include areas suited for
intense recreational facilities such as athletic complexes and large swimming
pools.  These areas may be ones of natural quality or outdoor recreation
such as walking, viewing, sitting, picnicking, and other passive
activities.  It may be all or any of the combination of the above depending
on the site suitability and community need.  The service area to the
community for this type of park is one to two miles and the size is from 15
to 25 acres.  Community parks may also include features such as water bodies
and areas suited for intense development.  These parks are easily accessible
to the neighborhood served.



      (4)   Regional/metropolitan park.  An area of natural or
ornamental quality for outdoor recreation such as picnicking, play areas,
boating, fishing, swimming, walking, and camping.  The service area for this
type of park is one-hour driving time.  A park of this nature will generally
service several communities.  The park size is from 25 to 200 acres. 
Regional/metropolitan parks may also include features that are contiguous to
or encompassing natural resources.



   (C)   Consumption prohibited.  The consumption of alcoholic
beverages is prohibited at all mini and neighborhood parks.  The consumption
of alcoholic beverages may be permitted at community and regional parks by
permit.



   (D)   Permit authorization.  The Parks and Recreation Department is
empowered to issue permits authorizing the consumption and possession of beer
or malt liquor in community and regional parks and to adopt rules and
procedures for the issuance of such permits.  Nothing herein, however, shall
be deemed to authorize the consumption and possession of any alcoholic
beverage in community and regional parks which is prohibited by state law.



   (E)   Exception.  The following areas are exempt from the
consumption and permitting provisions of this section:



      (1)   Those areas specified as the premises covered by the
City of Yuma liquor license.



      (2)   The Arroyo Dunes Golf Course.



      (3)   Caballero Park.



      (4)   Other city facilities where special permits have been
obtained pursuant to the City of Yuma Rules and Regulations for Parks and
Recreational Facilities.



   (F)   Glass beverage containers prohibited.  It shall be unlawful
for any person to have a glass beverage container in his possession in any
public park under the jurisdiction of the city.



('80 Code, § 21-6)  (Ord. 2609, passed 4-21-93)  Penalty, see § 170-99



§ 170-04  Civic Center Rules and Regulations Adopted; Amendments.



   (A)   The rules and regulations, standard operating procedures
reference liquor and fee schedules of the Yuma Civic and Convention Center on
file with the City Clerk and each and all of the rules and regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said documents are hereby
adopted as if set forth in full herein. ('80 Code, § 21-39)  (Ord. 1381,
passed 9-18-74; Res. 2064, passed 8-16-78; Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



   (B)   The rules and regulations, standard operating procedures and
fee schedules for the Yuma Civic and Convention Center may be amended from
time to time by the Council by resolution. ('80 Code, § 21-40)  (Ord. 1381,
passed 9-18-74)



Charter reference:



   Power of city to engage in commercial pursuits, see Charter Art. III,
§ 15



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to engage in business, see A.R.S. §§ 9-511 et seq.



   Power of city to regulate use of public grounds, see A.R.S. §
9-276(A)(1)



§ 170-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter,
any person, or corporation, who shall violate any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as
provided in § 10-99 of this code. ('80 Code, § 21-1)  (Ord. 2094, passed
10-20-82)



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 170-02 of this
chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine
not to exceed $1,000 and a maximum of ten days in jail, or by both fine and
imprisonment. ('80 Code, § 21-5)  (Ord. 2337, passed 11-19-86; Ord. 2609,
passed 4-21-93)



Title 19:  Public Works



   Chapter



      190.   Garbage and Refuse



      191.   Industrial Wastes and Other Wastewater Discharges



      192.   Stormwater Runoff in New Developments



      193.   Water and Sewers



      194.   Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination



      195.   Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff



Chapter 190:  Garbage and Refuse



Section



General Provisions



   190-01   Definitions



Collection and Disposal Generally



   190-15   Definitions



   190-16   Authority to collect



   190-17   Unlawful acts



   190-18   Enforcement



   190-19   Receptacles required; specifications



   190-20   Bulk rubbish



   190-21   Prohibited substances for deposit



   190-22   Condemnation and removal of receptacles



   190-23   Responsibility for damage to city owned containers



Residential Collection and Disposal



   190-35   Placing containers for pickup



   190-36   Location of city receptacles



   190-37   Refuse containers



   190-38   Upgrading service to commercial



Commercial Collection and Disposal



   190-50   Authority to contract for services and containers



   190-51   Receptacles; location



   190-52   Cleanliness



Fees and Charges



   190-65   Rates established



   190-66   When fees payable; late charges



   190-67   Fees are personal debt; collection



   190-68   Contents of notice of lien



   190-69   Fees constitute lien



   190-70   Inferiority of lien



   190-71   Formal requirements of lien; filing



   190-72   Duration of lien



   190-73   Release upon payment of lien



   190-74   Multiple liens



   190-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power to provide for general welfare, see Charter Art. III, § 1



   Abate nuisances, see Charter Art. III, § 5



   Require removal of rubbish, weeds, debris from private premises, see
Charter Art. III, § 6



Statutory reference:



   Solid waste management, see A.R.S. §§ 49-701 et seq.



General Provisions



§ 190-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LITTER.  Rubbish, trash, weeds, grass, refuse or other waste
materials, filth and debris which if thrown, deposited or accumulated as
herein prohibited shall constitute a hazard to the public health and
safety.  It shall also include all putrescible and nonputrescible solid
wastes, including garbage, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals and solid
market and industrial wastes and combustible and non-combustible wastes
including paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, construction
materials, discarded household furniture and appliances, abandoned vehicles
or parts thereof, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
any other accumulation of wastes, filth or debris.



   PRIVATE PREMISES.  Any private property, including vacant land, a
dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly
or in part for private residential purposes, or for commercial use whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any tract, lot, yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps or
vestibules belonging or appurtenant to such vacant land, dwelling, house,
building or other structures.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.



('80 Code, § 14-1)  (Ord. 1170, passed 10-15-69)



Collection and Disposal Generally



§ 190-15  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  Any right-of-way, public utility easement, or public way
commonly used for utility or public access.



   ASSESSMENT.  The fee that is or may be imposed for the recovery of
refuse collection incurred for benefiting particular property of any person
which is levied on pursuant to this subchapter.



   BRUSH.  Tree limbs and shrubbery clippings or prunings exceeding four
feet in length.



   BULK RUBBISH.  Wooden or cardboard boxes, crates, appliances, large
items of household furniture, and other refuse items which by size, shape or
weight are not readily containable.



   COLLECTION EMPLOYEE.  Any individual employed by the city for the
purpose of effectuating the provisions of this subchapter.



   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes, but is not limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Any establishment whose primary function or activity is
for production of income.



      (2)   Governmental agencies including federal, state, county
and city.



      (3)   Organizations, such as:  service, fraternal, religious,
charitable and any other similar types.



      (4)   Multiple dwelling establishments encompassing three or
more units, such as:  RV parks, mobile home parks, apartment complexes,
motels and hotels.  Exceptions to this requirement are individually owned
and occupied units such as:  mobile home subdivisions, townhouses,
condominiums, cooperatives, and planned unit developments.



   COMMERCIAL REFUSE GENERATOR.  Any person in charge of owning, leasing,
renting or occupying any business, industrial or commercial building other
than a private residence, including, but not limited to, a store, office,
factory, hotel, tourist court, motel, motor court, motor hotel, trailer
court, apartment hotel or residential building ordinarily leased for a period
of less than three months.



   CONSTRUCTION WASTE.  Material from construction, remodeling,
construction site preparation, including, but not limited to, rocks, trees,
debris, dirt, brick, fill, plaster and all types of scrap building materials.



   CONTAINABLE RUBBISH.  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes,
including, but not limited to, wrapped garbage, wrapped small dead animals,
wrapped or boxed ashes, waste paper, excelsior, rags, bottles, crockery,
bedding, clothing, carpets, leather, tin cans, metal scraps, small light
weight mechanical parts, wood or metal shavings, floor sweepings, grass and
weed clippings, twigs, tree limbs not exceeding four feet in length, and
other similar waste or debris.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The head of the Department of Public Works
or his or her duly authorized representative.



   FILTH.  Manure, excrement or similar substance.



   GARBAGE.  Putrescible and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   LIEN.  A charge which attaches in favor of the city to real property
benefited by the collection of any brush, trash, bulk rubbish, filth,
construction waste or refuse; said lien also attaches to any other real or
personal property of a person or any refuse generator, owning or in charge of
benefited property, to secure the payment of unpaid monthly collection costs
as hereinafter described.



   OPEN AREA.  Any park, street, alley, gutter, sidewalk, sewer,
boulevard, greenbelt, square, vacant lot, space, ground or other areas where
refuse may accumulate.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, institution
or other entity acting as principal, agent, officer, servant or employee for
himself or itself, or for any other individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, institution or other entity, who owns, leases, rents or occupies
any real property within the city limits.



   PROHIBITED SUBSTANCE.  Any liquid, solid or gas with an ignition
temperature or flash point of less than 200 degrees Fahrenheit (93.3 degrees
Celsius) including, but not limited to, gasoline, benzine, naphtha, or other
flammable or explosive; any material having a pH lower than five and one-half
or higher than nine or having any other corrosive or toxic property that
could be injurious or hazardous to city collection employees, or the public
in general, or which could cause damage to facilities and equipment; any
substance that is noxious or malodorous to the human senses that is subject
to depriving a neighborhood or any number of persons of the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property; or any hyperdermic needle, syringe or
contaminated or disease-infested substance or material; or any other material
or object by which through shape, appendages or explosive nature could pose
substantial hazard to collection employees, collection equipment or others
during handling for collection or disposal, such as but not limited to items
of sharp wood, metal, plastic or glass which protrude from the containers and
fluorescent and television tubes.  Materials regulated by the Environmental
Protection Agency, RCRA 1976, Subtitle C, Hazardous Waste Management,
Sections 3001 through 3020 as amended.



   REFUSE.  All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, sweepings, dead animals,
abandoned, wrecked or junked vehicles or parts thereof; brush, and
containable rubbish; filth, construction waste and prohibited substances when
these terms are not specifically noted in this subchapter.



   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE GENERATOR.  Any person in charge of, owning,
leasing, renting or occupying any building or buildings used solely for a
family or private residential domicile, including, but not limited to, single
and multiple family dwelling units, apartments, townhouses cooperatives,
condominiums, board and rooming houses, trailers and/or mobile homes.



   TRASH.  Rubbish, waste, debris or refuse.



   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any animal of a vicious species or of a domesticated
species, including, but not limited to, dogs and cats which, without
provocation, is prone or subject to attacking human beings.



('80 Code, § 14-18)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2131, passed 6-15-83;
Ord. 2266, passed 6-5-85; Ord. 2452, passed 7-6-89; Ord. 2531, passed 8-21-91)



§ 190-16  Authority to Collect.



   The city, its duly authorized representative, servants or employees
have the exclusive right to collect refuse within the city without limitation
to the city's authorization of collectors by license, franchise, permit or
contract.  This exclusive right to collect refuse does not include
roll-on/roll-off collection and disposal service.



('80 Code, § 14-19)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2605, passed 2-3-93)



§ 190-17  Unlawful Acts.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to:



   (A)   Place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or
private property not owned or under its control.



   (B)   Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped putrescible waste in
any refuse container, unless all liquid shall have been drained therefrom.



   (C)   Place or cause to be placed more than a limited amount of
filth in a container.  Limits to be set by the Director of Public Services
or his duly authorized representative.



   (D)   Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped filth in any refuse
container, unless the container is designed for and used only for that
purpose.



   (E)   Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped small, dead animal
in a refuse container.



   (F)   Fail to remove and dispose of construction waste within 30
days after it is generated, by means other than city owned containers and
city forces, prior to:



      (1)   Final building inspection.



      (2)   Clearance of public utilities.



      (3)   Issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



   (G)   Place or cause to be placed refuse in a container not owned or
maintained by him or designated for his use.



   (H)   Burn or cause to be burned any refuse without the written
permission of the Fire Chief.



   (I)   Permit or cause, wilfully or negligently, the escape or flow
of water in such quantity as to result in flooding and/or impeding of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, thereby causing damage to public
rights-of-way, and/or creating a hazard to such traffic and a threat to the
public health, safety and welfare.



   (J)   Fail to restrain any vicious animal and prevent interference
with collection employees acting in the course of their duties.



   (K)   Close or obstruct any right-of-way unless a special permit has
been granted by the Director of Public Services at least three days prior to
closing the right-of-way, street or alley.



   (L)   Remove or pilfer refuse or waste from any container for
salvage or scavenger purposes or mutilate and damage containers and wilfully
scatter refuse and wastes contained therein for any reason.



   (M)   Failure for any person to maintain those areas in the streets
or alleys between their property lines and to the center line of the
right-of-way abutting their property free and clear of any litter, stored
material, construction material, trees, bushes or other potential hazards to
public health, safety and welfare.



   (N)   Remove, haul or cause to be removed or hauled, any refuse on
or along any city right-of-way, street or alley, unless the same is contained
in watertight containers so constructed as to prevent any such refuse from
falling, leaking or spilling therefrom.



('80 Code, § 14-20)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2131, passed 6-15-83;
Ord. 2266, passed 6-5-85)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-18  Enforcement.



   It is the duty of the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative to enforce the terms of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 14-21)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2531, passed 8-21-91)



§ 190-19  Receptacles Required; Specifications.



   (A)   Required.  It shall be the responsibility of every person,
commercial or residential refuse generator to place, or cause to be placed,
all refuse accumulating on the premises in suitable receptacles or
containers, approved by the Director of Public Works, whether the receptacles
or containers are provided by such person, a contractor, or the city. 
Roll-on/roll-off containers shall not be used for collection and disposal of
garbage as defined by § 190-15. ('80 Code, § 14-22)



   (B)   Specification.  All refuse receptacles and containers,
approved or specified by the city shall be waterproof, equipped with fitted
covers, or securely tied, as the type approved for use may require, to
provide resistance to animals, insects, varmints and moisture. ('80 Code, §
14-23)



(Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2605, passed 2-3-93)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-20  Bulk Rubbish.



   (A)   Pickup.  Bulk rubbish, except for roll-on/roll-off
containers, will be collected by the city.  The generator shall call the
Director of Public Works for special collection of such items, and the
Director of Public Works shall establish the schedule for the collection. 
Bulk rubbish for special collection will be placed by the generator on the
day scheduled for its collection in the alley at the rear or side of his
property, or if there is no alley, at the curbline of the street fronting his
property, or as directed by the Director of Public Works.  Special
collection of bulky, heavy or uncontainable refuse is subject to the
limitations of this subchapter, and shall be at the rate as established by
resolution of the Council. ('80 Code, § 14-24)



   (B)   Oversized; overweight items.  Brush, tree trimmings, large
limbs, tree trunks and stumps, all of which exceed four feet in length, two
feet in diameter, or 50 pounds in weight per unit or bundle will not be
collected by the city.  The generator shall reduce the size and weight of
such items to the specified limits or make other arrangements for commercial
or private collection and disposal. ('80 Code, § 14-25)



   (C)   Dangerous plants.  Century plants, cacti, prickly pear and
similar plants hazardous to collection personnel shall be contained in
lengths less than four feet, bundled and tied in protective covering, or
contained in cardboard boxes. ('80 Code, § 14-26)



(Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2131, passed 6-15-83; Ord. 2605, passed
2-3-93)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-21  Prohibited Substances for Deposit.



   (A)   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any refuse
container which is serviced by the city any prohibited substance or
material.  All prohibited substances shall be separated and placed in
separate containers which shall be clearly identified.



   (B)   Every refuse generator shall call the director of public
services for special collection of these items; provided, however, that this
section shall not apply to any refuse generator who has secured the prior
written approval of the Director of Public Services or other duly authorized
agency acting for and in behalf of the city, for otherwise disposing of
prohibited substances.



('80 Code, § 14-27)  (Ord. 2131, passed 6-15-83)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-22  Condemnation and Removal of Receptacles.



   All privately owned containers, stands, racks, enclosures, or
receptacles in the alley not of an approved type or that are no longer
sanitary or are hazardous to handle, shall be condemned by the Director of
Public Services.  A tag shall be affixed with the date of the action and a
listing, of the reasons for the condemnation.  If the container, stand,
rack, enclosure or receptacle is not removed from service by the owner within
seven days of notice of condemnation, the city shall remove and destroy the
receptacle.  The property owner may make a request to the Sanitation
Division for hearing within the seven-day period objecting to the
condemnation and upon such request a hearing shall be held before the
Sanitation Superintendent.



('80 Code, § 14-28)  (Ord. 2131, passed 6-15-83; Ord. 2266, passed 6-5-85)



§ 190-23  Responsibility for Damage to City Owned Containers.



   Customer users shall assume full responsibility for any damages, other
than normal wear and tear, to containers assigned to them and shall pay all
costs for actual repairs required in connection therewith.  This encompasses
damages resulting from negligence or abuse by the user.



('80 Code, § 14-29)  (Ord. 2266, passed 6-5-85)



Residential Collection and Disposal



§ 190-35  Placing Containers for Pickup.



   Residential refuse generators shall place refuse containers on the
scheduled collection days at the curbline of the street fronting their
property or in the alleys at the rear or side of their property.  Actual
location and positioning of containers, whether street or alley, shall be as
designated and specified by the Director of Public Works in conformity with
the method of collection at curbline of any street prior to 6:00 p.m. on the
day preceding the day of collection; and after such containers are emptied,
they should be removed immediately or no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of
collection.



('80 Code, § 14-38)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2531, passed
8-21-91)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-36  Location of City Receptacles.



   City-owned containers shall be distributed and positioned as scheduled
by the Director of Public Works.  Containers serving more than one residence
shall be positioned along rear or side alleys not more than 100 feet from the
property line of any residence served.  Containers so positioned shall not
be moved to any other location or repositioned in any manner unless approved
by the Director of Public Works.  If there are no alleys, individual,
portable containers may be supplied by the city.



('80 Code, § 14-39)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2266, passed 6-5-85;
Ord. 2531, passed 8-21-91)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-37  Refuse Containers.



   (A)   New subdivisions.  It shall be the responsibility of the
owner or developer of all new subdivisions and developments within the city
to provide at his expense the required number and type of refuse containers
as determined and approved by the Director of Public Services, to facilitate
maximum estimated occupancy of the development, and said refuse containers
shall become the property of the city. ('80 Code, § 14-40)



   (B)   Privately owned weight.  Residential refuse generators, not
equipped or utilizing city-owned containers, shall place containable refuse
and rubbish in cardboard boxes and/or containers approved by the city which
shall not exceed a gross weight of 50 pounds shall be suitable and safe for
handling by collection personnel. ('80 Code, § 14-41)



   (C)   City-owned; weight.  To ensure optimal use of the city-owned
containers and the ancillary equipment used therewith, the contents of the
individual containers shall not exceed 500 pounds weight limit. ('80 Code, §
14-42)



   (D)   Cleanliness.  Each residential refuse generator is
responsible for maintenance of the sanitary condition of containers. ('80
Code, § 14-43)



(Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2131, passed 6-15-83)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-38  Upgrading Service to Commercial.



   The Director of Public Works may require any residential generator who
regularly or habitually exceeds 90 gallon capacity or 150 pounds of refuse
within a collection period, or any resident who regularly generates refuse
requiring special handling, or regularly abuses or violates the provisions of
this subchapter, to use a commercial disposal service or make other
arrangements for refuse collection services.



('80 Code, § 14-44)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2531, passed 8-21-91)



Commercial Collection and Disposal



§ 190-50  Authority to Contract for Services and Containers.



   Commercial refuse generators may, by contract, receive city refuse
collection services and city-owned containers.  Commercial refuse generators
not equipped or utilizing city-owned containers may contract for placement of
all containable solid waste, other than garbage as defined by § 190-15, in
approved roll-on/roll-off containers provided by contractors other than the
city.



('80 Code, § 14-56)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2266, passed 6-5-85;
Ord. 2605, passed 2-3-93)



§ 190-51  Receptacles; Location.



   Commercial refuse generators shall provide suitable and sufficient
storage facilities for refuse receptacles and shall provide unobstructed
access for the collection vehicle.  Commercial refuse generators shall
include in any development, reconstruction, remodeling, or site
modifications, provisions for refuse receptacle storage and collection
facilities conforming to city specifications for such facilities.  These
provisions shall include location of the storage facility upon the
generator's property with adequate access for collection vehicles.  This
facility may be screened, but if visible from a road, street, parking area,
or any other area in use by the general public, such facility shall be in an
enclosure in accordance with city specifications for refuse enclosures. 
Refuse collection services will be provided only within the approved area or
enclosure, and such facility shall not be used for any other purpose. 
Refuse generators shall keep the area or enclosure clean and free of spillage
or accumulated material, and in good repair and operating condition.



('80 Code, § 14-57)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2531, passed
8-21-91)  Penalty, see § 190-99



§ 190-52  Cleanliness.



   All commercial refuse generators shall maintain their alleys and the
area surrounding the refuse containers free from refuse and other potential
hazards to the public health, safety or welfare.  Where unusual or
inordinate waste material is generated, special collections shall be arranged
with the city.



('80 Code, § 14-58)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2131, passed
6-15-83)  Penalty, see § 190-99



Fees and Charges



§ 190-65  Rates Established.



   (A)   Periodically the City Council, by resolution, may establish
rates and standards appropriate for those rates for the various categories of
refuse collection and disposal services.



   (B)   The rates charged for collection and disposal services shall
be uniform for the various classes of users.



('80 Code, § 14-71)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75; Ord. 2531, passed 8-21- 91;
Res. R2018-002, passed 3-21-18)



Charter reference:



   Power to charge for services rendered by city, see Charter Art. III, §
10



§ 190-66  When Fees Payable; Late Charges.



   All charges shall become due and payable at such time as shall be
established by resolution of the Council, and if such charges are not paid
within 20 days when the same shall become due and payable, a penalty of ten
percent shall be added thereto.



('80 Code, § 14-72)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-67  Fees are Personal Debt; Collection.



   Every charge, rental or collection fee levied by or pursuant to this
subchapter shall become, from and after the time it is due and payable, a
personal debt of the person, receiving collection service, and may be
collected by civil suit instituted in the name of the city, by its city
attorney, upon the request of the City Administrator at any time after the
penalty as provided herein attaches to the aforesaid charges, rentals or
fees.  Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the remedy
provided by this section shall cumulate and other remedies provided under
this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 14-73)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-68  Contents of Notice of Lien.



   Notice of lien shall contain at least the following information:



   (A)   Name of person, commercial or residential generator owing said
charge, rental or collection fee.



   (B)   The amount owed.



   (C)   The penalty accrued to date.



   (D)   The calendar period(s) for which said charges, rentals or
collection fees are due and owing.



   (E)   A statement that the city claims a lien therefor.



('80 Code, § 14-74)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-69  Fees Constitute Lien.



   A right to a lien shall arise immediately upon the providing of
collection service.  If said charge, rental or collection fee is not paid 30
days after it has become due and payable, the city may issue a notice and
claim of lien.



('80 Code, § 14-75)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-70  Inferiority of Lien.



   The lien established by this subchapter shall be subject and inferior
to the lien for general taxes and to all prior recorded mortgages and
encumbrances of record.



('80 Code, § 14-76)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-71  Formal Requirements of Lien; Filing.



   The notice and claim of lien shall be issued under the official seal of
the city, signed by the Mayor and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.



('80 Code, § 14-77)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-72  Duration of Lien.



   A lien claimed under this subchapter shall not continue for more than
three years after it has been recorded, unless an action is brought within
such period to enforce the lien.



('80 Code, § 14-78)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-73  Release Upon Payment of Lien.



   Any lien claimed pursuant to this subchapter shall, upon payment of the
entire amount due, be released by the city in the same manner as mortgages
and judgments are released.



('80 Code, § 14-79)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-74  Multiple Liens.



   A prior lien, recorded for the purposes of this subchapter, shall not
constitute a bar to the recordation of a subsequent lien or liens for such
purposes.



('80 Code, § 14-80)  (Ord. 1417, passed 6-4-75)



§ 190-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 14-2)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 191:  Industrial Wastes and Other Wastewater Discharges



Section



   191-01   General Provisions



   191-02   General sewer use requirements



   191-03   Pretreatment of wastewater



   191-04   Individual wastewater discharge permits and general permits



   191-05   Individual wastewater discharge and general permit issuance



   191-06   Reporting requirements



   191-07   Compliance monitoring



   191-08   Confidential information



   191-09   Publication of users in significant noncompliance



   191-10   Administrative enforcement remedies



   191-11   Judicial enforcement remedies



   191-12   Supplemental enforcement actions



   191-13   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



   191-14   Miscellaneous provisions



§ 191-01  General Provisions.



   (A)   Purpose and policy.



      (1)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users
of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water
Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations
(40 CFR Part 403).



      (2)   The objectives of this chapter are:



         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with operation of the
system;



         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
municipal wastewater system that will pass through the system, inadequately
treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the system;



         (c)   To protect both municipal wastewater system
personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;



         (d)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial
wastewater and sludge from the municipal wastewater system; and



         (e)   To enable the city to comply with its Arizona
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (AZPDES) permit conditions, Aquifer
Protection Permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any
other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is
subject.



      (3)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly
owned treatment works. The chapter:



         (a)   Authorizes the issuance of individual and/or
general wastewater discharge permits;



         (b)   Provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities;



         (c)   Establishes administrative review procedures;



         (d)   Requires user reporting; and



         (e)   Provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.



   (B)   Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Director of Utilities Department shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the
Director of Utilities may be delegated to a duly authorized city employee.



   (C)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
chapter, shall have the designated meanings:



      ADEQ. Arizona Department of Environmental Quality.



      AZPDES. Arizona Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.



      BMP. Best management practice.



      BMR. Baseline monitoring report.



      BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.



      CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.



      CIU. Categorical industrial user.



      COD. Chemical oxygen demand.



      EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.



      FOG. Fats, oils, and grease.



      gpd. Gallons per day.



      IU. Industrial user.



      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.



      NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.



      NSCIU. Non-significant categorical industrial user.



      O&M. Operation and maintenance.



      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.



      RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.



      SIU. Significant industrial user.



      SNC. Significant noncompliance.



      TDS. Total dissolved solids.



      TSS. Total suspended solids.



      U.S.C. United States Code.



   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality.



      AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER.



         (a)   If the user is a corporation:



            1.   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a
vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function,
or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or



            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing,
production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility
including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital
investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive
measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws
and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or
actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit or general permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the user is a federal, state, or local
governmental facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated
to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in subsections (a)
through (c), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
city.



      BASELINE MONITORING REPORT. A report submitted by industrial
users within 180 days after the effective date of an applicable standard
which indicates the compliance status of the user with the standard.



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b),
as amended. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, usually expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l) by weight.



      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any
portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) that
apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



      CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER. An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.



      CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD. A measure of the oxygen required
to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.



      CITY. The City of Yuma, Arizona.



      COMBINED WASTESTREAM FORMULA. Procedure for calculating
alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated
wastestream from a categorical industrial user is combined with other
wastestreams prior to treatment.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The City.



      DAILY MAXIMUM. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day.



      DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in
units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of
the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.



      DIRECTOR OF UTILITIES. The director of the Utilities Department
of the City of Yuma, Arizona or and authorized representative designated by
that office.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management
Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized
official of said agency.



      EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge that is not a “new
source.”



      FATS, OILS, AND GREASES (FOG). Organic polar compounds derived
from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. These substances may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0
degrees-65 degrees Celsius) and may be referred to as FOG. Commonly these
substances are byproducts generated by the practice of cooking or preparing
food.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.



      GREASE INTERCEPTOR. Outdoor or underground interceptors are
grease retention units of the outdoor or underground type and normally
consist of a minimum 500-gallon capacity or more but no greater than 2,000
gallons.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any non-domestic source.



      INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT. The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.



      INTERFERENCE. A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city’s AZPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
there under, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of
the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred
to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant
to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries
Act.



      LOCAL LIMIT. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general
and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b), as
amended.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



      MONTHLY AVERAGE. The sum of all “daily discharges” measured
during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges”
measured during that month.



      MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT. The highest allowable average of “daily
discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all “daily
discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
“daily discharges” measured during that month.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or



            2.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a New Source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of subsection (a)2. or 3. above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   Construction of a new source as defined under this
paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous onsite construction program;



               a.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment; or



               b.   Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures,
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this subsection.



      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the city’s AZPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental entities.



      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution,
expressed in standard units.



      POLLUTANT. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and
industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).



      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Pretreatment standards shall
mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and
local limits.



      PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in § 191-02(A).



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. A treatment works, as
defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the
city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a
treatment plant.



      SEPTIC TANK WASTE. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.



      SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). Except as provided in
subsections (c) and (d) of this definition, a significant industrial user is:



         (a)   An industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards; or



         (b)   An industrial user that:



            1.   Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more
of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling
and boiler blow-down wastewater);



            2.   Contributes a process waste stream which
makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or



            3.   Is designated as such by the city on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.



         (c)   The city may determine that an industrial user
subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant
categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a
finding that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons per
day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact
cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater, unless specifically included in the
pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:



            1.   The industrial user, prior to city’s
finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards and requirements;



            2.   The industrial user annually submits the
certification statement required in § 191-06(D)(2) [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)],
together with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and



            3.   The industrial user never discharges any
untreated concentrated wastewater.



         (d)   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in
subsection (b) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in
response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance
with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be
considered a significant industrial user.



      SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration, which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 191-02(A). A slug discharge is any discharge of a
non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to
cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, local limits or permit conditions.



      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.



      TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLID or SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended
matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater,
or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.



      USER or INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge.



      WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.



      WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of
the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and
industrial waste.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-02  General Sewer Use Requirements.



   (A)   Prohibited discharge standards.



      (1)   General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause
to be introduced, directly or indirectly, into the POTW any pollutant or
wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is
subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or
local pretreatment standards or requirements.



      (2)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause
to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or
wastewater:



         (a)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard
in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste-streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21;



         (b)   Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than
11.5, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment;



         (c)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will
cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no
case solids greater than one half inch (½") in any dimension;



         (d)   Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants
(BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants,
will cause interference with the POTW;



         (e)   Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150
degrees F (66 degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the
treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which
causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104 degrees F (40 degrees C);



         (f)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or
products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or
pass through;



         (g)   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems;



         (h)   Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by Director of Utilities in accordance with § 191-03(D);



         (i)   Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent
entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair;



         (j)   Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant’s effluent, thereby violating the city’s AZPDES permit;



         (k)   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;



         (l)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian
well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage,
condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Director of
Utilities;



         (m)   Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes;



         (n)   Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by Director of Utilities in a wastewater discharge permit;



         (o)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with
other sources, the treatment plant’s effluent to fail toxicity test;



         (p)   Detergents, surface-active agents, or other
substances which that might cause excessive foaming in the POTW;



         (q)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin in quantities that cause or contribute to obstructions;



         (r)   Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion
hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the
POTW, of more than 5% or any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit of the meter.



      (3)   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.



   (B)   National categorical pretreatment standards.



      (1)   Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment
standards found at 40 CFR §§ 405–471, as amended.



      (2)   If a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only
in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the Director of Utilities may impose equivalent concentration or
mass limits in accordance with §§ 191-02(B)(6) and 191-02(B)(7).



      (3)   If the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are
expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the
Director of Utilities may convert the limits to equivalent limitations
expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent
concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to
individual industrial users.



      (4)   If wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Director of Utilities shall impose an alternate limit in accordance with 40
CFR 403.6(e).



      (5)   (a)   A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a
categorical pretreatment standard in accordance with the following paragraphs
of this subsection.



         (b)   Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted
to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water
in accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain credit
for intake pollutants must make application to the city. Upon request of the
industrial user, the applicable standard will be calculated on a “net”
basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for pollutants in the intake water)
if the following requirements are met:



            1.   Either (i) the applicable categorical
pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide
that they shall be applied on a net basis; or (ii) the industrial user
demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable
categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated,
meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters;



            2.   Credit for generic pollutants such as
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and
grease should not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the
constituents of the generic measure in the user’s effluent are
substantially similar to the constituents of the generic measure in the
intake water or unless appropriate additional limits are placed on process
water pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere;



            3.   Credit shall be granted only to the extent
necessary to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to
a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be
necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with
standard(s) adjusted under this section; and



            4.   Credit shall be granted only if the user
demonstrates that the intake water is drawn from the same body of water as
that into which the POTW discharges. The city may waive this requirement if
it finds that no environmental degradation will result.



      (6)   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request
that the city convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination
to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within the discretion of
the Director of Utilities.



         (a)   The city may establish equivalent mass limits only
if the industrial user:



            1.   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ,
water conservation methods and technologies that substantially reduce water
use during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;



            2.   Currently use control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard, and not have used dilution as a substitute for
treatment;



            3.   Provide sufficient information to establish
the facility’s actual average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based
on data from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the
facility’s long-term average production rate. Both the actual average daily
flow rate and the long-term average production rate must be representative of
current operating conditions;



            4.   Not have daily flow rates, production levels,
or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits
are not appropriate to control the discharge; and



            5.   Have consistently complied with all
applicable categorical pretreatment standards during the period prior to the
industrial user’s request for equivalent mass limits.



         (b)   An industrial user subject to equivalent mass
limits must:



            1.   Maintain and effectively operate control and
treatment technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent
mass limits;



            2.   Continue to record the facility’s flow
rates through the use of a continuous effluent flow monitoring device;



            3.   Continue to record the facility’s
production rates and notify the Director of Utilities whenever production
rates are expected to vary by more than 20% from its baseline production
rates determined in subsection (B)(6)(a)3. of this section. Upon notification
of a revised production rate, the Director of Utilities will reassess the
equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to reflect changed
conditions at the facility; and



            4.   Continue to employ the same or comparable
water conservation methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to
§ 191-02(B)(6)(a)3. of this section so long as it discharges under an
equivalent mass limit.



         (c)   When developing equivalent mass limits, the
Director of Utilities:



            1.   Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by
multiplying the actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es)
of the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum and monthly
average standard for the applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the
appropriate unit conversion factor;



            2.   Upon notification of a revised production
rate, will reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as
necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility; and



            3.   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in
subsequent individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial
user’s actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a result of the
implementation of water conservation methods and technologies, and the actual
average daily flow rates used in the original calculation of the equivalent
mass limit were not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for
treatment pursuant to § 191-02(F). The industrial user must also be in
compliance with § 191-13(C) regarding the prohibition of bypass.



      (7)   The Director of Utilities may convert the mass limits of
the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. The conversion is at the discretion of the
Director of Utilities.



      (8)   Once included in its permit, the industrial user must
comply with the equivalent limitations developed in this § 191-02(B) in lieu
of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.



      (9)   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one
limit for calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit
for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average, limitations.
Where such standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure
shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent
limitation.



      (10)   Any industrial user operating under a permit
incorporating equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a
production-based standard shall notify the Director of Utilities within two
business days after the user has a reasonable basis to know that the
production level will significantly change within the next calendar month.
Any User not notifying the Director of Utilities of such anticipated change
will be required to meet the mass or concentration limits in its permit that
were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate.



   (C)   State pretreatment standards. Users shall comply with Arizona
State Pretreatment Standards authorized by A.R.S. Title 49, Chapter 2,
Article 3.1, as amended, and located in Title 18, Chapter 9, Article 9 of the
Arizona Administrative Code (“A.A.C.”), as amended. State requirements
and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more
stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.



   (D)   Local limits.



      (1)   The Director of Utilities is authorized to establish
local limits pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.5(c).



      (2)   The following pollutant limits are established to
protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations. If and when
federal or state regulatory agency regulations require a specific
pretreatment concentration for a specific industry, whichever is the more
stringent concentration level between these regulations and such federal or
state regulations will apply.



   Local Limits for Users of the Figueroa Avenue Water Pollution Control
Facility (WPCF)



 


Parameter

 
Daily Maximum Limit




Ammonia
 
260 mg/L


Arsenic
 
0.070 mg/L


Boron
 
2.5 mg/L


Cadmium
 
0.072 mg/L


Chromium (Total)
 
4.9 mg/L


Copper
 
1.9 mg/L


Cyanide
 
0.13 mg/L


Dissolved Sulfide
 
0.5 mg/L


Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons
 
100 mg/L


FOG, Polar
 
(See note 1) (See note 2)


FOG, Total
 
(See note 1) (See note 2)


Lead
 
0.52 mg/l


Mercury
 
0.0002 mg/L


Molybdenum
 
0.20 mg/L


Nickel
 
0.82 mg/L


Nitrogen (Total)
 
150 mg/L


pH
 
5 - 11.5 S.U.


Silver
 
2.9 mg/L


Selenium
 
0.020/0.011 mg/L (See note 3)


Thallium
 
0.027 mg/L


Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
 
Note 4


Total Suspended Solids (TSS)
 
Note 4


Total Dissolved Solids (TDS)
 
Note 4


Zinc
 
1.8 mg/L


Note 1: Discharges of oil and grease shall not result in accumulations which
either alone, or in combination with other wastes, are capable of obstructing
flow or that interfere with the operations or performance of the wastewater
collection system or the treatment facilities.


Note 2: Dischargers of polar FOG shall minimize free floating polar FOG.
Discharge of polar FOG in quantities that cause or contribute to obstructions
is strictly prohibited. Dischargers of free floating polar FOG shall be
required to install pretreatment devices such as grease removal equipment
sized according to city standards and institute other best management
practices.


Note 3: Industry specific selenium local limit of 0.020 mg/L to identified
selenium discharging significant industrial users (SIU). To counterbalance
the higher selenium limit for these discharges a lower limit of 0.011 mg/L
for other SIUs is required.


Note 4: The discharge of wastewater shall not cause the inhibition of
wastewater treatment or violation of any ADEQ requirements.




 



The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless
indicated otherwise. The Director of Utilities may impose mass limitations in
addition to the concentration-based limitations above.



      (3)   The Director of Utilities may develop best management
practices (BMPs), by ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits
and/or general permits, to implement local limits and the requirements of §
191-02(A).



   (E)   City’s right of revision. The city reserves the right to
establish, by chapter or in individual wastewater discharge permits and/or
general permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter.



   (F)   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process
water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge
limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard
or requirement. The Director of Utilities may impose mass limitations on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-03  Pretreatment of Wastewater.



   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve
compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the
prohibitions set out in § 191.02(A) of this chapter within the time
limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the Director of Utilities,
whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be
provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s sole expense. User shall
submit detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures to
the Director of Utilities for review. User shall not begin constructing any
such facilities until the plans and operating procedures for such facilities
are approved in writing by the Director of Utilities. The review of such
plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a
discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.



      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the Director of Utilities may
require users to:



         (a)   Restrict their discharge during peak flow periods;



         (b)   Designate that certain wastewater be discharged
only into specific sewers;



         (c)   Relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge;



         (d)   Separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams; and



         (e)   Such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user’s compliance with the requirements
of this chapter.



      (2)   The Director of Utilities may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on such person’s
property and at his or her expense, a suitable storage and flow-control
facility to ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge
permit and/or general permits may be issued solely for flow equalization.



      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided
when, in the sole opinion of Director of Utilities, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity
approved by Director of Utilities, and shall be located such that the unit is
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be
inspected, cleaned, and repaired by the user at user’s sole expense.



      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



   (C)   Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans. The
Director of Utilities shall evaluate whether each SIU needs an accidental
discharge/slug discharge control plan or other action to control slug
discharges. The Director of Utilities may require any user to develop, submit
for approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action that may be
necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively, the Director of
Utilities may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:



      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;



      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of
Utilities of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 191-06(F) of
this chapter; and



      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental
or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



   (D)   Hauled wastewater.



      (1)   Septic tank waste may only be introduced into the POTW
at locations designated by the Director of Utilities, and at such times as
are established by the Director of Utilities. Such waste shall not violate §
191-02 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the city. The
Director of Utilities may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits. The Director of Utilities also may
prohibit the disposal of septic tank waste.



      (2)   The Director of Utilities may require haulers of
industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The
Director of Utilities may require generators of hauled industrial waste to
obtain individual wastewater discharge permits. The Director of Utilities
also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of
hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Industrial waste haulers may only discharge loads at
locations designated by the Director of Utilities. No load may be discharged
without prior written consent of the Director of Utilities. The Director of
Utilities may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with
applicable standards. The Director of Utilities may require the industrial
waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge.



      (4)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking
form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification,
names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-04  Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits and General Permits.



   (A)   Wastewater analysis. If requested by the Director of
Utilities, a user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics
of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The Director of Utilities is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update this information.



   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
requirement.



      (1)   No significant industrial user shall discharge
wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater
discharge permit from the Director of Utilities, except that a significant
industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to § 191-04(C)
of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified
therein.



      (2)   The Director of Utilities may require users to obtain
individual wastewater discharge permits or general permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.



      (3)   Any violation of the terms and conditions of an
individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to
the sanctions set out in §§ 191-10 through 191-12 of this chapter.
Obtaining an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and
state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements
of federal, state, and local laws and regulations.



   (C)   Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting:
existing connections. Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general permit who was discharging wastewater into the
POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and who wishes to continue
such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after said date, apply
to the Director of Utilities for an individual wastewater discharge permit or
a general permit in accordance with § 191-04 (E) of this chapter, and shall
not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the
effective date of this chapter except in accordance with an individual
wastewater discharge permit or a general permit issued by the Director of
Utilities.



   (D)   Individual wastewater discharge and general permitting: new
connections. Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging
into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing
of such discharge. An application for this individual wastewater discharge
permit or general permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the
anticipated date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.



   (E)   Individual wastewater discharge and general permit application
contents.



      (1)   All users required to obtain an individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general permit must submit a permit application. Users
that are eligible may request a general permit under § 191-04(E). The
Director of Utilities may require users to submit the following information
as part of a permit application:



         (a)   Identifying information.



            1.   The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.



            2.   Contact information, description of
activities, facilities, and plant production processes on the premises;



         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



         (c)   Description of operations.



            1.   A brief description of the nature, average
rate of production (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include
a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW
from the regulated processes.



            2.   Types of wastes generated, and a list of all
raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or
could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW;



            3.   Number and type of employees, hours of
operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;



            4.   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



            5.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and
plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;



         (d)   Time and duration of discharges;



         (e)   The location for monitoring all wastes covered by
the permit;



         (f)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in § 191-02(B)(4) [40 CFR
403.6(e)].



         (g)   Measurement of pollutants.



            1.   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.



            2.   The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the Director of Utilities, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process.



            3.   Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.



            4.   The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
191-06(J). Where the standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by
the Director of Utilities or the applicable standards to determine compliance
with the standard.



            5.   Sampling must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in § 191-06(K).



         (h)   Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal
of an approved monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor
expected to be present in the discharge based on § 191-06(D)(2) [40 CFR
403.12(e)(2)].



         (i)   Any request to be covered by a general permit
based on § 191-04(F).



         (j)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary
by the Director of Utilities to evaluate the permit application.



      (2)   Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be
processed and will be returned to the user for revision.



   (F)   Wastewater discharge permitting: general permits.



      (1)   At the discretion of the Director of Utilities, the
Director of Utilities may use general permits to control a user’s
discharges to the POTW if all facilities to be covered by a general permit:



         (a)   Involve the same or substantially similar types of
operations;



         (b)   Discharge the same types of wastes;



         (c)   Require the same effluent limitations;



         (d)   Require the same or similar monitoring; and



         (e)   In the opinion of the Director of Utilities, are
more appropriately controlled under a general permit than under individual
wastewater discharge permits.



      (2)   To be covered by the general permit, the user must file
a written request for coverage that identifies its contact information,
production processes, the types of wastes generated, the location for
monitoring all wastes covered by the general permit, any requests in
accordance with § 191-06(D)(2) for a monitoring waiver for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, and any other
information the POTW deems appropriate. A monitoring waiver for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge is not effective
in the general permit until after the Director of Utilities has provided
written notice to the user that such a waiver request has been granted in
accordance with § 191-06(D)(2).



      (3)   The Director of Utilities will retain a copy of the (i)
general permit, (ii) documentation to support the POTW’s determination that
a specific user meets the criteria in § 191-04(F)(a) through (e) and
applicable state regulations, and (iii) a copy of the user’s written
request for coverage for three years after the expiration of the general
permit.



      (4)   The Director of Utilities may not control an SIU through
a general permit where the facility is subject to production-based
categorical pretreatment standards or categorical pretreatment standards
expressed as mass of pollutant discharged per day or for IUs whose limits are
based on the combined wastestream formula (§ 191-02(B)(4)) or net/gross
calculations (§ 191-02(B)(5)).



   (G)   Application signatories and certifications.



      (1)   All wastewater discharge permit applications, user
reports and certification statements must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the certification statement in §
191-06(N)(1).



      (2)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no
longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility
for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying
the requirements of this section must be submitted to the Director of
Utilities prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



      (3)   A facility determined to be a non-significant
categorical industrial user by the Director of Utilities must annually submit
the signed certification statement in § 191-06(N)(2).



   (H)   Individual wastewater discharge and general permit decisions.
The Director of Utilities shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. Within 45 days of receipt of a complete
permit application, the Director of Utilities shall determine whether to
issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit. The
Director of Utilities may deny any application for an individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general permit.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-05  Individual Wastewater Discharge and General Permit Issuance.



   (A)   Individual wastewater discharge and general permit duration.
An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall be issued
for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date
of the permit. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit
may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the
Director of Utilities. Each individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general permit will indicate a specific date upon which the permit will
expire.



   (B)   Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
contents. An individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit shall
include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the Director of
Utilities to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the
water body receiving the treatment plant’s effluent, protect worker health
and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.



      (1)   Individual wastewater discharge permits and general
permits must contain:



         (a)   A statement that indicates the wastewater
discharge permit issuance date, expiration date and effective date.



         (b)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit
is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with
§ 191-05(E) and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit.



         (c)   Effluent limits, including best management
practices, based on applicable pretreatment standards.



         (d)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on
federal, state, and local laws, rules, or regulations.



         (e)   The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring
for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge
in accordance with § 191-06(D)(2).



         (f)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local laws,
rules, or regulations.



         (g)   Requirements to control slug discharge, if
determined by the Director of Utilities to be necessary.



         (h)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Director
of Utilities (§ 191-06(D)(2)) must be included as a condition in the
user’s permit or other control mechanism.



      (2)   Individual wastewater discharge permits or general
permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:



         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;



         (b)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works;



         (c)   Requirements for the development and
implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including
management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;



         (d)   Development and implementation of waste
minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;



         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and
fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;



         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of
inspection and sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices;



         (g)   A statement that compliance with the individual
wastewater discharge permit or the general permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during
the term of the individual wastewater discharge permit or the general permit;
and



         (h)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
Director of Utilities to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.



   (C)   Permit issuance process.



      (1)   Public notification. The Director of Utilities shall
publish in either an official government publication and/or newspaper(s) of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice with the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, or on city’s website, a notice to issue
a pretreatment permit, at least 14 days prior to issuance. The notice shall
indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an address
where written comments may be submitted.



      (2)   Permit appeals. The Director of Utilities shall provide
public notice of the issuance of an individual wastewater discharge permit or
a general permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the Director
of Utilities to reconsider the terms of an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit within 30 days of notice of the permit’s
issuance.



         (a)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review
shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal.



         (b)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate
the individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit provisions
objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition,
if any, the appealing party seeks to place in the individual wastewater
discharge permit or a general permit.



         (c)   The effectiveness of the individual wastewater
discharge permit or general permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal.



         (d)   If the Director of Utilities fails to act within
60 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. A
decision not to reconsider an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general permit, not to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a
general permit, or not to modify an individual wastewater discharge permit or
a general permit shall be considered a final and conclusive administrative
action for purposes of judicial review.



         (e)   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the
final administrative individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit
decision must file a complaint with the Superior Court for Yuma County within
30 days of final administrative action.



   (D)   Permit modification.



      (1)   The Director of Utilities may modify an individual
wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to,
the following reasons:



         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state,
or local pretreatment standards or requirements;



         (b)   To address significant alterations or additions to
the user’s operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since
the time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;



         (c)   A change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



         (d)   Information indicating that the permitted
discharge poses a threat to the city’s POTW, city personnel, beneficial
disposal of the city’s biosolids, or the receiving waters;



         (e)   Violation of any terms or conditions of the
individual wastewater discharge permit;



         (f)   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose
all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any
required reporting;



         (g)   Revision of, or a grant of variance from
categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;



         (h)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit; or



         (i)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
191-05(E).



      (2)   The Director of Utilities may modify a general permit
for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



         (a)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state,
or local pretreatment standards or requirements;



         (b)   A change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;



         (c)   To correct typographical or other errors in the
individual wastewater discharge permit; or



         (d)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or
operation to a new owner or operator where requested in accordance with §
191-05(E).



   (E)   Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
statement of non-transferability.



      (1)   Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage
under general permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if
the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the Director of
Utilities and the Director of Utilities approves the individual wastewater
discharge permit or the general permit coverage transfer in writing. The
notice to the Director of Utilities must include a written certification by
the new owner or operator which:



         (a)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no
immediate intent to change the facility’s operations and processes;



         (b)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer
is to occur; and



         (c)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying
with the existing individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit.



      (2)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders
the individual wastewater discharge permit or coverage under the general
permit void as of the date of facility transfer.



   (F)   Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
revocation.



      (1)   The Director of Utilities may revoke an individual
wastewater discharge permit or coverage under a general permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:



         (a)   Failure to provide written notification to the
Director of Utilities of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the
changed discharge;



         (b)   Failure to provide prior notification to the
Director of Utilities of changed conditions pursuant to § 191-06(E);



         (c)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all
relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;



         (d)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and
certification statements;



         (e)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;



         (f)   Refusing to allow the Director of Utilities timely
access to the facility premises and records;



         (g)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;



         (h)   Failure to pay fines;



         (i)   Failure to pay sewer charges;



         (j)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;



         (k)   Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the
wastewater discharge permit application;



         (l)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer
of business ownership of a permitted facility; or



         (m)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or
requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the general
permit of this chapter.



      (2)   Individual wastewater discharge permits or coverage
under general permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or
transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater discharge permits
or general permits issued to a user are void upon the issuance of a new
individual wastewater discharge permit or a general permit to that user.



   (G)   Individual wastewater discharge permit and general permit
reissuance. A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit shall apply for individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in
accordance with § 191-04(E) of this chapter, a minimum of 90 days prior to
the expiration of the user’s existing individual wastewater discharge
permit or general permit.



   (H)   Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions.



      (1)   If another municipality, unincorporated area, sovereign
nation, or user contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Director of Utilities
shall enter into a contractual agreement with such contributing user.



      (2)   Prior to entering into an agreement required by
subsection (H)(1), above, the contributing user shall provide the Director of
Utilities with the following information:



         (a)   A description of the quality and volume of
wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing user;



         (b)   An inventory of all users located within the
contributing jurisdiction that are or will be discharging to the POTW; and



         (c)   Such other information as the Director of
Utilities may deem necessary.



      (3)   An agreement, as required by subsection (H)(1), above,
shall contain the following conditions:



         (a)   A requirement for the contributing user to adopt a
sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and local
limits, including required baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) which are at
least as stringent as those set out in § 191-02(D). The requirement shall
specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to
reflect changes made to the city’s ordinance or local limits;



         (b)   A requirement for the contributing user to submit
a revised industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis;



         (c)   A provision specifying which pretreatment
implementation activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit
or general permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be
conducted by the contributing user; which of these activities will be
conducted by Director of Utilities and which of these activities will be
conducted jointly by the contributing user and the Director of Utilities;



         (d)   A requirement for the contributing user to provide
the Director of Utilities with access to all information that the
contributing user obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;



         (e)   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the
contributing user wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;



         (f)   Requirements for monitoring the contributing user
discharge;



         (g)   A provision ensuring the Director of Utilities
access to the facilities of users located within the contributing
user/jurisdiction/municipality jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of
inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the Director
of Utilities; and



         (h)   A provision specifying remedies available for
breach of the terms of the agreement.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-06  Reporting Requirements.



   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Director of Utilities a report
which contains the information listed in subsection (A)(2), below. At least
90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources
that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an
applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Director of Utilities a
report which contains the information listed in subsection (A)(2), below. A
new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet
applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of
its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below.



         (a)   All information required in §§
191-04(E)(1)(a)1., 191-04(E)(1)(b), 191-04(E)(1)(c)1., and 191-04(E)(1)(f).



         (b)   Measurement of pollutants.



            1.   The user shall provide the information
required in § 191-04(E)(1)(g)1. through 4;



            2.   The user shall take a minimum of one
representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this section;



            3.   Samples should be taken immediately
downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment,
the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use
of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration
or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this
adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control
authority;



            4.   Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with § 191-06(J);



            5.   The Director of Utilities may allow the
submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long
as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial pretreatment measures;



            6.   The baseline report shall indicate the time,
date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that
such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and
expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.



         (c)   Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by
the user’s authorized representative as defined in § 191-01(D) and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.



         (d)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user
shall provide the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must
meet the requirements set out in § 191-06 (B).



         (e)   Signature and report certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with § 191-06 (N)(1) and
signed by an authorized representative.



   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by § 191-06 (A)(2)(d):



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



      (2)   No increment referred to in subsection (B)(1) above
shall exceed nine months; and



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the Director
of Utilities no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether the user
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps the user is taking to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Director of Utilities.



   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Director of Utilities a report containing the information described in
§§ 191-04(E)(1)(f) and (g) and 191-06 (A)(2)(b). For users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in § 191-02(B), the report shall contain a reasonable measure of
the user’s long-term production rate. For all other users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant
discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the report
shall include the user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling
period. The user shall sign and certify all compliance reports in accordance
with § 191-06 (N)(1). The user shall conduct all sampling in conformance
with § 191-06 (K).



   (D)   Periodic compliance reports. All SIUs shall submit periodic
compliance reports even if the SUI has been designated a non-significant
categorical industrial user under the provisions of § 191-06 (D)(3).



      (1)   Except as specified in § 191-06(D)(3), a SIU shall, at
a frequency determined by the Director of Utilities submit no less than twice
per year on dates specified in the individual wastewater discharge permits,
reports indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated
average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. In cases where the
pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice
(BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit
documentation required by the Director of Utilities or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.



      (2)   The city may authorize a significant industrial user
subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a
pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the significant
industrial user has demonstrated, through sampling and other technical
factors, that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in
the discharge, or that the pollutant is present only at background levels
from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities
of the significant industrial user [see 40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)]. This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:



         (a)   The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from
the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an
applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater;



         (b)   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the
duration of the effective period of the individual wastewater discharge
permit, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new
request for a waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit;



         (c)   In demonstrating that a pollutant is not present,
the industrial user shall provide data from at least one sampling of the
facility’s process wastewater that was taken prior to any treatment present
at the facility and that is a representative of all wastewater from all
processes;



         (d)   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed
in accordance with § 191-01(D)(3), and include the certification statement
set forth in § 191-06(N)(1);



         (e)   A significant industrial user may only use
non-detectable sample results as a demonstration that a pollutant is not
present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest
minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis;



         (f)   Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Director
of Utilities must be included as a condition in the significant industrial
user’s permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information
submitted by the significant industrial user in its request for the waiver
must be maintained by the Director of Utilities for three years after
expiration of the waiver;



         (g)   Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and
revision of the significant industrial user’s permit by the Director of
Utilities, the significant industrial user shall certify on each report, with
the statement in § 191-06(N)(3), that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in the significant industrial user’s waste stream due to
activities of the significant industrial user;



         (h)   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to
be present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the
significant industrial user’s operations, the significant industrial user
shall immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of § 191-06(D)(1),
or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the Director of
Utilities, and notify the Director of Utilities; and



         (i)   This provision does not supersede the
certification processes and requirements established in categorical
pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical
pretreatment standard.



      (3)   The user shall sign and certify all periodic compliance
reports in accordance with § 191-06(N)(1).



      (4)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user’s discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.



      (5)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location
more frequently than required by the Director of Utilities, using the
procedures prescribed in § 191-06(K), the results of this monitoring shall
be included in the report.



   (E)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user shall notify the
Director of Utilities in writing of any significant changes to the user’s
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its
wastewater at least 30 days before the change.



      (1)   The Director of Utilities may require the user to submit
such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
application under § 191-04(E).



      (2)   The Director of Utilities may issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit or a general permit under § 191-05(G) or modify
an existing wastewater discharge permit or a general permit under §
191-05(D) in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.



   (F)   Reports of potential problems.



      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited
to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that could
cause problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify
the Director of Utilities of the incident, including but not limited to the
location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known,
and corrective actions taken by the user.



      (2)   Within five days following such discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the Director of Utilities, submit a detailed written
report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken
by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which
might be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or
any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter, or any state or federal statute or regulation.



      (3)   The user shall permanently post a notice on the user’s
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the
event of a discharge described in subsection (F)(1), above. Employers shall
ensure that all employees, who could cause such a discharge to occur, are
advised of and properly trained regarding the emergency notification
procedure.



      (4)   Significant industrial users shall notify the Director
of Utilities immediately of any changes at significant industrial user’s
facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.



   (G)   Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to
obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the Director of Utilities as the Director of
Utilities may require.



   (H)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling
performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Director
of Utilities within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation or within 24
hours that user reasonably should be aware of the violation, whichever is
less. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Director of Utilities within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the user is not required
if (i) the city performs sampling at the user’s facility at least once a
month, (ii) the city performs sampling at the user between the time when the
initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user or the city
receives the results of this sampling, or (iii) the city has performed the
sampling and analysis in lieu of the user unless the city notifies the user
of the violation and requires the user to perform the repeat sampling and
analysis.



   (I)   Discharge of hazardous waste prohibition. Any material that
would be identified as hazardous waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 may not
be discharged or disposed of in a sewer.



   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, the
user shall perform the sampling and analyses by using validated analytical
methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the Director of Utilities or other parties approved
by EPA.



   (K)   Sample collection. Samples collected to satisfy reporting
requirements must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based on data
that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.



      (1)   Except as indicated in subsection (K)(2) and (3) below,
the user shall collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized in writing by the Director of Utilities. Where
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
Director of Utilities, the samples must be representative of the discharge.
Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part
136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a
24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the Director of Utilities, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with instantaneous limits.



      (2)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide,
total phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.



      (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring
and 90-day compliance reports required in §§ 191-06(A) and 191-06(C) [40
CFR 403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH,
cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for
facilities for which historical sampling data are available, Director of
Utilities may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by §
191-06(D) (40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h)), the industrial user is required
to collect the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.



   (L)   Date of receipt of reports. Written reports will be deemed to
have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not
mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility the date of receipt of the
report shall govern.



   (M)   Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of
this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter, any additional records of information obtained
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements, and documentation associated with best management practices
established under § 191-02(D)(3). Records shall include the date, exact
place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the
samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the
analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years;
except that this period shall be automatically extended for the duration of
any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Director of
Utilities.



   (N)   Certification statements.



      (1)   Certification of permit applications, user reports and
initial monitoring waiver. The following certification statement is required
to be signed by an authorized representative and submitted by (i) Users
submitting permit applications in accordance with § 191-04(G); (ii) Users
submitting baseline monitoring reports under § 191-06 (A)(2)(e); (iii) Users
submitting reports on compliance with the categorical pretreatment standard
deadlines under § 191-06 (C); (iv) Users submitting periodic compliance
reports required by § 191-06 (D)(1)-(4); and (v) Users submitting an initial
request to forego sampling of a pollutant on the basis of § 191-06 (D)(2)(d).



I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.



      (2)   Annual certification for non-significant categorical
industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical
industrial user by the Director of Utilities pursuant to § 191-01(D)
Definitions – Significant Industrial User and § 191-04(G)(3) must annually
submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the
signatory requirements in § 191-06(N). This certification must accompany an
alternative report required by the Director of Utilities:



Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
____, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the
period from __________, ________ to ________, ________ [months, days, year]:



(a)   The facility described as ____________________ [facility name] met
the definition of a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User as described
in § 191-01(D) Definitions – Significant Industrial User;



(b)   The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards and
requirements during this reporting period; and (c) the facility never
discharged more than 100 gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given
day during this reporting period.



This compliance certification is based on the following information.



________________________________________________



________________________________________________



      (3)   Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have
an approved monitoring waiver pursuant to § 191-06(D)(2) must certify on
each monitoring report that there has been no increase in the pollutant in
its wastestream due to activities of the user. The certification requirements
of this subsection may be fulfilled by including with the following statement
on each report.



Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR _______
[specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the
level of ______ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities
at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under §
191-06(D)(1).



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-07  Compliance Monitoring.



   (A)   Right of entry: inspection and sampling. The Director of
Utilities shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine
whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter and any
individual wastewater discharge permit or general permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the Director of Utilities ready access to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.



      (1)   Where a user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director of Utilities shall
be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific
responsibilities set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   The Director of Utilities shall have the right to set up
on the user’s property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user’s operations.



      (3)   The Director of Utilities may require the user to
install monitoring equipment as necessary at user’s facility. The
facility’s sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own
expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be
calibrated at least annually to ensure their accuracy.



      (4)   At the written or verbal request of the Director of
Utilities, user, at its own expense, shall promptly remove and not replace
any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled.



      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of
Utilities access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this
chapter.



      (6)   Monitoring facilities shall be constructed and located
so as to provide ample room to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples and analysis. Whether constructed on public or private property, the
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Director of
Utilities requirements as well as all applicable city laws and regulations,
including but not limited to the city’s construction standards and
specifications. User shall construct and maintain such facilities at the
user’s expense in such manner so as to enable the Director of Utilities to
perform independent monitoring activities.



   (B)   Search warrants. If user refuses to grant the Director of
Utilities access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof,
and the Director of Utilities is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe (i) that there may be a violation of this chapter; (ii) that there is
a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder; or (iii) to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, the Director of Utilities may
seek issuance of a search warrant from the Superior Court of Yuma County.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-08  Confidential Information.



   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge
permits, general permits, and monitoring programs, and from the Director of
Utilities inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the
public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director of Utilities, that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under
applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the
user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential,
the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret
processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall
be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses
related to the AZPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement
proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40
CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be
available to the public without restriction.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-09  Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance.



   The Director of Utilities shall publish annually, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant
noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any
other industrial user that violates subsections (C), (D) or (H) of this
section) and shall mean:



   (A)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined
here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude)
a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits as defined in § 191-02;



   (B)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product
of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous
limits, as defined by § 191-02 multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);



   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by § 191-02 (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the Director of Utilities determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass
through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general
public;



   (D)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
Director of Utilities exercise of the Director of Utilities’ emergency
authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;



   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;



   (F)   Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any
required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic
self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;



   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



   (H)   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Director of Utilities determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment
program.



(Ord, O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-10  Administrative Enforcement Remedies.



   (A)   Notification of violation. When the Director of Utilities
finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Director of Utilities may serve upon that user a written notice of
violation. Within ten days of the receipt of such notice, user shall submit
to the Director of Utilities an explanation of the violation and a plan for
the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific
required actions. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the user of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the
Director of Utilities to take any action, including emergency actions or any
other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.



   (B)   Consent orders. The Director of Utilities may enter into
consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such
documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to §§ 191-10(D) and 191-10(E) and shall be judicially
enforceable.



   (C)   Show cause hearing. The Director of Utilities may order a user
which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter,
an individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear
before the Director of Utilities and show cause why the proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the
time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons
for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be
served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt
requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served
on any authorized representative of the user and required by § 191-04(G)(1).
A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking
any other action against the user.



   (D)   Compliance orders. When the Director of Utilities finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, a general permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of
Utilities may issue an order, in writing, to the user responsible for the
discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified
time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided in
the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated pursuant to the all federal, state, and local laws and
regulations. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address
the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the
sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   (E)   Cease and desist orders. When the Director of Utilities finds
that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or
that the user’s past violations are likely to recur, the Director of
Utilities may issue an order to the user directing the user to cease and
desist all such violations and directing the user to:



      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements; and



      (2)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as
may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user.



   (F)   Administrative fines.



      (1)   When the Director of Utilities finds that a person has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of Utilities may fine such
person in an amount determined pursuant to the City Enforcement Response Plan
and penalty policy. For continuing violations, each day may constitute a
violation. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In
the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall
be assessed for each day during the period of violation. The Director of
Utilities may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions,
such as notices and orders, to the fine.



      (2)   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30
calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of 10% of the unpaid
balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per month or
part thereof until paid in full. A lien against the person's property may be
sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.



      (3)   Persons desiring to dispute such fines must file a
written request for the Director of Utilities to reconsider the fine along
with full payment of the fine amount within 15 days of being notified of the
fine. Where a request has merit, the Director of Utilities may convene a
hearing on the matter. In the event the person's appeal is successful, the
payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to
the person.



      (4)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.



   (G)   Emergency suspensions.



      (1)   The Director of Utilities may immediately suspend a
user’s discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which
reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Director of Utilities
may also immediately suspend a user’s discharge, after notice and
opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the
POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.



         (a)   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge
shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution upon receipt of
notification. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director of Utilities may take
such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream,
or endangerment to any individuals. The Director of Utilities may allow the
user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Utilities, that the period of endangerment
has passed, unless the termination proceedings in § 191-10(H) are initiated
against the user.



         (b)   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part,
for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed
written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Director of Utilities
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under §§
191-10(C) or 191-10(H).



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.



   (H)   Termination of discharge.



      (1)   In addition to the provisions in § 191-05(F), any user
who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:



         (a)   Violation of individual wastewater discharge
permit or general permit conditions;



         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of its discharge;



         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to
discharge;



         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s
premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or



         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §
191-02.



      (2)   Such user will be notified of the proposed termination
of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under §
191-10(C) why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Director of Utilities shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the user.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-11  Judicial Enforcement Remedies.



   (A)   Injunctive relief. When the Director of Utilities finds that a
user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter
191, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city
may petition the Superior Court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent
injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the individual wastewater discharge permit, the general
permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Chapter 191 on activities
of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to
conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not
be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a
user.



   (B)   Civil penalties.



      (1)   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this Chapter 191, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall, pursuant to A.R.S. § 49-391, as amended, be
liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $25,000 per violation, per
day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.



      (2)   The Director of Utilities may recover reasonable
attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with
enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the
cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.



      (3)   In determining the amount of civil liability, the Court
shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, those outlined in A.R.S. § 49-391, as amended, the extent of
harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation,
any economic benefit gained through the user’s violation, corrective
actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor
as justice requires.



      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar
against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.



   (C)   Criminal prosecution.



      (1)   A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this Chapter 191, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or
a general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1
Misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,500 per violation, per
day, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.



      (2)   A user who willfully or negligently introduces any
substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor and be subject to
a penalty of at least $2,500, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than
six months, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of
action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.



      (3)   A user who knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan,
or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
Chapter 191, individual wastewater discharge permit, or general permit, or
order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Chapter 191
shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class 1 Misdemeanor and be subject to
a penalty of at least $2,500 per violation, per day, or be subject to
imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.



   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
Chapter 191 are not exclusive. The Director of Utilities may take any, all,
or any combination of these remedies against a noncompliant user. Enforcement
of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city’s
enforcement response plan. However, the Director of Utilities may take other
action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Director
of Utilities is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against
any noncompliant user.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-12  Supplemental Enforcement Actions.



   (A)   Penalties for late reports. A penalty shall be assessed to any
user for each day that a report required by this Chapter 191, a permit or
order issued hereunder is late, beginning five days after the date the report
is due. Actions taken by the Director of Utilities to collect late reporting
penalties shall not limit the Director of Utilities authority to initiate
other enforcement actions that may include penalties for late reporting
violations.



   (B)   Performance bonds. The Director of Utilities may decline to
issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit or a general
permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, a previous
general permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to
the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Director of
Utilities to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.



   (C)   Liability insurance. The Director of Utilities may decline to
issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge or a general permit to
any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a
previous individual wastewater discharge permit, a previous general permit or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
unless the user first submits proof that user has obtained financial
assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its
discharge.



   (D)   Payment of outstanding fees and penalties. The Director of
Utilities may decline to issue or reissue an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding
fees, fines or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this
chapter, a previous individual wastewater discharge permit, or a previous
general permit or order issued under this chapter.



   (E)   Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, a general permit, order issued under this chapter, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may sever water service
to the user. Service will recommence, at the user’s expense, only after the
user has satisfactorily demonstrated user’s ability to comply.



   (F)   Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this
chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, general permit, order
issued under this chapter, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as
directed by the Director of Utilities. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of Title 13 of the City Code
governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.



   (G)   Contractor listing. Users which are not compliant with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to
receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city.
Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by a
user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or
requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the Director of Utilities.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-13  Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section, upset means an
exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors
beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
all of the requirements of subsection (A)(3), below, are met.



      (3)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user submitted the following information to
the Director of Utilities within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five days):



            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact
dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance
is expected to continue; and



            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (5)   Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (6)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of the user’s treatment facility
until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other
things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced,
lost, or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against the user for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in § 191-02(A)(1) or the
specific prohibitions in § 191-02(A)(2)(a) through (r) if the user can prove
that the user did not know, or have reason to know, that the user’s
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:



      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge
when the city was regularly in compliance with its AZPDES permit, and in the
case of Interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or
disposal requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   For the purposes of this section:



         (a)   Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste
streams from any portion of a user’s treatment facility.



         (b)   Severe property damage means substantial physical
damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources
which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe
property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      (2)   A user may allow a bypass to occur if the bypass does
not violate any pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it also
is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this
section.



      (3)   Bypass notifications.



         (a)   If possible, a user shall submit prior written
notice to the Director of Utilities at least ten days before the date of any
anticipated bypass.



         (b)   A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of
Utilities of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain (i) a
description of the bypass and its cause; (ii) the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times; (iii) if the bypass has not been corrected,
the anticipated time the bypass is expected to continue; and (iv) steps taken
or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Director of Utilities may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if
the oral report has been received within 24 hours.



      (4)   Bypass.



         (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the Director of
Utilities may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of
life, personal injury, or severe property damage;



            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the
bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime.
This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have
been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent
a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



            3.   The user submitted notices as required under
subsection (C)(3) of this section.



         (b)   The Director of Utilities may approve an
anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the Director of
Utilities determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in
paragraph (C)(4)(a) of this section.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



§ 191-14  Miscellaneous Provisions.



   (A)   Pretreatment  charges and fees. The city may adopt reasonable
fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city’s
pretreatment program.



      (1)   Pretreatment permit fees.



         (a)   Permit fees – new permits.



            1.   Categorical industrial user: $ 1,100.



            2.   Significant industrial user: $700.



            3.   General user: $300.



            4.   General - dewatering: $125.



         (b)   Permit fees – renewal of existing permits.



            1.   Categorical industrial user: $700.



            2.   Significant industrial user: $400.



            3.   General user: $175.



      (2)   Other program activity fees.



         (a)   Facility inspection: $280.



         (b)   Twenty-four hour composite sample collection: $240.



         (c)   Grab sample collection: $200.



      (3)   Commercial laboratory charges. When the services of a
commercial laboratory are needed, the city will utilize a laboratory which
has been licensed by the Arizona Department of Health Services. The cost of
laboratory testing will depend upon the tests requested and the laboratory
used and those costs as well as all shipping and handling charges will be
assessed to the individual user.



      (4)   Wastewater cost of services charge. A cost of service
charge shall be paid to the city by those user wastewater discharges whose
contributions of suspended solids and/or biochemical oxygen demand, and/or
flow (wastewater flow meter) creates costs in excess of a typical discharge.
Fees will be prescribed per The City of Yuma Schedule of Wastewater Rates
Resolution.



      (5)   Discrepancies between actual and reported industrial
wastewater discharge quantities.



         (a)   Should measurements or other investigations reveal
that a user is discharging a flow rate, or a quantity of flow, suspended
solids, biochemical oxygen demand, or other regulated substance,
significantly in excess of that stated on the industrial wastewater permit or
in excess of the quantities reported to the city by the user and upon which
the industrial wastewater treatment surcharge is based, the user shall be
assessed for all delinquent charges together with the penalty and interest
provided for in at least two additional 24 hour samples, and flow
measurements shall be obtained by the city with all costs of sampling and
analyses to be paid by the discharger.



         (b)   For the purpose of establishing the correct
treatment surcharge, the data obtained in these samplings along with any
other relevant information obtained by the city or presented by the user
shall be used by the Director of Utilities in determining the quantity
parameters for use in the surcharge formula.



      (6)   Discharge fee – recreational vehicle sewage holding
tank. A fee of $1.50 shall be charged by the city for each recreation
vehicle’s holding tank discharged into a permitted commercial servicing
facility.



      (7)   (a)   Contractual arrangements – rates.



         (b)   Special contractual arrangements are to be used
for situations involving other governmental agencies or users, requiring
additional treatment of their wastewater discharges.



            1.   The city is authorized to make special
contractual arrangements with users, except that in no event shall the rates
be charged to users situated outside of the cooperate limits of the City of
Yuma be less than the comparable charges charged to residential users within
the same classification.



            2.   In no event shall any contractual
arrangements for non-city users be at a cost less than the actual cost
incurred by the city.



      (8)   Other fees may include:



         (a)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental
discharge procedures and construction;



         (b)   Fees for filing appeals;



         (c)   Fees to recover administrative and legal costs
associated with the enforcement activity taken by the Director of Utilities
to address IU noncompliance; and



         (d)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the
matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines,
and penalties chargeable by the city.



   (B)   Severability. If any provision of this chapter is invalidated
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect.



(Ord. O2019-007, passed 2-6-2019)



Chapter 192:  Stormwater Runoff in New Developments



Section



   192-01   Definitions



   192-02   Purpose; exception



   192-03   Retention methods



   192-04   Retention basin standards



   192-05   On-site retention standards; residential, commercial and
industrial



   192-06   Combination storage



   192-07   Minimum floor elevation



   192-08   Surface alteration



   192-09   Estimated return periods for short-duration precipitation



§ 192-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING FLOOR ELEVATION.  The finished floor elevation in feet above
mean sea level of the lowest floor of a building.  BUILDING FLOOR ELEVATIONS
shall be related to the city datum.



   BUILDING PAD ELEVATION.  The elevation in feet above mean sea level of
the material on which the floor slab directly rests.



   COMBINATION STORAGE.  Handling of stormwater by utilizing both on-site
retention and retention basins.



   DRAINAGE PLAN.  That certain plan on which are shown the location,
dimensions and elevations of proposed stormwater storage areas.



   FIFTY-YEAR STORM.  A storm that has a two percent chance of occurring
each year in accordance with criteria established by the U.S. National
Weather Service, as shown in § 192-09.



   FREE BOARD.  The distance between the design high water surface and
the top of the wall of a retention basin.



   100-YEAR STORM.  A storm that has a one percent chance of occurring
each year in accordance with criteria established by the U.S. National
Weather Service, as shown in § 192-09.



   ON-SITE RETENTION.  Storage on public or private property or any
combination thereof, but not on public street or alley right-of-way.



   RETENTION BASIN.  A designated area for total storage, without
overland relief, of flows generated during a design storm.



   10-YEAR STORM.  A storm that has a ten percent chance of occurring
each year in accordance with criteria established by the U.S. National
Weather Service, as shown in § 192-09.



('80 Code, § 31-143)  (Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77)



§ 192-02  Purpose; Exception.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to require the owner/developer
of each lot, plot or parcel of land within the city limits to provide storage
of sufficient volume to hold the total runoff from the design storm falling
on that lot, plot or parcel of land.  An exception to this requirement will
be granted by the City Engineer only when runoff can be directed into a storm
sewer, channel or natural drainageway  with sufficient capacity to transport
storm water to an approved ultimate disposal site.  The owner/developer
shall not be required to provide storage for runoff from land other than his
own except where it can be proven that flow from adjacent land has
historically crossed or inundated the land of the owner/developer.



   (B)   This chapter and its revision(s) are intended to be as closely
compatible with the long range goals of the Yuma County Flood Control
District's future Storm Drainage Master Plan as is possible.



('80 Code, § 31-144)  (Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77; Ord. 1836, passed
6-20-79)



§ 192-03  Retention Methods.



   Storm water shall be contained within each lot, plot or parcel of land
by any of the following methods:



   (A)   On-site retention.



   (B)   Retention basin.



   (C)   Combination storage.



('80 Code, § 31-146)  (Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77)



§ 192-04  Retention Basin Standards.



   When a retention basin is utilized to handle storm water runoff in a
residential subdivision, the following design standards shall be applicable:



   (A)   The minimum storage volume shall be computed by estimating the
area under a hydrograph of a 100 year storm of two hour duration (1.22 inches
per hour) as shown in division (J) of this section.  In addition, the
greater of either one foot of freeboard or 25% additional basin capacity
shall be provided in the facility.



   (B)   Maximum basin depth shall not exceed three and one-half feet
unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.  When additional depth is
approved, the facility shall be enclosed with a six foot high masonry block
fence and 16 foot wide wood gate with lock.



   (C)   Maximum side slope shall be four to one unless otherwise
approved by the City Engineer.



   (D)   An acceptable method of transporting water from the street
into the basin shall be provided so as to preserve the integrity of the basin
walls and floor.



   (E)   Daily nuisance water from lawn watering, car washing, and the
like, shall be intercepted by dry wells prior to reaching the earthen floor
of the retention basin and disposed of by utilization of a percolation field.



   (F)   All residential streets shall be designed to carry the runoff
from a ten year two hour storm between the curbs.  In cases where the peak
flows from the design storm exceeds the street capacity, storm sewers of
sufficient size to carry the excess must be installed.  The minimum pipe
size for underground storm drainage shall be 12 inches.  The peak flow from
a 50 year storm must be carried within the cross-section between buildings
(front yards and street) for subdivisions served by retention basins. 



   (G)   The floor elevations of all habitable space shall be above
flood levels equivalent to a 100 year storm.



   (H)    All streets shall have vertical curb with minimum
longitudinal slope as shown in the table below, designed in accordance with
accepted City of Yuma Construction Standards.



 



 


   Minimum Slopes



Straight (400 foot radius and over) curb
 
0.20%


Curved (less than 400 foot radius) curb
 
0.25%


Valley gutter flowline
 
0.30%



 



   (I)   Each retention basin shall be constructed so that storm water
will not stand longer than five days after termination of the storm.  Basin
drainage shall be accomplished by infiltration or by controlled flow into an
existing facility suitable to receive, transport and dispose of storm
water.  When controlled flow is proposed, the owner/developer and the city
shall obtain approval from the owner of the existing facility prior to
formulating final drainage plans for the retention basin.  Final drainage
plans shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Engineer.



   (J)   (1)   The owner of the property on which the retention
basin is to be located shall grant a right to use said property for drainage
purposes.  Such grant shall be made by means of a document which shall be
approved by the City Attorney and recorded in the office of the County
Recorder and which shall contain the following:



         (a)   A legal description of the property to be used for
storage purposes.



         (b)   A legal description of the property which is
permitted to drain to the basin.



         (c)   A statement that the owner is responsible for
construction and maintenance of the basin in accordance with standards
established by the City Engineer.



         (d)   A statement that no habitable structure(s) may be
constructed within the basin.



         (e)   A statement that the property shall be used for
storm water storage so long as it is required for such purpose in the opinion
of the City Engineer.



         (f)   Such other provisions as are deemed by the City
Attorney to be necessary and proper to effectuate the purposes of this
chapter.



      (2)   In lieu of the requirements contained in this division,
the owner may dedicate the property to be used for storm water retention to
the city for drainage and for public use.  Such dedication shall become
effective only upon acceptance of the basin by the City Engineer.  As
conditions precedent to acceptance of dedication, the owner/developer shall
include landscaping (grass and trees), an irrigation system of the flood
and/or sprinkler type, and lighting as specified in approved city standards.



   (K)   Retention basin volume.



 





 



   (L)   A retention basin, to become dedicated to the city, shall be
located adjacent to arterial streets  (mile and half-mile streets) and the
geometries of the basin shall be coordinated with the City Engineer.



   (M)   With approval of the City Engineer, a retention basin may be
located on other streets which allow a direct storm sewer route to an
arterial street. Additionally, properly designed and sized inlets, manholes,
storm sewer lines and all other appurtenances shall be constructed to a point
where the storm sewer may be connected to a future storm main on an arterial
street.



('80 Code, § 31-147)  (Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77; Ord. 1836, passed
6-20-79)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 192-05  On-Site Retention Standards; Residential, Commercial and
Industrial.



   (A)   Residential.  When on-site retention is utilized in
residential subdivisions, the following design criteria shall be applicable:



      (1)   Minimum lot size for on-site retention shall be 8,000
square feet.  A deed covenant prohibiting alteration of the final site
ground elevations shall be required.  The minimum design depth of storm
water storage on any lot shall not exceed eight inches except as approved by
the City Engineer.



      (2)   The lot depth below the back edge of the sidewalk shall
be computed using a 100 year storm of 24 hour duration with 3.85 inches of
total rainfall.  An allowance for evaporation and/or percolation shall not
be incorporated into the computations for minimum lot depth.  Storage volume
shall also be provided for adjacent streets and alleys except for arterial
streets.



      (3)   Each lot shall be provided with an earthen berm around
the back and sides of each lot.  The earthen berm shall be one foot higher
than the adjacent final ground elevation of the lot.



      (4)   All residential streets shall have vertical curb and
gutter designed in accordance with accepted city construction standards.  An
appropriate means of transporting water into the storage area shall be
provided.



      (5)   Slope away from building shall not exceed 20:1 for a
distance of five feet out from the foundation.



('80 Code, § 31-148)



   (B)   Commercial, industrial.  When on-site retention is utilized
in commercial and industrial developments, all storm water from a 100 year
storm of one hour duration (2.25 inches) must be retained on-site.  Dry
wells will be permitted to drain surface retention areas.  However, the
infiltration cannot be considered to reduce the volume of the retention
area.  The City of Yuma shall not be responsible for the design,
performance, operation or maintenance of dry wells or retention basins in
commercial or industrial developments.  Dry wells shall not be located
within 20 feet of any building(s).  ('80 Code, § 31-149)



(Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77; Ord. 1836, passed 6-20-79)  Penalty, see §
193-99



§ 192-06  Combination Storage.



   Combination storage shall consist of providing adequate storage volume
for the appropriate design storm by a combination of on-site retention and a
retention basin.  All requirements and conditions outlined in the previous
sections shall apply.



('80 Code, § 31-150)  (Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77)



§ 192-07  Minimum Floor Elevation.



   (A)   Requirements.  The minimum building floor elevation shall be
ten inches above the design high water elevation in the case of on-site
retention or combination storage.  In the case of retention basins, the
minimum building floor elevation shall be ten inches above the back of curb
fronting the lot. ('80 Code, § 31-151)



   (B)   Exemption.  The provisions of division (A) of this section
shall not apply to any existing building or structure nor to an expansion of
less than 25% in floor area or any alteration to an existing building or
structure, but in no case shall the floor elevation of the extension be below
the existing floor of the habitable space. ('80 Code, § 31-152)



(Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77; Ord. 1836, passed 6-20-79)  Penalty, see §
193-99



§ 192-08  Surface Alteration.



   (A)   Approval required.  The surface of any lot, plot or parcel of
land may not be filled or substantially altered without first obtaining
written approval from the City Engineer. ('80 Code, § 31-154)



   (B)   Obtaining approval.  Prior to issuing written approval, the
City Engineer shall require the owner/developer to submit for review a
drainage plan showing existing and proposed grades together with calculations
showing the volume of storage required and provided.  Such plan and
calculations shall be prepared under the direction of a professional engineer
registered in this state. ('80 Code, § 31-155)



   (C)   Obtaining approval for single lot.  An alteration which is
proposed for a platted residential lot where the work is to be done only on
said lot, plans and calculations prepared by a professional engineer will not
be required.  The property owner shall submit a sketch to the division of
building safety showing the proposed work.  The building official is
authorized to assist the property owner in preparing such a sketch and making
any computations which may be required. ('80 Code, § 31-156)



   (D)   Approval; a prerequisite for building permit.  The Division
of Building Safety shall not issue a building permit until receipt of
notification from the City Engineer that a drainage plan has been approved in
accordance with this chapter. ('80 Code, § 31-157)



   (E)   Compliance with terms of approval required.  The Division of
Building Safety shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until receipt of
notification from the City Engineer that construction has been completed in
substantial compliance with the approved drainage plan or that subsequent
completion has been guaranteed by other means acceptable to the city. ('80
Code, § 31-158)



(Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 192-09  Estimated Return Periods for Short-Duration Precipitation.



 




Estimated Return Periods for Short-Duration Precipitation in Arizona




Station:  Yuma WBO



Elevation (feet):  914

 

Latitude:  32°40'



Longitude:  114°36'




Duration

 

Return Period (Years)




1

 

2

 

5

 

10

 

25

 

50

 

100




5 min.

 

0.10

 

0.18

 

0.31

 

0.39

 

0.48

 

0.57

 

0.65




10 min.

 

0.16

 

0.28

 

0.49

 

0.61

 

0.75

 

0.88

 

1.01




15 min.

 

0.21

 

0.35

 

0.62

 

0.77

 

0.95

 

1.12

 

1.28




30 min.

 

0.28

 

0.49

 

0.85

 

1.07

 

1.32

 

1.55

 

1.78




1 hr.

 

0.36

 

0.62

 

1.08

 

1.35

 

1.67

 

1.96

 

2.25




2 hr.

 

0.38

 

0.66

 

1.15

 

1.45

 

1.81

 

2.12

 

2.43




3 hr.

 

0.40

 

0.70

 

1.22

 

1.54

 

1.94

 

2.28

 

2.61




6 hr.

 

0.44

 

0.80

 

1.40

 

1.78

 

2.26

 

2.66

 

3.05




12 hr.

 

0.48

 

0.89

 

1.56

 

1.99

 

2.55

 

3.00

 

3.44




24 hr.

 

0.52

 

0.98

 

1.72

 

2.21

 

2.85

 

3.36

 

3.85




Note:  All values shown are in inches of rainfall.





 



('80 Code, § 31-143)  (Ord. 1670, passed 10-12-77)



Chapter 193:  Water and Sewers



Section



General Provisions



   193-01   Liability of city



   193-02   Escape of water prohibited



   193-03   Escape of irrigation water prohibited



   193-04   Privies, privy-vaults or cesspools restricted



Water and Sewer Service Regulations



   193-15   Scope and applicability



   193-16   Definitions



   193-17   Utility service area



   193-18   Utility regulations to be adopted by resolution or ordinance



   193-19   Restriction of use



   193-20   Temporary interruption of service



   193-21   Utility service applications



   193-22   Terms and conditions of service applications



   193-23   Service deposits



   193-24   Compliance with standards and specifications



   193-25   Access to premises



   193-26   Negligence on part of city



   193-27   Property damage by customer



   193-28   Unlawful acts



   193-29   Discontinuance of service



Water Emergencies



   193-45   Definition



   193-46   Applicability



   193-47   Declaration



   193-48   Proclamation



   193-49   Water usage restricted and prohibited



   193-50   New water services



   193-51   Maintenance of sanitation



   193-52   Discontinuance of service



   193-53   Termination



Billing and Payments



   193-65   When due; where payable



   193-66   Failure to receive bill no excuse



   193-67   Monthly; special billing



   193-68   Basis of billing



   193-69   Estimated billing



   193-70   Special billings for connection and disconnection between
billing periods



   193-71   Delinquent payments



   193-72   Disputed bills



   193-73   Return item fee



Water and Sewer Commission



   193-85   Created; members; compensation



   193-86   Terms



   193-87   Ex officio members



   193-88   Duties and powers



   193-99   Penalty



General Provisions



§ 193-01  Liability of City.



   The city shall not be held liable for any damage that may result from
the shutting off or turning on of any supply pipe or main for any purpose
whatsoever, even should notice have been given, nor for damages caused by any
break or leak of any water pipe inside of the curbline.



('80 Code, § 31-1)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-02  Escape of Water Prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit
or cause the escape or flow of water in such quantity as to cause flooding,
to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous condition to
such traffic, to cause damage to the public streets of the city, or to cause
conditions to be created which amount to a threat to the public health and
safety.



('80 Code, § 31-2)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 193-03  Escape of Irrigation Water Prohibited.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently permit
or cause the escape or flow of irrigation water in such quantity as to cause
flooding, to impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic, to create a hazardous
condition to such traffic, to create a condition which constitutes a threat
to the public health and safety, or to cause damage to the public streets of
the city through the failure or neglect to properly operate or maintain any
irrigation structure, delivery ditch, or waste ditch in which said person has
a vested right or interest or through willful or negligent failure of the
person to accept irrigation water after it has been ordered by him, or to
irrigate his property in a manner which results in the overflow of such
irrigation waters.



('80 Code, § 31-3)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 193-04  Privies, Privy-Vaults or Cesspools Restricted.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain or
keep any privy, privy-vault or cesspool on any lot or premises fronting upon
a street or alley in or upon which there is laid or constructed a sanitary
sewer to which such premises may be connected or drained; or upon any lot or
premises within 200 feet of a sanitary sewer.



('80 Code, § 31-4)  (Ord. 93, passed 5-25-11)  Penalty, see § 193-99



Water and Sewer Service Regulations



§ 193-15  Scope and Applicability.



   (A)   If a conflict arises between any provision of this subchapter
and any ordinance or resolution adopted prior to this subchapter, then the
provisions of this subchapter shall control.



   (B)   The provisions as herein set forth or as they may hereafter be
altered or amended shall govern the rendering of water or sewer service,
including the extensions of water and sewer mains and the making of
connections thereto.  Every applicant, upon the signing of an application
for water or sewer service, shall be bound hereby.



('80 Code, § 31-81)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-16  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  City of Yuma, Arizona.



   CUSTOMER.  Any person, persons, association, corporation or
governmental agency supplied, or entitled to be supplied, with water and
sewer service by the Utility Division in accordance with established
regulations, rates and charges.



   RUN SERVICE-SEWER.  The installation of the pipe or tubing necessary
to conduct waste water from the customers' facilities at their property line
to the sewer main in the public right-of-way.



   RUN SERVICE-WATER.  The installation of pipe or tubing, fittings and
valves necessary to conduct water from the distribution main in the public
right-of-way to and through the meter where connection is made with
facilities of the customer.



   SERVICE AVAILABLE.  A property or establishment to which a service has
previously been run.  The water service available may or may not contain a
meter.



   SEWER AVAILABLE.  When a sewer main of adequate size and capacity is
present along the total frontage or along one full side of property to be
served.



   TEMPORARY SERVICE CONNECTION.  A connection which is installed for the
temporary use of water, including service to construction sites.



   UTILITY DIVISION.  The Utility Division of the Department of Public
Service designated to conduct operations in connection with the supply,
treatment and distribution of potable water, treatment and collection of
waste water and water and sewer service to customers.



   UTILITY DIVISION COST.  Cost shall include all “Components of
Construction Cost and Overhead Construction Costs” as prescribed by the
National Association of Railroad and Utilities Commissioners.



   WATER AVAILABLE.  When a water line of adequate size and capacity is
present along the total frontage or along one full side of property to be
served.



('80 Code, § 31-83)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-17  Utility Service Area.



   The city will provide water and sewer service to areas as determined by
the City Council.



('80 Code, § 31-84)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-18  Utility Regulations to be Adopted by Resolution or Ordinance.



   (A)   Regulations not in conflict with the provisions of this
subchapter shall be established for governing the use of the utilities,
connections and extensions thereto, and for prescribing utility rates,
charges and fees.  Such regulations shall not become effective until
approved by the City Council and shall be adopted by resolution or ordinance.



   (B)   A certain document. three copies of which are on file as
public record in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Yuma, being
marked and titled as "City of Yuma Utility Regulations Article I - Water
Regulations," dated February 7, 2006, which was made a public record by
Resolution R2006-32, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof as
it fully set out herein.



('80 Code, § 31-85)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2566, passed 3-4-92;
Ord. O2006-35, passed 5-17-06)



§ 193-19  Restriction of Use.



   The Utility Division reserves the right to at any time restrict or
prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods
of emergency or circumstances demanding such restrictions or prevention of
use.



('80 Code, § 31-86)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-20  Temporary Interruption of Service.



   The city reserves the right to cut off any utility service without
notice in case of emergencies.  When an interruption in service is necessary
for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers
will be notified as circumstances permit.  The city is not liable for any
damages that might occur on account of water being cut off for any purpose or
on account of the breaking of any pipe or fixture.  Domestic customers who
have any machinery or a material processing plant which requires a constant
supply of domestic water shall install upon their premises such water storage
facilities as will prevent any damage in case the city potable water supply
is, for any reason, interrupted or discontinued.



('80 Code, § 31-87)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-21  Utility Service Applications.



   (A)   Utility service existing.  A customer desiring to have
premises supplied with water and sewer service where the services exist shall
make application in person on the forms provided at the Customer Services
Division, office of the Financial Services Department in the City Hall.



   (B)   New service required.  A customer requiring the installation
of a new water or sewer service shall make application in person, to the
Department of Development Services, Engineering Division on the forms
provided for such application.  The Utility Division requirements for the
type of service desired must be met before the application for the service
will be approved.



   (C)   Special service.  Application for a special service shall be
made in writing in the same manner as required for a new service and shall be
made under the following circumstances:



      (1)   When temporary service is requested.



      (2)   When standby service for fire protection is requested.



   (D)   Waiver.  At the time of application for water service, the
customer will sign a statement waiving claims against the city for damages
which may occur to the customer's property at the time of service turn-on due
to any leaks in or failure of the customer's water system.



   (E)   Social security numbers. Disclosure of a utility customer's
social security number is voluntary and is not a condition of receiving
utility services from the City of Yuma. The city may use a customer's social
security numbers for the following business purposes:



      (1)   Establishment of new utility account applications;



      (2)   Identification and verification;



      (3)   To obtain credit information from third party credit
agencies to determine the credit worthiness of a customer;



      (4)   Billing and payment collections; and



      (5)   The city may disclose social security numbers to another
agency or governmental entity if such disclosure is necessary for the
receiving agency or entity to perform its duties and responsibilities.



('80 Code, § 31-88)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2168, passed
11-16-83; Ord. O2017-031, passed 9-6-17)



§ 193-22  Terms and Conditions of Service Applications.



   (A)   Payment of charges and fees.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to connect a private sewer line and/or water service line to any portion of
the city's sewer and/or water system unless a proper application for a permit
to connect to the system has been made, all fees required to accompany the
application have been paid and the application has been approved by the
proper city authorities.



      (2)   As a condition precedent to the granting of the permit
and furnishing water to the premises, the Utility Division shall require
payment in advance for the installation of service pipe, meter, water and
sewer inspection fees, reimbursement charges, connection fees and capacity
charges.



      (3)   Sewer capacity charges will be due and payable at the
time of granting of the application for the water service except for a
general water service that involves more than one building per meter
setting.  In that circumstance, sewer capacity charges will be due and
payable for each building when that building permit is issued by the Building
Safety Division of the Development Services Department.



   (B)   No water service furnished until all charges paid.  The
Utility Division shall not furnish domestic water service to any premises or
property, or resume such service subsequent to a turnoff order until all
charges against the premises incurred by the customer at that location due
and payable to the city under this chapter are paid.



   (C)   Proper notification of discontinuance required.  A customer
who has made application for water shall be liable for all water and sewer
service furnished to such premises until such time as the customer properly
notifies the Utility Division to discontinue the service for his account.



   (D)   Use of service without proper application.  Any person,
persons, associations or corporations taking possession of a premise where
the water supply has been shut off by the Utility Division and using water or
sewer service without making proper application shall be responsible for all
charges for the water and/or sewer service.  The amount of such charges
shall be determined from meter readings or on the basis of the estimated
consumption for the time water or sewer was used.



   (E)   Additional information required for industrial waste
connection.  Each industry, business or other operation that discharge
wastes into the public sewer system shall make application for an industrial
waste connection, and said connection shall be approved only after the
applicant has complied with all applicable provisions of this subchapter. 
The applicant shall furnish all information required by the proper city
authorities relating to the desired connection, proposed use of the sewer and
the character of the wastes to be discharged.  A change in use or type of
wastes discharged shall require a new application and approval.



('80 Code, § 31-89)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2039, passed 9-2-81;
Ord. 2086, passed 9-1-82)



§ 193-23  Service Deposits.



   (A)   Along with the application for water utility service(s) and
prior to such service being connected, all applicants shall pay the city a
security deposit for each service connection, with the amount of the deposit
established by the Finance Director and based upon the credit history and/or
utility payment history of the customer.



   (B)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to waive or
reduce the deposit requirement based solely on the credit history or account
history of the applicant. The deposit shall not be waived for those
applicants who do not provide their social security number to the City of
Yuma. Unless waived or reduced by the Finance Director, the mandatory deposit
shall be the minimum charges for an average two month period or $300,
whichever is greater.



   (C)   Applicants for hydrant meter usage shall be required to pay to
the city a deposit in the amount of $600.00 for each meter requested at the
time of application. The deposit will be relinquished to the city in the
event of damage, theft or loss.



   (D)   Upon termination of water service, such deposit, without
interest, will be refunded, except that any unpaid charges, including final
charges for service, shall be deducted from the deposit and any excess
portion of the deposit refunded.



   (E)   In the event of non-payment for utilities services, the
deposit shall not preclude the City of Yuma from discontinuing any and all
utility services to the service location, regardless whether the amount of
the deposit is sufficient to cover the arrearage amount.



('80 Code, § 31-90)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2039, passed 9-2-81;
Ord. 02000-16, passed 5-3-00; Ord. O2017-031, passed 9-6-17)



§ 193-24  Compliance with Standards and Specifications.



   The city shall establish standards and specifications as may be deemed
necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility
service system owned and operated by the city.  Such standards and
specifications shall be filed in the office of the City Engineer and
violation of the standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 31-91)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 193-25  Access to Premises.



   (A)   Duly authorized agents and employees of the Utility Division
shall have access, at all reasonable hours, to the premises of all customers
for the purpose of installing, repairing or removing Utility Division
property, inspecting pipes, appliances and fixtures, or reading or testing
meters in connection with the Utility Division services facilities.



   (B)   In addition to the provisions of division (A) of this section,
duly authorized agents and employees of the Utility Division shall have
access and the right to examine at all reasonable hours the records of
commercial and industrial sewer users, regardless of whether those records
are located within or without the state in regard to the following:



      (1)   Chemical supplies.



      (2)   Operational records.



      (3)   Other relevant data as to process impacting on the waste
water treatment plant.



('80 Code, § 31-92)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 1987, passed 2-18-81)



§ 193-26  Negligence on Part of City.



   The city shall not be responsible for negligence of third persons or
forces beyond the control of the Utility Division resulting in any
interruption of service or damage to the customer's property.



('80 Code, § 31-93)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-27  Property Damage by Customer.



   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the Utility
Division is caused by, or results from the negligent or wrongful act of the
customer, his family, agents or employees, the cost of necessary repairs or
replacements shall be paid by the customer to the city, and any liability
otherwise resulting shall be assumed by the customer.  The amount of such
loss or damage of the cost of repairs may be added to the customer's bill.



('80 Code, § 31-94)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-28  Unlawful Acts.



   (A)   Use of utility tools.  It is unlawful for any unauthorized
person to use any curb cock key, valve key or hydrant wrench to the city
water supply system and no person shall, without authority from the city,
make, construct, buy, sell or in any way dispose of to any person any curb
cock key, valve key or hydrant wrench for use on the city water supply system.



   (B)   Tampering with water meters.  Water meters shall be sealed by
the proper city officials in such a manner as to prevent all tampering with
or injury to the mechanism thereof, without breaking the seal, and no person
shall break or remove a seal or willfully injure or destroy a meter.



   (C)   Tampering with, covering or preventing access to utility
appurtenances.  No person shall fill up, cover over or place upon or about
any valve, valve box, curb cock, water meter box or water gate, any object,
debris or structure of any kind that shall prevent free access to the same. 
At no time and in no manner shall any person tamper or injure utility
appurtenances being the property of the city.



   (D)   Damage to system in general.  No person, firm or corporation
shall connect to the water and sewer system in any way except as specified in
these provisions nor shall they tamper with, damage, remove or render
inoperable said system or any part thereof.



('80 Code, § 31-95)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 193-29  Discontinuance of Service.



   (A)   Discontinuance of service at customer's request.



      (1)   A customer may have service discontinued by giving not
less than two days' advance written or verbal notice to the city.



      (2)   When such notice is not given, the customer shall be
held responsible for all water consumed on the subject premise and will be
required to pay for service until two days after the city has knowledge that
the customer has vacated the premises or otherwise has discontinued water
service.



   (B)   Discontinuance of service by city.



      (1)   The city may discontinue service to any customer for
nonpayment of bill for service.  Bills are delinquent 15 days after rendered.



      (2)   The city may discontinue service to any customer without
notice whenever the fraudulent use of the water or sewer system is detected,
or where the Utility Division's regulating and measuring equipment has been
tampered with, or where a dangerous condition is found to exist on the
customer's premises or where a violation of the utility regulations is found
to exist and customer refuses to correct same.



      (3)   The city may discontinue service to any customer on
written notice of at least two days mailed to such customer at his address as
shown on the Utility Division's records or personally delivered to his
household, advising the customer of the specific violation of these rules
that exists.  The customer will be permitted 48 hours to correct the
violation.



      (4)   If the customer believes that in fact no violation of
regulations or delinquency exists, the customer is entitled to a hearing on
that matter.  A hearing may be arranged by contacting the Customer Services
Division of the Financial Services Department at the City Hall.



   (C)   Renewal of water service after discontinuance date.



      (1)   If service has been discontinued for failure to comply
with the provision prescribed herein, or when a Utility Division
representative has arrived at a premises to discontinue service or collect a
delinquent water bill, the city may make a charge for restoration of service
or collection of the delinquent bill.



         (a)   The charge for restoration of a service or
collection of a delinquent bill during normal hours of business will be $50.



         (b)   The charge for restoration of service between 5:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any weekday and anytime on Saturday, Sundays or
holidays will be $100.



      (2)   In the event the customer turns on the water service or
allows it to be turned on without authorization after it has been turned off
under the provisions of division (B) of this section, the Utility Division
may again turn off the water service and the fee to reconnect water and sewer
service shall be two times the fee provided in subdivision (1) of this
division.



      (3)   If the customer, without authorization, turns on a
service or allows or causes it to be turned on after it has been discontinued
because of a sanitary hazard or other dangerous condition, the Utility
Division will remove the meter and not reinstall it until such hazard or
condition is abated.  The city will charge the customer the cost for removal
of the meter and the cost to reinstall it and to restore service in such
circumstances.



      (4)   If the Utility Division discontinues water service
because the customer has tampered with the Utility Division's regulating
device or meter, the customer will be required to deposit the sum of $50
before water service will be restored.  Such deposit will be applied to the
cost of repairs of the Utility Division's property and any balance renaming
shall be refunded to the customer.



('80 Code, § 31-96)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2086, passed 9-1-82;
Ord. 2095, passed 10-20-82; Ord. O96-81, passed 8-28-96; Ord. O2014-09,
passed 3-19-14; Ord. O2014-32, passed 12-3-14)



Water Emergencies



§ 193-45  Definition.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   WATER.  Water taken from the city water system.



('80 Code, § 31-57)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-46  Applicability.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all persons using
water, both inside and outside the city limits, and regardless of whether
such person shall have a contract for water service with the city.



('80 Code, § 31-58)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-47  Declaration.



   A water emergency shall be deemed to exist in the city at any time the
records of the City Water Division indicate that the city water plant is
being used at a maximum capacity beyond that approved by the State Department
of Health Services.



('80 Code, § 31-59)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-48  Proclamation.



   Whenever a water emergency shall be deemed to exist in the city, the
City Council may issue a proclamation stating that such emergency exists. 
Such proclamation shall be published once in a local daily paper.  Upon
publication of such proclamation, the provisions of this subchapter shall be
in force and effect throughout the city.



('80 Code, § 31-60)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-49  Water Usage Restricted and Prohibited.



   The use and withdrawal of water by any person for the following
purposes is considered wasting of city water in an emergency situation and is
hereby restricted or prohibited under the conditions stated:



   (A)   Watering yards and other vegetation.  The sprinkling or
irrigating of shrubbery, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens,
vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation which is used in landscaping
shall be restricted to those days and times as set forth in the Council's
proclamation of emergency.



   (B)   Cleaning outdoor surfaces.  The washing of sidewalks,
driveways, filling stations, aprons, porches and other outdoor surfaces is
strictly prohibited.



   (C)   Cleaning buildings.  The washing of the outside of dwellings
and the washing of the outside of office buildings is strictly prohibited.



   (D)   Ornamental fountains.  The operation of any ornamental
fountain or other structure making a similar use of water is strictly
prohibited, except when it is maintained with a recirculating system.



   (E)   Swimming pools.  Swimming and wading pools not employing a
filter and recirculating system are strictly prohibited.



   (F)   Escape through defective system.  The known escape of water
through defective plumbing is strictly prohibited.



('80 Code, § 31-61)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)  Penalty, see § 193-99



§ 193-50  New Water Services.



   No water connections shall be allowed except upon proper application
and approval of the city or its agents.  Upon any denial of water service by
the city or its agents, the applicant may appeal to the City Council.



('80 Code, § 31-62)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-51  Maintenance of Sanitation.



   The city, through its representative, shall have the authority to
permit a reasonable use of water in any case necessary to maintain adequate
health and sanitation standards.



('80 Code, § 31-63)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-52  Discontinuance of Service.



   The city shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter by the discontinuance of water service in the event of violation
hereof after proper hearing at a date, time and place set forth in the notice
of hearing which shall be served on the alleged violator.  The water service
shall be discontinued, after proof of such violation, until such time as the
city has been assured that there will be no repetition of the acts done in
breach of this subchapter subject to the right of appeal set forth herein.



('80 Code, § 31-64)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



§ 193-53  Termination.



   Whenever a water emergency shall abate, or no longer exist, the Council
shall issue a proclamation removing the restrictions and prohibitions set
forth in this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 31-65)  (Ord. 1315, passed 7-5-73)



Billing and Payments



§ 193-65  When Due; Where Payable.



   Bills for service are due and payable upon presentation and payment
shall be made at the City Hall, Customer Services Division, or at such other
place as may be designated by the city.  Water and sewer charges shall be
payable and billed to the person in whose name the water meter or other meter
is recorded at any service location or property connected to the city utility
system.



('80 Code, § 31-110)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-66  Failure to Receive Bill No Excuse.



   Customers are responsible for furnishing the Utility Division with
their correct address.  Failure to receive bills will not be considered an
excuse for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the date when the amount
will be considered delinquent.



('80 Code, § 31-111)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-67  Monthly; Special Billing.



   Regular bills will be rendered by the city to each customer monthly. 
Customers who begin or terminate service between regular meter reading dates
will be subject to special billing.



('80 Code, § 31-112)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. O2014-09, passed
3-19-14)



§ 193-68  Basis of Billing.



   Water bills rendered to customers will be based upon quantitative
consumption of water as indicated on the water meter.  The amount of sewer
charges will be based on the type of use of the property as indicated on the
fee classification schedule listed in the utility regulation section.



   (A)   Hydrant Meters.  Customers requesting hydrant meters shall be
supplied with a meter reading schedule and instructions upon receipt of
meter. These customers shall deliver their city issued hydrant meters to
Meter Shop personnel for reading and inspection during the requested time
period. A field meter service fee of $100.00 per meter per read shall be
charged when the customer fails to deliver their hydrant meter to the Meter
Shop during the requested time period. 



('80 Code, § 31-113)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. O2000-16, passed
5-3-00)



§ 193-69  Estimated Billing.



   In the event a water meter is inaccessible or if the meter fails to
register correctly, water consumption will be estimated by use of previous
consumption by metered service to the premises.



('80 Code, § 31-114)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-70  Special Billings for Connection and Disconnection Between Billing
Periods.



   Special billings for customers connecting or disconnecting from water
and sewer service between regular reading periods shall be based on daily
proration.



('80 Code, § 31-115)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. O96-64, passed
7-3-96; Ord. O97-68, passed 12-3-97)



§ 193-71  Delinquent Payments.



   (A)   All bills unpaid 15 days after issue shall be considered
delinquent and under such circumstances water or sewer service may be
discontinued as provided in § 193-29 (B)(1).  Bills not paid when due shall
be added to and included in the following billing cycle.



   (B)   Bills not paid by the next billing cycle shall have added to
them a delinquency fee of $20.



   (C)   A collection fee of 20% of the outstanding balance shall be
added to any delinquent bill referred for collection. Interest of one and
one-half percent per month shall be charged on the unpaid balance of any
delinquent account from the time that such account is referred to the
collection agency.



('80 Code, § 31-116)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2037, passed 9-2-81;
Ord. O2014-09, passed 3-19-14; Ord. O2014-32, passed 12-3-14; Ord. O2019-017,
passed 4-17-19)



§ 193-72  Disputed Bills.



   (A)   Corrections.  Whenever the correctness of any bill for water
or sewer service is questioned, the Utility Division will cause an
investigation to be made, provided the request for the investigation is made
before the bill becomes delinquent.  Any adjustment in the billing shall be
authorized by the Utility Superintendent when shown to be proper.



   (B)   Meter accuracy.  When the accuracy of a water meter is in
question by the customer, the Utility Division, upon request, shall cause an
official test to be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
utility regulations.



   (C)   Adjustment of bills for meter errors.



      (1)   Fast meters.  When, as a result of any test, a meter is
found to be more than two percent fast, the city will render a corrected bill
for the period in which the meter was in use, not exceeding six months,
unless it can be shown that the error occurred on a date which can be fixed,
in which case the overcharge will be corrected to that date.



      (2)   Slow meters.  When, as a result of any test, a meter is
found to be more than two percent slow, the city will render a corrected bill
for the period in which the meter was in use, not exceeding six months,
unless it can be shown that the error occurred on a date which can be fixed,
in which case the billings may be corrected to that date.



   (D)   Special meter readings.  The Utility Division will make
special meter readings at the request of the customer for a fee of $2.50;
however, if such special reading discloses that the meter reading was in
error, no charge will be made.



('80 Code, § 31-117)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-73  Return Item Fee.



   A $25 return item fee will be charged any water or sewer service
customer for each check that is returned from a bank for nonsufficient funds
or is returned from the bank for any other reason.



('80 Code, § 31-118)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2168, passed
11-16-83; Ord. O2014-32, passed 12-3-14)



Water and Sewer Commission



§ 193-85  Created; Members; Compensation.



   A Water and Sewer Commission for the city is hereby created, to consist
of seven members, all of whom shall serve without compensation.



('80 Code, § 31-20)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



Charter reference:



   Power to create commission, assign duties, etc., see Charter Art. IX,
§ 1



§ 193-86  Terms.



   The term of office of the present members of the Water and Sewer
Commission shall expire July 1, 1983.  After that date, members of such
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the City Council
to staggered terms of office as follows:  one one-year appointment; one
two-year appointment; one three-year appointment; two four-year appointments;
two five-year appointments.  Any subsequent appointment after the above
staggered appointments expire shall be for a set term of five years. 
Beginning July 1, 2011, all terms will expire on December 31 of the term
expiration year. Any member whose term expires shall be eligible for
reappointment to another five-year term.  In the event of death, resignation
or removal of a member, the Mayor with approval of the Council shall appoint
a new member to serve during the remainder of the unexpired term.



('80 Code, § 31-21)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80; Ord. 2128, passed 5-18-83;
Ord. O2010-66, passed 1-5-11)



§ 193-87  Ex Officio Members.



   The Director of the Department of Public Services and the Utility
Superintendent shall serve as ex officio members of the Commission and shall
be permitted to participate in the discussion, but shall have no vote.



('80 Code, § 31-22)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-88  Duties and Powers.



   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties with the
approval of the Mayor and Council:



   (A)   To establish rules as it deems necessary for the operation and
faithful performance of the Commission.



   (B)   To organize by electing one of the Commission as chairman of
the Commission and one of its members as secretary of the Commission.



   (C)   To act in an advisory capacity to the City Council concerning
matters affecting the planning and development of the city water and sewer
systems.



   (D)   To act as supportive liaison between the city government and
the residents of the city on subjects including but not limited to proposed
utility capital improvements, bond issues, rate schedule and system policies.



   (E)   To sit as a board of adjustment in October of each year or at
any other time as required by the City Council and in an advisory capacity
make recommendations to the City Council as to the city water and sewer rates
and charges.



('80 Code, § 31-23)  (Ord. 1899, passed 1-16-80)



§ 193-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 31-5)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 194:  Illicit Discharge Detection and Elimination



Section



   194-01   Findings of fact



   194-02   Purpose



   194-03   Definitions



   194-04   Applicability



   194-05   Responsibility for administration



   194-06   Ultimate responsibility



   194-07   Discharge prohibitions



   194-08   Suspension of the MS4 access



   194-09   Industrial or construction activity discharges



   194-10   Monitoring of discharges



   194-11   Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater
pollutants by use of best management practices



   194-12   Watercourse protection



   194-13   Notification of spills



   194-14   Enforcement



   194-15   Appeal of notice of violation



   194-16   Enforcement measures after appeal



   194-17   Cost of abatement of the violation



   194-18   Injunctive relief



   194-19   Remedies not exclusive



 



   194-99   Penalty



§ 194-01 Findings of Fact.



   An illicit discharge is defined as any discharge to the MS4 or waters
of the United States that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except for
discharges allowed under the AZPDES Permit No. AZG2002-002 or waters used for
firefighting operations. These non-stormwater discharges occur due to illegal
connections to the MS4 from residential, business, industrial or commercial
establishments. As a result of these illicit connections, contaminated
stormwater, wastes or wastewater enters into storm drains or directly into
local waters before receiving treatment from a wastewater treatment plant.
Illicit connections may be intentional or may be unknown to the property or
business owner and may be due to the connection of floor drains to the MS4.
Additional sources of illicit discharges can be attributed to but not
necessarily limited to failing septic systems, illegal dumping practices, and
the improper disposal of sewage from recreational practices such as boating
or camping.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-02 Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the City of Yuma (City) through the
regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 to the maximum extent
practicable as required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes
methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 in order
to comply with requirements of the AZPDES permit process, The objectives of
this chapter are:



   (A)   To regulate the introduction of pollutants into the city's MS4
from stormwater discharges by any user.



   (B)   To prohibit illicit connections, illegal dumpings and
discharges to the city's MS4.



   (C)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection,
surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-03 Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARIZONA POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (AZPDES) STORMWATER
PERMITS.  A permit issued by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality
(ADEQ) under authority delegated pursuant to 33 United States Code & 1342(b).
The permits authorize the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
area-wide basis.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the discharges of pollutants
directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating
procedure, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or
water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.



   CITY.  The City of Yuma, being in Yuma County, State of Arizona.



   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to AZPDES Construction
General Permit No. AZG2003-001.



   ENGINEER.  City Engineer or firm or person and their properly
authorized assistants and inspectors designated by the city to prepare plans
and administer stormwater management.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.  Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly
contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   ILLEGAL DISCHARGE.  Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to
the MS4, except as exempted in §§ 194-01 and 194-07 of this chapter.



   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.  An illicit connection is defined as either of
the following:



      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the MS4 including but
not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharges
including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the MS4 and any
connections to the MS4 from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether
said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved
by the city or;



      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent records and approved by authorized enforcement agency.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY.  Activities subject to AZPDES Multi-Sector
General Permit (MSGP) as regulated by Arizona Department of Environmental
Quality (ADEQ).



   NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to the MS4 that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.



   OPERATOR.  Someone who maintains overall or day-to-day operational
control over activities at a commercial establishment, an industrial facility
or a construction site that will ensure compliance with the AZPDES stormwater
and local regulations. Typically, this refers to the owner or manager.



   PERSON.  Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner
or as the owner's agent.



   POLLUTANT.  Anything, which causes or contributes to pollution.
POLLUTANTS may include but are not limited to: fats, oil and grease, paints,
varnishes and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid
and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other
discarded o r abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or
contribute to pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
hazardous substances and wastes, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
dissolved and particulate metals, animal wastes; waste and residues that
result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.



   PREMISES.  Any building, lot, parcel of land or portion of land
whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4).  City or publicly-owned
facilities by which only stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including
but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
gutters, curbs, inlets, forcemains, spillways, pipes, manholes, catch basins,
pumping facilities, dry wells, wet wells, retention and detention basins,
natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other
drainage structures.MS4s do not include combined sewer systems in which both
sewage and stormwater are conveyed at the same lines.



   STORMWATER.  Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting
entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting
solely from such precipitation.



   STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).  A document which
describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at site
and the action to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater,
MS4, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.



   WASTEWATER.  Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated
stormwater, discharged from a facility.



   WATERCOURSE.  A definite channel with bed and banks within which water
flows, either continuously or in season.



   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.  All waters which are currently used (or
used in the past) for interstate or foreign commerce. All interstate waters,
including wetlands. All other waters, the use of or degradation of which
would affect interstate or foreign commerce (including recreation, fishing,
and industrial uses). All impoundments of waters. The territorial sea and
wetlands adjacent to waters identified above.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-04 Applicability.



   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the MS4 in the city or
its watercourses, whether generated on any developed and undeveloped lands,
unless explicitly exempted by the Engineer.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-05 Responsibility for Administration.



   The city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the city may be delegated
in writing by the Engineer to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the city.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-06 Ultimate Responsibility.



   The standard set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter
are minimum standards. Therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-07 Discharge Prohibitions.



   (A)   Prohibition of illegal discharges.



      (1)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into
the MS4 or to the city's watercourses any materials, including but not
limited to pollutants or water containing any pollutants, which exceed state,
federal, and/or local water quality standards.



      (2)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any
discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described as follows:



         (a)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge
prohibitions established by this chapter: stormwater runoff, surface runoff
and drainage, water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland
flows, swimming pool ( if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM
chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not
containing pollutants.



         (b)   Discharges specified in writing by the Engineer as
being necessary to protect the public health and safety.



         (c)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but
requires a verbal notification to the city's Department of Public Works prior
to the time of the test.



      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater
discharges permitted under an AZPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has
been granted for any discharge to the MS4.



   (C)   Prohibition of illicit connections.



      (1)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued
existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.



      (2)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation,
illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection.



      (3)   A person is considered to be in violation of this
chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage or any other substance
not excepted under § 194-08(A)(2) to the MS4, or allows such a connection to
continue.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-08 Suspension of the MS4 Access.



   (A)   Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency
situations.  The city may, without prior notice, suspend its MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial
danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or the MS4
or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the city may take steps as deemed
necessary to prevent or minimize the damage to its MS4, or waters of the
United States, or to minimize danger to persons.



   (B)   Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharges.  Any
person discharging to the city's MS4 in violation of this chapter may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an
illicit discharge. The city will notify the violator of the proposed
termination of access. The violator may petition the city for a
reconsideration and hearing.



   (C)   Reinstatement of an MS4 access.  A person commits an offence
if the person reinstates the MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to
this section, without the prior approval of the Engineer.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-09 Industrial or Construction Activity Discharges.



   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity shall
comply with the provisions of the AZPDES permits. Proof of compliance with
such permits may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to
allowing of discharges to the MS4.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-10 Monitoring of Discharges.



   (A)   Applicability.  This section applies to the facilities that
have stormwater discharges associated with an industrial activity, including
construction activity.



   (B)   Access to facilities.



      (1)   The Engineer shall be permitted to enter and inspect
facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. The discharging party
shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of
the city.



      (2)   Facility operators shall allow the Engineer ready access
to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of
the AZPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any
additional duties as defined by state and federal law.



      (3)   The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted
facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Engineer to
conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.



      (4)   The city shall have the right to require the discharger
to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and a proper
operating condition by the discharging party, at its own expense. All devices
used to measure stormwater flow and any quality shall be calibrated to ensure
their accuracy.



      (5)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Engineer and
shall not be replaced. The cost of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.



      (6)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the Engineer access to a
permitted facility are a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of
this chapter. The operator of the facility with an AZPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offence if the
operator or one of his personnel denies the Engineer reasonable access to the
permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or
required by the chapter.



      (7)   If the Engineer has been refused access to any part of
the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation to this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance
of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-11 Requirements to Prevent, Control, and Reduce Stormwater Pollutants
by Use of Best Management Practices.



   (A)   The city will adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any
activity, operation, or any facility, which may cause or contribute to
pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4 or waters of the United
States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment
shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or
watercourses, through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or a premise, which is or may
be the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge
of pollutants to the MS4.



   (B)   Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid AZPDES
permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the
provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with
requirements of the AZPDES permit.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-12 Watercourse Protection.



   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse
within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other
obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow
of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall
maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a
watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function, or physical integrity of the watercourse.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-13 Notification of Spills.



   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any operator, or
a person responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of any known or suspected release of materials which are
resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutant discharges into
stormwater, the MS4, or waters of the United States; said operator or person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and
cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of release of
non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the Department of Public
Works of the city in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notification in person or by phone shall be confirmed by
written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of
the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge
and the action taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-14 Enforcement.



   (A)   Notice of violation.  Whenever the city finds that a person
has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter,
the city may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:



      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;



      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;



      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall
cease and desist;



      (4)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and



      (5)    The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.



   (B)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further
advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the
established deadline, the city or a contractor acting on behalf of the city
will perform the work and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-15 Appeal of Notice of Violation.



   Any person receiving a notice of violation (NOV) may appeal the
determination of the Director of the Department of Public Works of the city.
The notice of appeal must be received within 15 calendar days from the date
of the NOV. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her
designee shall take place within 15 calendar days from the date of receipt of
the notice of appeal. The decision of the city or its designee shall be final.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-16 Enforcement Measures After Appeal.



   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements
set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, the
Engineer within three working days of the decision of the city upholding its
decision, then the Engineer shall enter upon the subject private property and
is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner,
agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the Engineer
or the city designated contractor to enter upon the premises, for the
purposes set forth above.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-17 Cost of Abatement of the Violation.



   Within 15 calendar days after abatement of violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount
of the assessment within 15 calendar days. If the amount due is not paid
within 15 calendar days or by the time in which to file for an appeal is
expired, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property
and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid
in not more than 12 equal monthly payments. Interest at the rate of 12% per
annum shall be assessed on any late payments.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05; Ord. O2005-42, passed 6-15-05)



§ 194-18 Injunctive Relief.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has
violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may
petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person
from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or rcmediation of the violation.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-19 Remedies Not Exclusive.



   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



§ 194-99 Penalty.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate, or
cause the violation of, any provision of this chapter. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the provisions in this chapter shall be guilty
of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than ten days or
both fine and imprisonment. Fine and imprisonment must consider the nature of
the violation, its seriousness and the prior history of the violator. Each
separate day or part thereof during which any violation of said sections
occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



(Ord. O2005-15, passed 2-16-05)



Chapter 195:  Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff



Section



   195-01   Findings of facts



   195-02   Purpose



   195-03   Objectives



   195-04   Applicability



   195-05   Exemptions



   195-06   Definitions



   195-07   Permits and fees



   195-08   Review and approval



   195-09   Design requirements for post-construction component of the
SWPPP



   195-10   Post-construction component of SWPPP requirements



   195-11   Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements



   195-12   Inspections



   195-13   Right of entry for inspection



   195-14   Stop-work order; revocation of permit



   195-15   Violation and penalties



§ 195-01 Findings of Facts.



   Land development in both new and redevelopment projects can increase
the impervious land cover, alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds
and ultimately increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion and sediment transport and deposition. This runoff
contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants. However,
stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development sites. Therefore, the city establishes this set of water quality
and quantity policies applicable to its MS4 and local surface waters to
provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the
purpose of protecting the city's MS4 and local water resources from urban
pollutants, reduction in conveyance capacities of flood control facilities
and degradation to local water resources.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-02 Purpose.



   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within the
city.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-03 Objectives.



   This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following
objectives:



   (A)   Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by
stormwater runoff from any development, with a total of one or more acres,
which would otherwise degrade local water quality.



   (B)   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development,
with a total area of one or more acres, in order to reduce flooding,
siltation, increases in stream temperature and streambank erosion and
maintain the integrity of stream channels.



   (C)   Minimize the annual volume of stormwater runoff which flows
from any specific site following development to not exceed the
pre-development hydrologic regime.



   (D)   Reduce runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, whenever possible, through best management practices (BMPs)
and to ensure that these BMPs are properly maintained with no threat to
public safety.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-04 Applicability.



   The intent of this chapter is to promote the public welfare by guiding,
regulating and controlling the design, construction and use of any new
development, or redevelopment that has a total area of one acre or more in
public and private projects within the city's jurisdiction. This chapter also
applies to all sites that are smaller than one acre but are part of a larger
common plan of development that has a cumulative area of one or more acres
even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may
take place at different times on different schedules.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-05 Exemptions.



   The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:



   (A)   New sites with on-site retention criteria per § 192-03 which
ensures that the subject site will capture all its stormwater within premises
and no stormwater will be released off site and in accordance with the
stormwater on-site retention standards for residential, commercial and
industrial stated in § 192-05.



   (B)   Any emergency activity as determined by the city that is
immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural
resources.



   (C)   Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as
permitted or accessory use.



   (D)   New development that is not located within 50 feet of the
city's stormwater collection system and that is not likely to impair the
objectives of this chapter, upon the approval of the City Engineer based on
the criteria noted herein.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-06 Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  A property owner or his/her agent who has filed an
application for a permit.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs).  Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management
practices to prevent and reduce the discharge of pollutants to the MS or
waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.



   CITY. The City of Yuma, being in Yuma County, State of Arizona.



   CONSTRUCTION.  Any repair, construction, reconstruction, upgrading or
enhancing of a structure, grading or landscaping that disturbs one or more
acres of land in public or private development.



   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or firm or person, and their properly
authorized assistants and inspectors, designated by the city to prepare plans
and administer the construction of work.



   EROSION CONTROL DRAINAGE DESIGN MANUAL FOR MARICOPA COUNTY (ECDDM). The
Manual in its latest amended form as an update/upgrade to the original Volume
III Erosion Control of Drainage Design Manual (3 volume set) issued by the
Flood Control District of Maricopa County, Arizona, in 1993.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). City or publicly-owned
facilities by which only stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including
but limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters,
curbs, inlets, forcemains, spillways, pipes, manholes, catch basins, pumping
facilities, dry wells, wet wells, retention and detention basins, natural and
human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage
structures. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems in which both sewage
and stormwater are conveyed at the same lines.



   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION.  Pollution from any source other than from
any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but
not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.



   PERMIT.  An official document or certificate issued by the city, which
authorizes the performance of a specific construction work, demolition,
repair, reconstruction, upgrading or enhancing of a structure, grading or
landscaping or alteration of ground features to create certain improvements
and structures and is subjected to the requirements of this chapter as
defined in CONSTRUCTION above.



   POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP).  A
plan that is required by the city and includes site map(s), an identification
of construction/contractor activities that could cause pollutants in the
stormwater, and a description of measures or practices to control these
pollutants. The SWPPP must contain a post-construction component, if required.



   QUALIFIED STORMWATER PERSON.  A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practices of erosion and sediment controls and who possesses the skills
to assess conditions at the site that could impact stormwater quality and the
effectiveness of the BMPs selected to control the quality of stormwater
discharges. Preferred to be a professional engineer registered in the State
of Arizona, Certified Professional in Stormwater Quality (CPSWQ) or Certified
Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) by the Certified
Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control.



   RECHARGE.  The replenishment of underground water reserves.



   REDEVELOPMENT.  Any construction, alteration or improvement in which
the total project's area is one or more acres.



   SITE.  A parcel of land or a contiguous combination thereof, where
construction work is performed as a single, unified or phased operation.



   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES.  All waters that are currently used, were
used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign
commerce, including all waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tide.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES include all interstate waters and intrastate
lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sand
flats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or
natural ponds.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-07 Permits and Fees.



   (A)   Development and construction for all sites falling under the
authority of this chapter shall submit a SWPPP as defined above for review
and approval by the city. The post-construction component of the SWPPP shall
detail the concept of how runoff and associated stormwater quality impacts
resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. The city shall
not grant any permit for site development or improvement activity that would
fall under this chapter without first having reviewed and approved the
applicant's SWPPP as defined above.



   (B)   No post-construction component of SWPPP is required for the
sites and activities mentioned in § 195-05.



   (C)   Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site, and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant's principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee as set by the Engineer.



   (D)   Applicant must assure that all other applicable environmental
and federal/state permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval
of the SWPPP.



   (E)   The applicant shall pay the city, when applicable, the costs
for engineering plan review and inspection visits, as specified in § 195-12,
as follows:



 

Application
 
Fees


SWPPP inspection
 
$184 for the first 10 acres, plus an additional $20 for each additional 5
acres or part thereof.


SWPPP plan review
 
$174 for the first 10 acres, plus an additional $ 29 for each additional 5
acres or part thereof.



 



An annual update in the above fees is to be made each subsequent July 1 equal
to the change of the previous year West Urban Consumer Price Index



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-08 Review and Approval.



   (A)   The city will review each application, as part of its permit
issuance process, for certain types of permits to determine its conformance
with the provisions of this chapter. After receiving an application, the city
shall respond in one of the following ways:



      (1)   Approve the permit application; or



      (2)   Approve the permit application subject to such
reasonable conditions as may be necessary to substantially secure the
objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these
conditions; or



      (3)   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the
reason(s) and procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.



   (B)   If the city does not act on an original or revised
application, within 30 calendar days of the submittal, the applicant may
assume approval of application, and request issuance of the permit, unless
additional agreements have been created between the applicant and the city.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-09 Design Requirements for Post-Construction Component of the SWPPP.



   (A)   All SWPPPs shall establish BMPs to reduce the generation of
stormwater and to control the peak flow rates using the local two-year,
24-hours storm, as described in Chapter 192, and runoff coefficient from each
drainage area. These BMPs should seek to utilize pervious areas for
stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways,
sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent
practicable to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.



   (B)   All new development or redevelopment shall not discharge
untreated stormwater directly into the city's MS4 or waters of the United
States without adequate treatment.



   (C)   Groundwater recharge rates shall be maintained, by promoting
infiltration through the use of structural and non structural BMPs. At a
minimum, annual recharge from the post development site shall mimic the
annual recharge from pre-development site conditions.



   (D)   BMPs for a site shall be chosen based on the physical
conditions of the site. Among the factors that should be considered:



      (1)   Topography



      (2)   Maximum drainage area



      (3)   Depth to water table



      (4)   Soils



      (5)   Slopes and terrain



      (6)   Proximity to environmentally-sensitive features



Applicant shall consult the Erosion Control Drainage Design Manual (ECDDM)
for Maricopa County, Arizona, as amended, for guidance on factors that
determine site design feasibility when selecting a BMP.



   (E)   All BMPs shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for
the maximum removal of pollutants, to the maximum extent practicable, and
reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Maximizing of flow path from inflow points to outflow
points.



      (2)   Protection of inlet and outfall structures.



      (3)   Elimination of erosive flow velocities.



      (4)   Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.



The ECDDM for Maricopa County, Arizona, as amended provides detailed guidance
on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved BMPs.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-10 Post-Construction Component of SWPPP Requirements.



   The post-construction SWPPP shall include the following:



   (A)   A map indicating the location of the existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, BMPs. The map shall also identify
soil type, vegetation cover, and resources protected under other sections of
this chapter. This map shall be a normal engineering scale and should be at a
scale no smaller than 1"= 100', and no larger than 1"= 10'.



   (B)   Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed BMPs
are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this
chapter and as stated in the ECDDM for Maricopa County, Arizona, as amended.



   (C)   For redevelopment, BMPs for controlling existing stormwater
runoff discharges from the site.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-11 Compatibility with Permit and Other Ordinance Requirements.



   This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law, The
requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and
where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of
law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective
standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take
precedence.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-12 Inspections.



   The city shall make site inspections for post-construction SWPPP
compliance for city-owned projects. For private projects, the city may
monitor and advise the applicant of any apparent remarks for their SWPPP. To
obtain inspections, the owner shall notify the city at least two working days
before the day of inspection.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-13 Right of Entry for Inspection.



   When any new drainage control facility is installed on private
property, or when any new connection is made between private property and the
city's MS4, the property owner shall grant to the Engineer the right to enter
the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose
of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring or
has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance
or correction of a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-14 Stop-Work Order; Revocation of Permit.



   In the event that any person holding any type of permit pursuant to
this chapter violates the terms of the permit or implements site development
in such a manner as to adversely affect the environment, health, welfare, or
safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development
site, so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare, environment,
or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city may
suspend or revoke the building permit.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



§ 195-15 Violation and Penalties.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct,
enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any demolition, grading, excavation, or
fill, or cause such actions, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this
chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a class 1 misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not more than ten days or both fine and imprisonment. Each separate day
or part thereof, during which any violation of said sections occurs or
continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable as herein provided.



(Ord. O2007-78, passed 12-19-07)



Title 21:  Streets and Traffic Code



   Chapter



      210.   Streets and Sidewalks



      211.   Traffic Rules



      212.   Stopping, Standing and Parking



      213.   Bicycles and Play Vehicles



      214.   Railroads



Chapter 210:  Streets and Sidewalks



Section



General Provisions



   210-01   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks



   210-02   Owner and occupant of property to clean sidewalks



   210-03   Removal of materials deposited by storm



   210-04   Building material on streets and sidewalks



   210-05   Excavations in the streets; lighting at night



   210-06   Tampering with barricades and lanterns



   210-07   Throwing nails, broken glass and other objects on public
places



   210-08   Display of merchandise



   210-09   Construction standards



Excavations and Other Work in Streets



   210-20   Applicability



   210-21   Permit required



   210-22   Application



   210-23   Restoration of surface



House Numbering



   210-35   Required



   210-36   Specifications



   210-37   Location of number



   210-38   Numbering grid



   210-39   Assignment of numbers



   210-40   Duty of owner and occupant



   210-41   Issuance of notice



   210-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power of city to regulate use of streets, exercise control over
streets, see Charter Art. III, § 15



Statutory reference:



   Exclusive power of city over streets, sidewalks, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(3)(b)



   Erect, maintain bridges, culverts, sidewalks, crossways and prevent
injury thereto, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(4)



   Direct, regulate planting of ornamental trees, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(9)



   Regulate poles, wires, railroads in, on streets, public grounds, see
A.R.S. § 9-276(A)(5)



   Extend streets, or alter grade and protect same from injury, see A.R.S.
§ 9-276(A)(20), (22)



   Opening, widening, closing public ways, see A.R.S. §§ 9-601 et seq.



General Provisions



§ 210-01  Obstruction of Streets and Sidewalks.



   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
obstruct in any manner or by any material whatsoever, any street or sidewalk,
curb, gutter, alley or other public place.



('80 Code, § 28-1)  (Ord. 93, passed 5-25-11)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-02  Owner and Occupant of Property to Clean Sidewalks.



   It shall be the duty of the owner of real property, and the lessee or
user thereof, to keep the sidewalks in front of and abutting their property
free from dirt, sand and rubbish.



('80 Code, § 28-2)  (Ord. 405, passed 10-7-41)  Penalty, see § 210-99



Statutory reference:



   Require streets, walk appurtenant or adjacent to owner's, occupant's
premises to be cleaned, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(21)



§ 210-03  Removal of Materials Deposited by Storm.



   Every property owner and the lessee or user thereof shall, immediately
following any sand, wind, or rain storm, remove or cause to be removed, from
any sidewalk in front of or abutting their property; any sand, dirt or
accumulation of rubbish that may have been deposited thereon by reason of
said storm.



('80 Code, § 28-3)  (Ord. 405, passed 10-7-41)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-04  Building Material on Streets and Sidewalks.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the construction of any
building, or other public or private improvement, to leave any rock, brick,
mortar, lumber or any building material of any kind whatsoever on any street,
alley or sidewalk for more than three days after the completion of such
improvement or for any time that would impede lawful vehicular traffic.



('80 Code, § 28-4)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-05  Excavations in the Streets; Lighting at Night.



   Any person who shall make any excavation or dig any hole, drain or
ditch in any highway or thoroughfare in the city without providing a
sufficient light at night and a temporary fence or suitable obstruction
around or in front of such excavation during the day shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 28-5)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 210-99



Statutory reference:



   Control lighting of streets, see A.R.S. § 9-276(A)(4)



§ 210-06  Tampering with Barricades and Lanterns.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, extinguish or
destroy any lantern that has been placed upon any public street or sidewalk
for the purpose of warning pedestrians or persons traveling in vehicles at
night that such street or sidewalk has been closed to public use.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy or
otherwise interfere with any construction placed upon any public street or
sidewalk in the city for the purpose of preventing accidents or warning
pedestrians or persons traveling in vehicles that the street or sidewalk has
been closed to travel.



('80 Code, § 28-6)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-07  Throwing Nails, Broken Glass and Other Objects on Public Places.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, either willfully and maliciously
or carelessly and negligently to drop, throw, place or scatter upon any
street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the city any nails, tacks, broken
glass, glass bottles or any instrument or thing whatsoever of such nature as
to be capable of injuring the feet of horses or the tires of vehicles.



('80 Code, § 28-7)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-08  Display of Merchandise.



   It shall be unlawful for merchants, or others doing business in the
city, to expose their goods or property for sale, display, advertisement or
other purposes, in such a manner as to rest upon or project over the
sidewalks of this city, or to be suspended from the awning post or upon
wires, ropes, or framework suspended between the awning posts or in any
manner to obstruct the free use of said sidewalks and passage thereon by the
public.



('80 Code, § 28-8)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-09  Construction Standards.



   (A)   The “Construction Standard Detail Drawings, dated February
2009,” by this reference made a part hereof, is adopted for the City of
Yuma. The “Maricopa Association of Governments Uniform Standard
Specifications and Details for Public Works Construction dated January
2015,” and current revisions thereto dated January 2018, and the “City of
Yuma Supplement to MAG Uniform Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction effective May 15, 2016,” each by this reference made a part
hereof, are adopted as the Construction Specifications for public
improvements for the City of Yuma, Arizona.



   (B)   The City Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to
periodically review the Construction Specifications and Construction Standard
Detail Drawings and prepare amendments as the need may arise so that the
adopted Construction Specifications and Construction Standard Detail Drawings
will comply with current standardized and recognized engineering practice and
will be reasonably compatible with similar standards adopted by other
governmental entities.  Unless previously adopted by resolution, such
amendments shall be put into effect by ordinance of the City Council.



   (C)   The City Engineer, or his designated representative, is
authorized to allow exceptions and minor modifications, on a case-by-case
basis, when physical conditions, good engineering practice and common sense
dictate.  Use of the Construction Specifications or Standard Detail Drawings
does not relieve anyone of the necessity for following the accepted and
adopted rules and practices of the Arizona State Board of Technical
Registration as established in Arizona Revised Statutes.



('80 Code, § 28-9)  (Ord. O95-061, passed 10-5-95; Res. R96-55, passed
12-18-96; Res. R2002-02, passed 1-2-02; Res. R2009-13, passed 3-4-09; Ord.
O2018-007, passed 3-21-18)



Statutory reference:



   Require construction of sidewalks, see A.R.S. § 9-243



Excavations and Other Work in Streets



§ 210-20  Applicability.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to any person doing, or
causing to be done, any work of any nature listed below on or in any street,
alley, sidewalk, park or other public ground or place in the city:



   (A)   Altering or changing;



   (B)   Bridge;



   (C)   Culvert;



   (D)   Ditch;



   (E)   Drain;



   (F)   Electric, telegraph or telephone wire, pole or conduit;



   (G)   Excavating or other digging;



   (H)   Flume;



   (I)   Gas main, pipe or conduit;



   (J)   Railroad track, tie or switch;



   (K)   Sewer main, manhole or pipe;



   (L)   Sidewalk;



   (M)   Street improvement;



   (N)   Tree; or



   (O)   Water main, hydrant or pipe.



('80 Code, § 28-25)  (Ord. 260, passed 9-26-27)



§ 210-21  Permit Required.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any work coming under the
provisions of this subchapter without first obtaining a permit therefor.



('80 Code, § 28-26)  (Ord. 260, passed 9-26-27)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-22  Application.



   Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this
subchapter shall make application therefor to the City Engineer on forms
provided for such purpose by the city.



('80 Code, § 28-27)  (Ord. 260, passed 9-26-27)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-23  Restoration of Surface.



   After completion of the work done under the provisions of this
subchapter, it shall be the duty of the permittee to replace all materials
taken from the street, alley, sidewalk, park or other public place or ground
and to restore the same in as good condition as existed before such work was
begun and approved as such by the City Engineer.  Failure to do so shall be
deemed a violation of this code.



('80 Code, § 28-28)  (Ord. 110, passed 6-10-13)  Penalty, see § 210-99



House Numbering



§ 210-35  Required.



   Any person owning, occupying or managing any house or other premises
within the city shall number such house or premises in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 28-45)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-36  Specifications.



   The numbers used to identify houses or other premises shall be of
durable material and not less than three inches in height with the width
proportionate thereto.



('80 Code, § 28-46)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-37  Location of Number.



   The number required by the provisions of this subchapter shall be
placed on the front of the house or other premises in so conspicuous a manner
that the number may be easily discernible and read from the opposite side of
the street.  If a house or premises is too far back from the street to
comply with this section, or if the front thereof is hidden or the view
thereof is obstructed by trees, plants, shrubbery or other objects, the
number may be placed on a post or other object in order to comply with this
section.



('80 Code, § 28-47)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-38  Numbering Grid.



   For the purpose of implementing and administering the provisions of
this subchapter, a grid map is hereby adopted, on file in the office of the
City Clerk, and made the system of numbering in the city.  All numbers
assigned shall be assigned in accordance with the grid.



('80 Code, § 28-48)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12; Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



§ 210-39  Assignment of Numbers.



   The city planner shall assign all numbers required under the provisions
of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 28-49)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12)



§ 210-40  Duty of Owner and Occupant.



   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any house or other
premises within the city to comply with the provisions of this subchapter. 
Failure to do shall be a violation of this code.



('80 Code, § 28-50)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12)  Penalty, see § 210-99



§ 210-41  Issuance of Notice.



   If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this
subchapter, the City Clerk's Office shall so notify such person of such
failure, giving the number to be posted and requiring compliance with this
subchapter within five days.



('80 Code, § 28-51)  (Ord. 104, passed 9-17-12; Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



§ 210-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 28-10)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



Chapter 211:  Traffic Rules



Section



General Provisions



   211-01   Obstruction of streets and sidewalks



   211-02   Obstruction of traffic



   211-03   Obstruction by street vendors



   211-04   Striking fixed object off roadway



   211-05   Unnecessary tire noise



   211-06   Authority to detain persons to serve traffic complaint



   211-07   Roadways and streets



   211-08   Material handling



   211-09   Definitions



   211-10   Use of portable communication device; prohibited; exceptions



Traffic-control Devices



   211-12   Traffic signal, lighting specifications and standards



   211-13   Approval



   211-14   Obedience



   211-15   Avoidance prohibited



Truck Routes



   211-20   Definitions



   211-21   Intent



   211-22   Truck routes and traffic



   211-23   Use required



   211-24   Exemptions



   211-25   Truck traffic off of truck routes



   211-26   Map of truck route and streets



   211-27   Posting of signs



   211-28   Weighing of trucks off truck route and street



   211-29   Oversize vehicles



Pedestrians



   211-40   Duty of drivers



   211-41   Crossing in business districts



   211-42   Crossing arterial streets



   211-43   Crossing outside business districts



   211-44   Controlled intersections



   211-45   Crossing at right angles



   211-46   Crossing or stopping in a roadway



Parades and Processions



   211-55   Definition



   211-56   Exceptions



   211-57   Permit required



   211-58   Application for permit



   211-59   General restrictions



   211-60   Change of route



   211-61   Issuance restricted



   211-62   Driving through procession prohibited



   211-63   Interruption prohibited



Cruising



   211-75   Prohibited



   211-76   Exceptions



   211-99   Penalty



Charter reference:



   Power to regulate the use of streets, see Charter Art. III, § 12



Statutory reference:



   Exclusive control over streets, sidewalks, see A.R.S. § 9-240(B)(3)(a)



   Power to prevent, suppress racing or immoderate driving, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(14)



General Provisions



§ 211-01  Obstruction of Streets and Sidewalks.



   Any person who or corporation that obstructs the streets, sidewalks or
other thoroughfares of the city by placing or causing to remain therein or
thereon any fence, ditch, embankment, post, cart, wagon or other article,
thing or obstruction whatsoever, or causes crowds of people to gather thereon
shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 30-1)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2169, passed
11-16-83)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-02  Obstruction of Traffic.



   Any person or representative of a corporation who stands, sits or
engages in any activity whatever on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or
public ground within the city in such a manner as to prevent or obstruct the
free passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon or hinder free
ingress or egress to or from any public place or place of business shall be
deemed guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor.



('80 Code, § 30-2)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2169, passed
11-16-83)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-03  Obstruction by Street Vendors.



   No person shall erect or maintain upon the street or sidewalk a stand,
movable booth, or wheel vehicle for the purpose of trade or barter, except
under license or contract with the Council.



('80 Code, § 30-3)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2181, passed
2-1-84)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-04  Striking Fixed Object Off Roadway.



   Any person who, while driving a motor vehicle, strikes any fixed object
off a roadway (e.g. in a parking lot) shall have a duty to immediately report
such accident to either the owner of the object, or if the owner is not
available, the Police Department.



('80 Code, § 30-6)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-05  Unnecessary Tire Noise.



   No person shall intentionally operate any vehicle at such a speed on a
curve or turn, or intentionally accelerate or decelerate any vehicle in such
a manner as to create loud or unnecessary noise through the squealing of
tires on the surface of the roadway or to cause damage to the roadway.



('80 Code, § 30-7)  (Ord. 1064, passed 7-5-67; Ord. 2181, passed 2-1-84) 
Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-06  Authority to Detain Persons to Serve Traffic Complaint.



   Any peace officer or duly authorized agent of the city may stop and
detain a person as is reasonably necessary to investigate an actual or
suspected violation of this title, and to serve a copy of the traffic
complaint for any alleged civil or criminal violation.



('80 Code, § 30-9)  (Ord. 2181, passed 2-1-84)



§ 211-07  Roadways and Streets.



   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the use,
repair, construction or reconstruction of a roadway or alley without taking
reasonable precautions to prevent excessive amounts of particulate matter
from becoming airborne.  Dust and other particulates shall be kept to a
minimum by employing temporary paving, dust suppressants, wetting down,
detouring or by other reasonable means.



   (B)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit transportation
of materials likely to give rise to airborne dust without taking reasonable
precautions, such as wetting, applying dust suppressants, or covering the
load, to prevent particulate matter from becoming airborne.  Earth or other
material that is deposited by trucking or earth moving equipment shall be
removed from paved streets by the person responsible for such deposits.



   (C)   Excluding implements of husbandry, no person shall operate or
move a motor vehicle or trailer carrying a load of scrap, debris, landscape
trimmings, dirt, gravel, rocks, recyclable material, or any other type of
waste products or trash within the city limits unless the vehicle load is
secured and covered to prevent the load from falling, dropping, sifting,
leaking, or otherwise escaping. Implement of husbandry, motor vehicle and
trailer shall have the same meanings as defined in A.R.S. 28-101 or its
successor.



   (D)   Notwithstanding the penalty provisions of  § 211-99, any
person or corporation who violates division (C) of this section shall pay a
civil penalty of $100 plus any other penalty assessment authorized by law for
a first violation in a 12-month period. Any person or corporation convicted
of violating division (C) of this section, who has previously been convicted
of a violation of division (C) of this section within the 12-months
immediately preceding, shall pay a civil penalty of $250 plus any other
penalty assessment authorized by law. Violations of division (C) of this
section shall be administered pursuant to the procedures for civil traffic
violations as set out in A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 5, Article 4.



('80 Code, § 30-10)  (Ord. 2638, passed 11-30-93; Ord. O2018-048, passed
11-21-18)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-08  Material Handling.



   No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit crushing, screening,
handling, transporting or conveying of materials or other operations likely
to result in significant amounts of airborne dust without taking reasonable
precautions, such as the use of spray bars, wetting agents, dust
suppressants, covering the load, and hoods to prevent excessive amounts of
particulate matter from becoming airborne.



('80 Code, § 30-11)  (Ord. 2638, passed 11-30-93)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-09 Definitions.



   For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Means the same as that ascribed to
"authorized emergency vehicle" in A.R.S. 28-101, or its successor, as amended.



   DRIVE. Means the same as that ascribed to "drive" in A.R.S. 28-101, or
its successor, as amended.



   DRIVER. Means the same as that ascribed to "driver" in A.R.S. 28-101,
or its successor, as amended.



   HANDS-FREE MOBILE DEVICE. A portable communication device which allows
a driver to use the device without holding the device while driving a motor
vehicle.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Means the same as that ascribed to "motor vehicle" in
A.R.S. 28-101, or its successor, as amended.



   PARK or PARKED.  The driver has completely ceased movement of a motor
vehicle in a lawful manner and location. For purposes of this section,
"Parked" does not include or mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due
to either a lawful traffic control device, or the conditions on the roadway,
or traffic congestion patterns then existing.



   PORTABLE COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any handheld mobile cellular telephone,
personal digital assistant (PDA), handheld device with mobile data access,
laptop computer, pager, electronic game, or portable computing device.



(Ord. O2015-057, passed 11-4-15; Ord. O2015-061, passed 12-16-15)



§ 211-10Use of portable communication device; prohibited; exceptions.



   (A)   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle on a highway while
using a portable communications device.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   A driver using a hands-free mobile device, as long as
the hands-free mobile device does not obstruct the driver's view of the front
or sides of the motor vehicle or interfere with the safety or operating
equipment of the motor vehicle.



      (2)   A law enforcement officer or authorized emergency
vehicle driver, if the use of a portable communications device is in the
performance of the official duties of the officer or driver.



      (3)   A person driving a motor vehicle on private property.



      (4)   A driver who is legally parked.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section
that the driver was using a portable communication device to prevent an
injury to a person or property or to communicate an emergency to law
enforcement, a fire department, a hospital or physician's office, or an
ambulance service.



   (D)   A violation of this section is a civil traffic violation.



   (E)   A person found to be in violation of this section and not
involved in a motor vehicle crash is subject to a civil penalty of $100 plus
any other penalty assessment authorized by law.



   (F)   A person found to be in violation of this section and involved
in a motor vehicle crash is subject to a civil penalty of $250 plus any other
penalty assessments authorized by law.



   (G)   Violations of this section shall be administered pursuant to
the procedures for civil traffic violations as set out in A.R.S. 28-1591
through 28-1601.



(Ord. O2015-057, passed 11-4-15)



Traffic-control Devices



§ 211-12  Traffic signal, lighting specifications and standards.



   Those documents, three (3) copies of each of which are on file in the
office of the City Clerk, being marked and entitled "General Specifications
for Traffic Signals and Highway Lighting Systems, Edition of 1964," and
"State of Arizona, State Highway Department, Traffic Signal and Highway
Lighting Systems Standard Drawings, 'T.S.' Standards 1964," respectively,
prepared and adopted by the State Highway Department, be and the same are
hereby adopted as the official specifications and drawings of the city,
regulating the purpose of materials and equipment and the erection of traffic
signals on public streets in the city. Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of these publications are hereby referred
to, adopted and made a part hereof as if set out in this chapter and as they
may be from time-to- time amended.



('80 Code, § 30-26) (Ord. 977, passed 4-21-65; Am. Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94;
Am. Ord. 2675, passed 11-2-94)



Statutory reference:
   Adoption of codes by reference, see A.R.S. 9-801 et seq.



   Local traffic control devices must meet state specifications, see
A.R.S. 28-643



§ 211-13  Approval.



   Approval for traffic control devices installed within the city shall be
made by the City Engineer upon the recommendation of a traffic review
committee as constituted by the City Administrator.



('80 Code, § 30-27) (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Am. Ord. 2675, passed
11-2-94)



§ 211-14  Obedience.



   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any traffic
control device erected or approved by the city unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.



('80 Code, § 30-28) (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



Cross-reference:
   Obedience to police officers, see § 111-04



§ 211-15  Avoidance prohibited.



   No person shall drive a vehicle in such a manner as to avoid a traffic
control device, unless directed to do so by a police officer. For example,
cutting through a gas station to avoid a red light at an intersection would
constitute a violation of this provision.



('80 Code, § 30-29) (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



Truck Routes



§ 211-20  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEVIATING TRUCK.  A truck which leaves and departs from a truck route
while traveling inside the city.



   TRUCK.  Any motor vehicle designed or used primarily for the carrying
of property other than the effects of the driver or passengers, and includes
a motor vehicle to which has been added a box; platform or other equipment
for such carrying and whose combined body and load weight exceeds 10,000
pounds registered gross vehicle weight.



   TRUCK ROUTE.  A way over certain streets, as designated herein, over
and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate.



('80 Code, § 30-118)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74)



§ 211-21  Intent.



   It is the intent of this subchapter to prohibit trucks from using
residential streets within the city when not otherwise authorized by this
subchapter as it is felt that it is in the best interest of the citizens of
the city to prevent such streets from being so used unless there is an actual
emergency situation whereby there is a danger to life, limb or property.  It
is not the intent of this subchapter to prohibit unloaded trucks to deviate
to a specific destination point within the city and to remain therefor not in
excess of one hour in any one day.



('80 Code, § 30-119)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74; Ord. O2017-023, passed
7-19-17)



Statutory reference:



   Power of officials to restrict truck usage of streets, see A.R.S. §
28-1006(C)



§ 211-22  Truck Routes and Traffic.



   There is hereby established within the city the following truck routes:



 


Street

 

Direction

 

Extent





4th Ave.
 

Both

 
Its entire length


4th Ave. Ext
 

Both

 
4th Avenue to 40th Street


Arizona Ave.
 

Both

 
10th Street to 24th Street and 32nd Street to 40th Street


Avenue A
 

Both

 
8th Street to County 14th Street


Avenue B
 

Both

 
8th Street to south city limits


Avenue C
 

Both

 
8th Street to 40th Street


Avenue D
 

Both

 
8th Street to south city limits


Pacific Avenue
 

Both

 
8th Street to 32nd Street


Avenue 3E
 

Both

 
16th Street (HWY 95) to County 19th Street


Avenue 3½E
 

Both

 
32nd Street to 40th Street


Avenue 5E
 

Both

 
32nd Street to County 14th Street


Avenue 9E
 

Both

 
Highway 95 to County 14th Street


Giss Parkway
 

Both

 
4th Avenue to Castle Dome Avenue


8th St.
 

Both

 
Its entire length


16th St.
 

Both

 
Its entire length


24th St.
 

Both

 
From Avenue D to Avenue 3E


Gila Ridge Road
 

Both

 
From Avenue 3E to Avenue 5E


30th Street
 

Both

 
From Araby Road to N. Frontage Road


32nd Street
 

Both

 
From Avenue D to Avenue 10E


40th Street
 

Both

 
Its entire length, except Avenue B to Avenue A and Arizona Ave. to Pacific
Ave.


County 14th Street
 

Both

 
Its entire length




 



('80 Code, §§ 30-120 and 30-121)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74; Ord. 1418,
passed 6-4-75; Ord. 1696, passed 12-21-77; Ord. 2383, passed 1-6-88; Ord.
O2017-023, passed 7-19-17)



§ 211-23  Use Required.



   All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the
truck routes herein established and on the other designated streets over
which truck travel is permitted.



('80 Code, § 30-122)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-24  Exemptions.



   The following vehicles are not subject to the provisions of this
subchapter:



   (A)   Emergency vehicles.  The operation of emergency vehicles upon
any street in the city.



   (B)   Governmental vehicles.  The operation of trucks owned or
operated by the city, county, state or United States government while in
performance of their official or normal duties.



   (C)   Public utilities.  The operation of trucks owned or operated
by public utility companies while in performance of their official duties.



   (D)   Contractors, materialmen.  The operation of trucks owned or
operated by a contractor or materialman engaged in the repair maintenance or
construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the
city.



   (E)   Detoured trucks.  The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated
upon the street for which such detour is established.



('80 Code, § 30-123)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74)



§ 211-25  Truck Traffic Off of Truck Routes.



   Trucks entering the city going to and in city destination, leaving the
city from an in city point of origination and/or conducting business between
points within the city shall conform to the following:



   (A)   In city destination, single destination.  All trucks entering
the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an
established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the
street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination
point.  Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return
to the truck route by the shortest permissible route.



   (B)   In city destination, multiple destinations.  All trucks
entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over
established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the
street, upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first
destination point.  Upon leaving the first destination point a deviating
truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction and
only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted.  Upon leaving the
last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by
the shortest permissible route.



   (C)   In city origination.  All trucks, on a trip originating in
the city, and traveling in the city for a destination point outside the city
shall proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is
permitted to a truck route as herein established.



   (D)   In city origination and destination.  All trucks, on a trip
originating in the city, and traveling in the city for destination points in
the city shall proceed only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted.



('80 Code, § 30-124)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-26  Map of Truck Route and Streets.



   The City Clerk shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck
routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and shall be available to the
public.



('80 Code, § 30-125)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74; Ord. 2662, passed 7-6-94)



§ 211-27  Posting of Signs.



   The City Engineer of the city shall cause all truck routes and those
streets upon which truck traffic is permitted to be clearly posted with signs
so that they give notice that this subchapter is in effect.



('80 Code, § 30-126)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74; Ord. 2675, passed
11-2-94)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-28  Weighing of Trucks Off Truck Route and Street.



   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to require any person
driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck
route or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any
public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determine
whether this subchapter has been complied with.



('80 Code, § 30-127)  (Ord. 1384, passed 12-4-74)



§ 211-29  Oversize Vehicles.



   (A)   The owner and/or driver of any overdimensional, overweight or
overheight vehicle, or mobile home, as defined in ADOT Administrative Rules
and Regulations, Title 17, shall seek authorization from the City Engineer to
use any street in the city not designated as a state or federal highway.



   (B)   Any such vehicle shall have such marking as is required by
Title 17 of the ADOT Administrative Rules and Regulations.



('80 Code, § 30-128)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2675, passed
11-2-94)  Penalty, see § 211-99



Pedestrians



§ 211-40  Duty of Drivers.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not relieve the driver of a
motor vehicle from the duty to exercise due care under the circumstances for
the safety of pedestrians.



('80 Code, § 30-145)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 211-41  Crossing in Business Districts.



   No pedestrian shall cross the roadway within a business district at any
place other than a crosswalk as designated in A.R.S. § 28-602.



('80 Code, § 30-146)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-42  Crossing Arterial Streets.



   No person shall cross the roadway other than in a crosswalk upon any
designated arterial street.



('80 Code, § 30-147)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-43  Crossing Outside Business Districts.



   Outside the business districts any pedestrian crossing at a point other
than a crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to motor vehicles upon the
roadway.



('80 Code, § 30-148)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-44  Controlled Intersections.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals, pedestrians
shall not cross the roadway at any place except where authorized by this
section.  A pedestrian crossing or starting to cross any such crosswalk on a
green signal shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, including those
making turns until such pedestrian has reached the opposite curb or a safety
zone.



('80 Code, § 30-149)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-45  Crossing at Right Angles.



   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a route at right
angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a
crosswalk.



('80 Code, § 30-150)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-46  Crossing or Stopping in a Roadway.



   (A)   A pedestrian shall not cross a roadway where prohibited by
appropriate signs, markings, devices or by law.



   (B)   No pedestrian may stop or remain in the portion of the roadway
designed for vehicular use or in a painted or raised traffic island or median
not designated for use by pedestrians except to wait to cross the roadway at
the next pedestrian signal or, in the absence of a pedestrian signal, when
traffic has cleared or yielded.



('80 Code, § 30-151)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-010, passed
3-4-15)  Penalty, see § 211-99



Parades and Processions



§ 211-55  Definition.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   PARADE.  The concerted movement of a body of persons, equestrians or
vehicles in something approximating military order over the streets,
sidewalks or public ways of the city.



('80 Code, § 30-189)



§ 211-56  Exceptions.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to movements of the
military forces of the United States of America, or of the state, nor to a
funeral procession being held as a part of the burial services of a human
body.



('80 Code, § 30-190)



Statutory reference:



   Funeral procession right-of-way, see A.R.S. § 28-776



§ 211-57  Permit Required.



   All parades within the city are expressly prohibited unless a permit
therefor shall have been first had and obtained in conformity with the
provisions of this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 30-191)  Penalty, see § 211-99



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate, prohibit processions, assemblages on
highways, see A.R.S. § 28-627



§ 211-58  Application for Permit.



   Any person or group of persons desiring to engage in or conduct a
parade in the city shall make application in writing to the City
Administrator not less than 24 hours before the time for holding the proposed
parade and shall state in the application the probable number of persons,
animals and vehicles to be used in the parade and the object, time and route
of the parade, together with the names of the persons to be in charge thereof.



('80 Code, § 30-192)  (Ord. 1983, passed 1-21-81)



§ 211-59  General Restrictions.



   No permit shall be issued for a parade to be held at any time when the
holding thereof or the route thereof will tend to cause or bring about public
disorder, breach of the peace or undue congestion of traffic within the city
in the opinion of the Chief of Police.



('80 Code, § 30-193)  (Ord. 1983, passed 1-21-81)



§ 211-60  Change of Route.



   The City Administrator is authorized to make such change in the route
of any proposed parade as he may deem proper and necessary in averting breach
of the peace, public disorder or traffic congestion within the city.



('80 Code, § 30-194)



§ 211-61  Issuance Restricted.



   Upon application for a parade permit, the City Administrator shall
forthwith issue a permit or license for such parade unless he is justified in
refusing a permit for such proposed parade under the provisions of this
subchapter, in which event he shall refuse the issuance of such permit to the
applicant therefor.



('80 Code, § 30-195)



§ 211-62  Driving Through Procession Prohibited.



   No driver of any vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a
funeral or other authorized parade or procession while they are in motion,
provided that the vehicles are conspicuously so designated.  Such provision
shall not apply to intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic
control signals or police officers.



('80 Code, § 30-196)  (Ord. 2181, passed 2-1-84)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-63  Interruption Prohibited.



   No vehicle or person shall interrupt, enter or otherwise disrupt the
free movement of a parade or procession unless specifically directed to do so
by a police officer.



('80 Code, § 30-197)  (Ord. 2181, passed 2-1-84)  Penalty, see § 211-99



Cruising



§ 211-75  Prohibited.



   (A)   No person may drive or permit a motor vehicle he owns to be
driven past a traffic control point three or more times within a one-hour
period in an area posted as a no cruising zone.



   (B)   Every no cruising area will be posted with sufficient signs to
provide notice of the prohibition.  Signs will clearly state that the area
is a no cruising zone and that driving through the area more than two times
in one hour between certain time periods is a violation of city ordinance.



   (C)   A traffic control point as used in this section means any
point within the no cruising area established by the Police Department for
the purpose of monitoring cruising.



   (D)   No area may be designated or posted as a no cruising zone
unless City Council passes a resolution that specifically mandates the
designation and posting for a particular area.



('80 Code, § 30-257)  (Ord. O96-62, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 211-99



§ 211-76  Exceptions.



   The following vehicles are valid exceptions to this subchapter:



   (A)   Emergency vehicles;



   (B)   Any vehicle owned or operated by the city, provided it is
being operated for official purposes; and



   (C)   Any taxicab, bus, or other commercial vehicle for hire
transporting persons on legitimate business.



('80 Code, § 30-258)  (Ord. O96-62, passed 6-19-96)



§ 211-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty
of a class 3 misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than one day, or both fine and imprisonment. ('80
Code, § 30-259)  (Ord. O96-62, passed 6-19-96)



   (B)   In addition to any penalty imposed under division (A) of this
section, any person or corporation that violates any provisions of this
chapter is subject to a civil sanction pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-626, unless a
code section defining a specific penalty to an offense provides otherwise.
('80 Code, § 30-8)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82; Ord. 2169, passed 11-16-83)



Chapter 212:  Stopping, Standing and Parking



Section



General Provisions



   212-01   Unattended motor vehicles



   212-02   Presumption in reference to illegal parking



   212-03   Impounding of vehicles



   212-04   Towing; notice to police



   212-05   Parking so as to impede traffic



   212-06   Parking in, on or adjacent to median dividers



   212-07   Parking in alleys



   212-08   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places



   212-09   Stopping, standing or parking outside of business or
residence district



   212-10   Parking for display or working on vehicle



   212-11   Parking trucks and trailers on residential streets



   212-12   Parking at roadside



   212-13   Parallel parking



   212-14   Angle parking



   212-15   Parking in driveway or private property



   212-16   Time limit



   212-17   Gasoline fuel trucks in residential area



   212-18   Parking on private property



   212-19   Parking in space reserved for handicapped persons



   212-20   Restricted parking; freight loading zone



   212-21   Restricted parking; passenger loading zone



Emergency Lanes and Loading Zones on Private Property



   212-30   Authorized



   212-31   Emergency lanes for new and renovated buildings



   212-32   Establishment and maintenance



   212-33   Color and content of marking of emergency lane



   212-34   Location and marking of emergency lane



   212-35   Signs, size and marking of loading zone



   212-36   Payment for signs and markings



   212-37   Enforcement



   212-38   Use by commercial vehicles and disabled occupants



   212-99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Authority of local officials to designate parking place, manner of
parking, see A.R.S. § 28-874



General Provisions



§ 212-01  Unattended Motor Vehicles.



   (A)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the
ignition and removing the key, or when standing upon any perceptible grade
without effectively setting the brake thereon and turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer shall find a motor vehicle
standing unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle, in violation of
this section, such police officer is authorized to remove the key from such
vehicle and to deliver such key to the Police Department.



('80 Code, § 30-46)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-02  Presumption in Reference to Illegal Parking.



   In any civil proceeding alleging or in any prosecution charging a
violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was
parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that
the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who
parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during
which, such violation occurred.



('80 Code, § 30-47)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2181, passed 2-1-84)



§ 212-03  Impounding of Vehicles.



   The Police Department may take in charge, remove and keep in custody,
under the direction of the Chief of Police, any unoccupied vehicle of any
kind or description found violating any of the provisions of this code, or of
any of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state regulating the
standing or parking of vehicles.



('80 Code, § 30-48)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 212-04  Towing; Notice to Police.



   No person shall tow or transport any vehicle without the express
permission of the owner, unless he shall first have notified the Police
Department of his intent to do so, and provided the following information:



   (A)   Name and address of the owner of the vehicle if known.



   (B)   The vehicle license number and description.



   (C)   The reason the vehicle is being moved without the permission
of the owner.



   (D)   The location where the vehicle is being taken.



   (E)   The name and address of the person or company that is to tow
or transport the vehicle.



('80 Code, § 30-49)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-05  Parking So As to Impede Traffic.



   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a
manner or under such conditions as to impede the free movement of vehicular
traffic.



('80 Code, § 30-50)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-06  Parking In, On or Adjacent to Median Dividers.



   In the event a highway is divided into two or more separate roadways,
and traffic is restricted to one direction upon each roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle other than on the right-hand side of such one-way
roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking elsewhere.



('80 Code, § 30-51)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-07  Parking in Alleys.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of
the width of roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position
as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.



   (B)   No person shall park any vehicle in any alley, except
commercial cars, trucks or wagons for the purpose of loading and unloading,
and then not for a longer period than is actually necessary to load or
unload.  Vehicles displaying state “disabled parking” identifying
insignia may stand or park in an alley while loading or unloading persons for
a period not to exceed five minutes.



   (C)   At no time shall a vehicle parked in an alley be left
unattended during the time of loading and unloading.



('80 Code, § 30-52)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2181, passed
2-1-84)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-08  Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction
of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:



   (A)   On a sidewalk.



   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway or the entrance to an
alley.



   (C)   Within an intersection.



   (D)   Where prohibited by official signs or where the curb is
painted red.



   (E)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.



   (F)   On a crosswalk.



   (G)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.



   (H)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop
sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.



   (I)   Within a designated bus stop.



   (J)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing or
within eight feet, six inches of the center of any railroad track, except
while a motor vehicle with motive power attached is loading or unloading
railroad cars.



   (K)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station
and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of the entrance when properly posted.



   (L)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction
when stopping, standing or parking would impede traffic.



   (M)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.



   (N)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a street or
within a street tunnel.



   (O)   In that area between the curb and sidewalk.  On those
roadways without curbs no person shall park a vehicle so as to force a
pedestrian to walk in the traveled portion of the roadway.



   (P)   Upon any lot or area prohibiting such parking.



('80 Code, § 30-53)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-09  Stopping, Standing or Parking Outside of Business or Residence
District.



   Upon any street outside of a business or residence district, no person
shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the roadway when it is
practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle off that part of the
roadway.



('80 Code, § 30-54)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-10  Parking for Display or Working on Vehicle.



   No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway including the
right-of-way thereof, for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle
for sale; display advertising; displaying commercial exhibits; or washing,
greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by emergency.



('80 Code, § 30-55)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-11  Parking Trucks and Trailers on Residential Streets.



   (A)   Unless otherwise exempted in this ordinance, no person shall
stand, idle or park a vehicle having a manufacturer’s payload rating of
greater than one-ton and having a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)
classified by the United States Department of Transportation as a Class 3
vehicle or greater, or a tractor, semitrailer, trailer, bus, motor home or
recreational vehicle for more than five consecutive minutes on a local or
collector street in a residential zone. Residential deliveries are exempt
from the parking time limitation if the delivery vehicle is being loaded or
unloaded.







 



   (B)    Moving vans, motor homes and recreational vehicles shall be
exempt from the five minute time limitation if the vehicle is in the process
of being loaded and/or unloaded. In no circumstance shall moving vans, motor
homes or recreational vehicles be permitted to load and/or unload on a local
or collector street in a residential district for more than 48 hours.



   (C)    Vehicles, which are no-greater than a Class 6 vehicle as
identified above, and are providing on-call services to local public safety
agencies and/or public utilities shall be exempt from the parking time
limitation if the vehicle is actually providing an on-call service. In no
circumstance shall the on-call service vehicle be permitted to park on a
local or collector street in a residential district for longer than 72 hours.



   (D)   This provision shall not apply to buses operated by a public
and/or private educational institution or those which provide public
transportation to the residents within Yuma County.



('80 Code, § 30-56)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2017-025, passed
8-16-17; Ord. O2018-037, passed 9-5-18)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-12  Parking at Roadside.



   No person shall park any vehicle at any time in that area between the
curb and the sidewalk.  On those roadways without curbs no person shall park
a vehicle so as to force a pedestrian to walk in the traveled portion of the
roadway.



('80 Code, § 30-57)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-13  Parallel Parking.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway
headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the curbside
wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.



('80 Code, § 30-58)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-14  Angle Parking.



   No person shall park or stand a vehicle upon those streets which have
been signed or marked by the City Traffic Engineer for angle parking, other
than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs
or markings.



('80 Code, § 30-59)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-15  Parking in Driveway or Private Property.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle in any private driveway or on
private property or private parking areas without the express or implied
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property.



   (B)   The owner or person in lawful possession of any private
parking area shall be deemed to have given consent to unrestricted parking by
the general public in such parking area unless such parking area is posted
with signs as prescribed by this section which are clearly visible and
readable from any point within the parking area and at each entrance
thereto.  Such signs shall contain, as a minimum, the following information:



      (1)   Restrictions on parking.



      (2)   Disposition of vehicles found in violation of parking
restrictions.



      (3)   Maximum cost to the violator that could result from the
disposition of his unlawfully parked vehicle.



      (4)   Telephone number or address where the violator can
locate his vehicle.



      (5)   Each sign shall state “Yuma City Code Sec. 212-15.”



('80 Code, § 30-60)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-16  Time Limit.



   No person may park a vehicle upon any roadway for a consecutive period
of time longer than that indicated by official signs installed to limit such
parking.



('80 Code, § 30-61)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-17  Gasoline Fuel Trucks in Residential Area.



   Gasoline or other types of fuel trucks shall not be parked in a
residential area unless involved in a retail or wholesale delivery to the
particular property involved.



('80 Code, § 30-63)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-18  Parking on Private Property.



   No person shall operate, drive or leave any motor vehicle, motorcycle,
minibike, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, jeep, or other form of
transportation propelled by an internal combustion engine, upon the private
property of another, without the written permission of the owner thereof or
the person entitled to immediate possession thereof, or the authorized agent
of either.



('80 Code, § 30-64)  (Ord. 1256, passed 3-15-72; Ord. 2181, passed
2-1-84)  Penalty, see § 212-99



Statutory reference:



   Power to regulate parking of vehicles, see A.R.S. § 28-627(1)



§ 212-19  Parking in Space Reserved for Handicapped Persons.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle
in a parking space reserved for use by physically disabled persons, whether
on public property or private property available for public use, when such
space is designated as described in division (C) of this section, unless:



      (1)   The motor vehicle displays one of the following:



         (a)   A distinguishing insignia placard issued under
state law for this purpose; or



         (b)   License plates bearing the international
wheelchair symbol; or



         (c)   Any other distinguishing insignia for physically
disabled persons recognized under the laws of the State of Arizona; and



      (2)   The motor vehicle is transporting a person eligible for
the placard, license plates, or permit.



   (B)   Any person who is chauffeuring a physically disabled person
shall be allowed, without a distinguishing placard, license plate, or permit,
to park momentarily in any such parking space for the purpose of loading or
unloading such disabled person.  Such momentary parking shall not constitute
a violation of division (A) of this section.



   (C)   (1)   All parking spaces reserved for use by physically
disabled persons pursuant to the Yuma City Code, A.R.S. § 34-409(A), or
A.R.S. § 28-883(A) or (B), or any successor of the foregoing, shall be
designated as reserved for the disabled by a sign showing the symbol of
accessibility.  Signing which meets the requirements of this section
includes:



         (a)   Raised blue reflective markers in the design of
the standard symbolic disabled parking sign; or



         (b)   Signing which complies with A.R.S. § 28-883(C) or
any successor thereto.



      (2)   The posting of such sign or signs shall authorize police
and volunteers in policing (V.I.P.s) to enforce the provisions of this
section and shall thereby constitute a waiver of any objection by the owner
of the property to enforcement by the Police Department.



   (D)    PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSON shall be as defined by A.R.S. §
28-881(I), or any successor thereto.



('80 Code, § 30-65)  (Ord. 2500, passed 9-5-90)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-20  Restricted Parking; Freight Loading Zone.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time in any place marked by signs and/or yellow painted curb
designated by the Chief of Police as a freight loading zone.



   (B)   Exceptions:



      (1)   The expeditious loading and unloading of materials, in
no case to exceed 30 minutes.



      (2)   Vehicles displaying state “disabled parking”
identifying insignia may stand or park in a freight loading zone while
loading or unloading persons for a period not to exceed 20 minutes.



('80 Code, § 30-81)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 1902, passed
2-20-80)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-21  Restricted Parking;  Passenger Loading Zone.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose
or length of time in any place marked by signs and/or yellow painted curb
designated by the Traffic Engineer as a passenger loading zone.



   (B)   Exceptions:



      (1)   The loading and unloading of passengers, in no case to
exceed five minutes.



      (2)   Vehicles displaying state "disabled parking" identifying
insignia may stand or park in a passenger loading zone while loading or
unloading persons for a period not to exceed 20 minutes.



(Ord. O2002-54, passed 9-18-02)  Penalty, see § 212-99



Emergency Lanes and Loading Zones on Private Property



§ 212-30  Authorized.



   Any owner of commercial property may in accordance with the provisions
of this subchapter establish emergency lanes and/or loading zones upon his
property.



('80 Code, § 30-93)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



Statutory reference:



   Property owner authorized to regulate traffic on such property, see
A.R.S. § 28-628



§ 212-31  Emergency Lanes for New and Renovated Buildings.



   Any new industrial or commercial structure must establish emergency
lanes in accordance with Fire Department regulations.  In addition any
renovation of over 50% of an existing commercial or industrial structure,
pursuant to the Uniform Building Code, will require the establishment of
emergency lanes.



('80 Code, § 30-94)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



§ 212-32  Establishment and Maintenance.



   The Chief of Police of the city is hereby authorized and required to
establish and maintain emergency lanes and/or loading zones on private
commercial property upon request of the owner thereof.



('80 Code, § 30-95)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



§ 212-33  Color and Content of Marking of Emergency Lane.



   Emergency lanes shall be approximately 15 feet in width and shall be
marked with appropriate white marks or lines.  Where applicable the curb
shall be marked in red.  Signs designating the emergency lane shall be
marked “No Parking-Emergency Lane” and shall be placed at least every 50
feet along the curb or side of building where the lane is established.  Said
signs shall be of such size and marking as to be in conformance with state
law.



('80 Code, § 30-96)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



§ 212-34  Location and Marking of Emergency Lane.



   Location and marking of emergency lanes upon said commercial property
shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief. 
Location and marking of loading zones shall be subject to the approval of the
Chief of Police.



('80 Code, § 30-97)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



§ 212-35  Signs, Size and Marking of Loading Zone.



   Loading zones shall be approximately 15 feet in width and shall be
marked with appropriate white marks or lines.  Where applicable the curb
shall be marked in yellow.  Signs designating the loading zone shall be
marked “No Parking-Loading Zone” and shall be placed at least every 50
feet along the curb or side of building wherein the zone is established. 
Said signs shall be of such size and marking as to be in conformance with
state law.



('80 Code, § 30-98)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)  Penalty, see § 212-99



§ 212-36  Payment for Signs and Markings.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the commercial property
to bear the cost of the signs and marking of said emergency lane and/or
loading zone.



('80 Code, § 30-99)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



§ 212-37  Enforcement.



   Police officers of the city may remove or cause the removal of any
vehicle from any emergency lane and/or loading zone established in accordance
with the terms of this subchapter.  Such vehicle shall be impounded into a
public garage, parking lot or storage yard.  The owner of said vehicle shall
pay reasonable towing and storage charges before said vehicle may be released.



('80 Code, § 30-100)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77)



§ 212-38  Use by Commercial Vehicles and Disabled Occupants.



   The following vehicles may use, to the extent indicated, the emergency
lanes and/or loading zones established in accordance with this subchapter:



   (A)   Commercial vehicles, while in the act of loading and
unloading, may park in areas designated as loading zones.



   (B)   Those vehicles displaying state “disabled parking”
identifying insignia may stand or park in a loading zone while loading or
unloading.



('80 Code, § 30-101)  (Ord. 1694, passed 12-21-77; Ord. 1798, passed
12-20-78)



§ 212-99  Penalty.



   (A)   Any person who or corporation that violates any provisions of
this chapter is subject to a civil sanction pursuant to A.R.S. § 28-626,
unless a code section defining a specific penalty to an offense provides
otherwise.



('80 Code, § 30-8)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82; Ord. 2169, passed 11-16-83)



   (B)   Pursuant to A.R.S. Title 28, Chapter 5, any person or
corporation that violates any provision of § 212-11 is subject to a civil
penalty of $100 in addition to any other penalty authorized by law.
Violations of this section shall be administered pursuant to the procedures
for civil traffic violations as set out in A.R.S. §§ 28-1591 through
28-1601. 



(Ord. O2018-037, passed 9-5-18)



   (C)   Any person who violates the provisions of § 212-19 of this
chapter shall be guilty of a civil offense which shall be punishable by a
minimum civil sanction of $75, plus the penalty assessments prescribed by
statute.  If a person is convicted of a second violation of § 212-19 of
this chapter within a period of 12 months, the minimum civil sanction shall
be a fine of $100, plus the penalty assessments prescribed by statute.  If a
person is convicted of a third or subsequent violation of § 212-19 of this
chapter within a period of 12 months, the minimum civil sanction shall be a
fine of $125, plus the penalty assessments prescribed by statute.  The
maximum civil sanction which may be imposed under § 212-19 of this chapter
shall be $500.



('80 Code, § 30-65)  (Ord. 2500, passed 9-5-90; Am. Ord. O98-21, passed
3-18-98)



Chapter 213:  Bicycles and Play Vehicles



Section



General Provisions



   213-01   Definitions



   213-02   Applicability



   213-03   Exceptions



   213-04   Responsibility of parent or guardian



   213-05   Riding on sidewalks



   213-06   Traffic hazard or impedance



   213-07   Signs prohibiting operation



   213-08   Yield right-of-way



   213-09   Speed



   213-10   Emerging from alley or driveway



   213-11   Parking



   213-12   Motorized skateboards and motorized play vehicles



   213-13   Requirement for helmet use



   213-14   Traffic flow



   213-15   Duty of drivers



Registration



   213-25   Application



   213-26   Procedure for registration



   213-27   Registration records



   213-28   Fees



   213-29   Identification of registered bicycles



Statutory reference:



   Power of city to regulate operation of bicycles, license, register and
require fee therefor, see A.R.S. § 28-627(A)(8)



General Provisions



§ 213-01  Definitions.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE.  Every device propelled by human power, upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 16 inches in
diameter.



   BICYCLE LANE.  A portion of a roadway which has been designated by
pavement markings and, if used, indicating the preferential or exclusive use
by bicycles.



   OWNER.  Any person who holds legal title to a bicycle or if the
bicycle is the subject of a lease or an agreement for the conditional sale
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated
in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or if a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such lessee, conditional vendee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner.



   PLAY VEHICLE.  Tricycles, unicycles, skateboards, motorized
skateboards, scooters, rollerskates, and any wheeled, non-motorized
conveyance.



   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway, physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within a highway
right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way. Shared-use paths may be
pedestrians, skaters, wheelchair users, joggers, and other non-motorized
users.



   SHOULDER. The portion of a roadway contiguous with the traveled way for
accommodation of stopped road vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral
support of sub-base, base, and surface courses.



   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street or highway right-of-way designed for
preferential or exclusive use by pedestrians.



('80 Code, § 30-214)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)



§ 213-02  Applicability.



   The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to tricycles,
unicycles, skateboards, motorized skateboards, scooters, rollerskates, and
all other wheeled, nonmotorized conveyances.



('80 Code, § 30-215)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 213-03  Exceptions.



   The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to persons confined
to or restricted to a wheelchair or similar conveyance, nor baby carriages or
strollers being used to transport infants.



('80 Code, § 30-216)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)



§ 213-04  Responsibility of Parent or Guardian.



   The parent or guardian of a person under the age of 18 years shall not
authorize or knowingly permit such person to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.



('80 Code, § 30-217)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Statutory reference:



   Responsibility of parent or guardian, see A.R.S. § 28-811



§ 213-05  Riding on Sidewalks.



   A.    No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk where a bicycle
lane is available, unless the bicycle lane is obstructed.



   B.   No person shall operate a bicycle or play vehicle upon a
sidewalk in an area where business doors are adjacent to the sidewalk or
where the operation would be hazardous to persons entering or exiting a
business.  These areas prohibiting bicycle riding shall be posted with signs
referring to Yuma City Code § 213-05.



('80 Code, § 30-219)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-06  Traffic Hazard or Impedance.



   No person shall operate a bicycle or play vehicle upon a street, alley
or public highway if such operation creates a traffic hazard or impedes the
free flow of traffic.



('80 Code, § 30-220)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-07  Signs Prohibiting Operation.



   The City is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk, street, alley or
public highway prohibiting the operation of bicycles or play vehicles.



('80 Code, § 30-221)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2675, passed
11-2-94; Ord. O2015-019, passed 4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-08  Yield Right-of-Way.



   A.   A person riding a bicycle or play vehicle on a sidewalk or
shared-use path that enters or crosses a roadway shall yield the right-of-way
to traffic on such roadway.



   B.   A person operating a bicycle or play vehicle upon a sidewalk or
shared-use path shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians, and shall
otherwise ride and operate such conveyance in a safe and lawful manner.



('80 Code, § 30-222)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-09  Speed.



   No person shall operate a bicycle or play vehicle at a speed greater
than is reasonable and prudent under the existing conditions.



('80 Code, § 30-223)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-10  Emerging From Alley or Driveway.



   A.   The operator of a bicycle or play vehicle emerging from an
alley, driveway, or building shall yield the right-of-way to closely
approaching pedestrians, bicycles, and play vehicles.



   B.   The operator of a bicycle or play vehicle entering the street
or public highway shall yield the right-of-way to closely approaching
bicycles, play vehicles, and motor vehicles.



   C.   In this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as that
ascribed to MOTOR VEHICLE in A.R.S. § 28-101(33).



('80 Code, § 30-224)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Statutory reference:



   Traffic laws to apply to bicycles, see A.R.S. § 28-812



§ 213-11  Parking.



   No person shall park a bicycle or play vehicle upon a public sidewalk,
street, alley or public highway in a manner that substantially impedes
pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic or obstructs access to public or private
facilities.



('80 Code, § 30-225)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2015-019, passed
4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-12  Motorized Skateboards and Motorized Play Vehicles.



   (A)   Obedience to traffic laws.



      (1)   Except as to those provisions of law which by their
nature can have no application, any person operating a motorized skateboard
or motorized play vehicle on a roadway or on any shoulder adjoining a roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by both:



         (a)   The laws of this state declaring rules of the road
applicable to vehicles; and



         (b)   The traffic laws of the city applicable to the
driver of a vehicle.



      (2)   This section shall not be construed to require the
licensing or registration of motorized skateboards; the licensing of
motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle operators or the carrying of
insurance covering accidents involving motorized skateboards or motorized
play vehicles.



   (B)   Definitions.  In this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      (2)   MOTORIZED PLAY VEHICLE.  A coaster, scooter, any other
alternatively fueled device, or other motorized vehicle that is
self-propelled by a motor or engine, gas or electric and which is not
otherwise defined in A.R.S. Title 28, as a MOTOR VEHICLE, MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR
DRIVEN CYCLE, MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR or ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY
DEVICE.



      (2)   MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD.  A self-propelled device that has
a motor, gas or electric, a deck on which a person may ride and at least two
tandem wheels in contact with the ground, and which is not otherwise defined
in A.R.S. Title 28, as a MOTOR VEHICLE, MOTORCYCLE, MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE,
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR or ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE.



   (C)   Responsibilities of parents, guardians, and custodians.



      (1)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor or
ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit such minor or ward to violate
any of the provisions of this section.



      (2)   No minor shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any city right-of-way, including streets, roadways,
and paved alleyways, unless the minor possesses at all times while operating
the motorized skateboard or motorized play vehicle a written consent of the
minor's parent or legal guardian. The written consent shall be signed by the
parent or legal guardian, whose signature shall be notarized, and shall
contain the following:



         (a)   The name and date of birth of the minor.



         (b)   The residence address of the minor and
parent/guardian.



         (c)   The residence and work telephone number of the
parent/guardian.



         (d)   The following statement:



            I am the parent/guardian of the minor named herein
and hereby authorize said minor to operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle in the City of Yuma. I have read and discussed with
said minor the applicable laws of the State of Arizona and of this City
regarding the operation of motorized skateboards and play vehicles and have
assured myself that said minor understands these regulations.



   (D)   Operation prohibited in certain areas and at certain times.



      (1)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any sidewalk except for use in crossing such
sidewalk to gain access to any public or private road or driveway.



      (2)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle in any city parking structure or city park, except for
use on public roadways within such park on which a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle is otherwise allowed.



      (3)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any public property that has been posted or
designated by the owner of such property as an area in which the operation of
motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles is prohibited.



      (4)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any private property of another, including any
canal bank and irrigation district or any public property which is not held
open to the public for vehicle use, without the written permission of the
owner, or the owner's authorized agent.



      (5)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any public roadway having a speed limit established
greater than 25 miles per hour.



      (6)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on a city right-of-way, including streets, roadways,
and paved alleyways, except during daylight.



      (7)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle on any unpaved alleyway.



   (E)   General operating restrictions.



      (1)   No child under the age of 16 shall operate a motorized
skateboard or motorized play vehicle.



      (2)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit or at a speed
greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing.



      (3)   A person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized
play vehicle, approaching a sidewalk, bicycle path, bicycle lane, or multiuse
path in order to cross such, shall yield the right-of-way to all other users.



      (4)   No person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized
play vehicle shall allow passengers when the motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle is in operation or motion.



      (5)   No person operating or riding upon a motorized
skateboard or motorized play vehicle shall attach themselves or the motorized
skateboard or motorized play vehicle in any manner to any other vehicle.



      (6)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle while carrying any package, bundle, or article which
prevents the operator from keeping both hands upon the steering mechanism at
all times.



      (7)   No person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized
play vehicle shall transport extra fuel in a separate container or alter the
fuel reservoir from the original manufacturer's design. This includes the
prohibition of physically attaching fuel packs or containers to the
operator's person.



      (8)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle in a manner causing excessive, unnecessary, or
offensive noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or
which causes discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal
sensitivity.



      (9)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle that has been structurally altered from the original
manufacturer's design, including but not limited to the alteration or removal
of any muffler.



   (F)   Required safety equipment.



      (1)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle at any time when there is not sufficient light to
render clearly discernible persons and vehicles at a distance of 500 feet
ahead.



      (2)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle unless it is equipped with a brake, which enables the
operator to make a braked wheel(s) skid on pavement.



      (3)   A person under the age of 18 years operating a motorized
skateboard or motorized play vehicle on a roadway shall at all times wear a
protective helmet on his or her head in an appropriate and safely secured
manner. The helmet shall meet minimum standards of testing and safety
inspection type approved for bicycle use.



      (4)   No person shall operate a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle without wearing footwear. The footwear must have a
sole and completely cover the feet and toes.



      (5)   A person operating a motorized skateboard or motorized
play vehicle shall wear, at all times, protective glasses or goggles or a
transparent face shield of a type approved for motorcycle or motor driven
cycle use.



   (G)   Merchant's disclosure requirements.



      (1)   It is unlawful for a merchant to sell motorized
skateboards or motorized play vehicles without making the disclosures
required by this section.



      (2)   Any merchant who sells motorized skateboards or
motorized play vehicles within the city limits of Yuma shall:



         (a)   Post, in a prominent place at each location where
motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice to
the effect that operation of motorized skateboards or motorized play vehicles
is regulated by Yuma City Code, § 213-12.



         (b)   Provide a copy of such notice and a copy of Yuma
City Code, §  213-12 to each purchaser of a motorized skateboard or
motorized play vehicle, either before or in connection with the purchase.



   (H)   Providing penalties for violations thereof.



      (1)   Any person who or corporation that violates any
provisions of this chapter is subject to a civil sanction pursuant to A.R.S.
§ 28-626, or any successor, unless a code section defining a specific
penalty to an offense provides otherwise.



      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of this section
shall be guilty of a civil offense, which shall be punishable by a minimum
civil sanction of $75, plus the penalty assessments prescribed by statute. If
a person is convicted of a second violation of this section within a period
of 12 months, the minimum civil sanction shall be a fine of $100, plus the
penalty assessments prescribed by statute. If a person is convicted of a
third or subsequent violation of this section within a period of 12 months,
the minimum civil sanction shall be a fine of $125, plus the penalty
assessments prescribed by statute. The maximum civil sanction, which may be
imposed under this section shall be $500.



('80 Code, § 30-226)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. O2004-62, passed
10-6-04)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-13  Requirement for Helmet Use.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall ride a bicycle or be a
passenger on a bicycle, ride in a restraining seat attached to a bicycle, or
ride in a trailer towed by a bicycle unless that person is wearing a properly
fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the current standards of the
American National Standards Institution for protective headgear.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or lease any
bicycle to or for the use of a person under the age of 18 years unless:



      (1)   The person is in possession of a protective helmet
meeting the standards set out above in division (A) of this section at the
time of such rental or lease; or



      (2)   The rental or lease includes a protective bicycle helmet
meeting the standards set out above in division (A) of this section and the
person agrees to wear the helmet at all times while operating or riding as a
passenger on the bicycle.



   (C)   A person regularly engaged in the business of selling bicycles
shall provide any purchaser of a bicycle with a written explanation, either
on the receipt of sale or on a separate form indicating receipt of a written
explanation of the provisions of divisions (A) and (C) of this section.



   (D)   Any person in violation of this section shall be found guilty
of a civil infraction and be required to pay a minimum fine of $50 which
cannot be suspended except pursuant to division (E) of this section.



   (E)   The penalty provided in this section for a violation of this
section may be waived if any offender presents suitable proof that an
approved helmet has been purchased or otherwise obtained since the time of
the violation and that the minor uses or intends to use said helmet whenever
required to do so by this section.



('80 Code, § 30-227)  (Ord. O97-32, passed 6-4-97)



§ 213-14  Traffic Flow.



   No person shall ride a bicycle against the flow of adjacent traffic in
a bicycle lane, sidewalk, or shoulder.



(Ord. O2015-019, passed 4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



§ 213-15  Duty of Drivers.



   A.   A person shall not drive a motor vehicle on a sidewalk, except
to enter or leave the roadway, and only after yielding the right-of way to
all bicycles, play vehicles or pedestrians lawfully upon the sidewalk.



   B.   In this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as that
ascribed to MOTOR VEHICLE in A.R.S. § 28-101(33).



(Ord. O2015-019, passed 4-15-15)  Penalty, see § 10-99



Registration



§ 213-25  Application.



   Every owner of a bicycle may apply to the Police Department or to
persons or entities authorized by the Police Department for registration of a
bicycle.



('80 Code, § 30-239)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2567, passed
3-18-92)



§ 213-26  Procedure for Registration.



   Application for registration shall be made on a format as approved by
the Police Department.



('80 Code, § 30-240)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2567, passed
3-18-92)



§ 213-27  Registration Records.



   The records of registered bicycles shall be kept in such manner as the
Police Department shall determine, and may at the discretion of the Police
Department be disposed of after a period of not less than five years.



('80 Code, § 30-241)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2567, passed
3-18-92)



§ 213-28  Fees.



   There shall be no fees charged for the registration of bicycles under
this subchapter.



('80 Code, § 30-242)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2567, passed
3-18-92)



§ 213-29  Identification of Registered Bicycles.



   The Police Department or those authorized by the Police Department may
provide plates, stickers, or otherwise mark the bicycle with the registration
number.  Identification stickers or plates provided by an issuer at no
expense to the city may bear a business or club logo, or name of the issuer,
subject to prior design approval by the Police Department.



('80 Code, § 30-245)  (Ord. 1798, passed 12-20-78; Ord. 2567, passed
3-18-92)



Chapter 214:  Railroads



Section



   214-01   Flying switches



   214-02   Blocking street



   214-03   Clinging to equipment



   214-04   When warning devices at crossings may be required



   214-05   Crossings required



   214-06   Maintenance of crossings



   214-99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Power to regulate railway crossings, train speed, see A.R.S. §
9-240(B)(25)



§ 214-01  Flying Switches.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause to be made, or
permit to be made, any flying switch or kick, of, with or by means of any
railroad car or coach, or to run or operate any railroad car, coach or
engine, over, upon or across any of the public streets of the city, unless
the same shall be coupled or attached to, and under the control of a
locomotive or electrical engine and said engine driven and controlled by a
competent engineer or driver.



('80 Code, § 26-1)  (Ord. 157, passed 6-18-18)  Penalty, see § 214-99



§ 214-02  Blocking Street.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any street or
street crossing or intersection within the city to be obstructed or blocked
by any railroad car, coach, engine, train or part of a train, whether
standing or moving, for any length of time whatsoever in excess of five
minutes.  This section shall be deemed to include the movements of railroad
cars, trains and parts of trains whether in through transit or being switched
or shunted for the purpose of making trains.



('80 Code, § 26-2)  (Ord. 157, passed 6-18-18)  Penalty, see § 214-99



§ 214-03  Clinging to Equipment.



   (A)   If any person shall climb upon, jump off, hold to, or in any
manner whatever, attach himself to any locomotive, engine or car while the
same is in motion or running into or through the city, he shall be deemed
guilty of an offense.



   (B)   This section shall not apply to any employee of the railroad
company, any passenger or any person who may be acting by permission or under
the rules of the company then operating the railroad.



('80 Code, § 26-3)  Penalty, see § 214-99



§ 214-04  When Warning Devices at Crossings May be Required.



   Every railroad company which has railroad tracks which run through the
city, or any portion thereof, shall be required to erect, place or construct
such barricades or other warning devices as shall be required by the board of
aldermen at all crossings of such tracks with the streets.



('80 Code, § 26-4)



§ 214-05  Crossings Required.



   Every railroad company operating its railroad through the city shall
construct and maintain good and sufficient crossings, where its railroad
crosses the streets or public roads of the city, to be opened for public use,
which crossings shall be constructed of the material and in the manner
provided by state law.



('80 Code, § 26-5)  Penalty, see § 214-99



§ 214-06  Maintenance of Crossings.



   It shall be the duty of each railroad company whose lines of tracks are
constructed within the city to put in good repair and maintain in good
condition all streets or parts of streets, crossings and rights-of-way
through or over which its lines of tracks may run, and to keep the same free
from obstructions of every kind, which repair shall be made and constructed
under the direction and supervision of the city.



('80 Code, § 26-6)  Penalty, see § 214-99



§ 214-99  Penalty.



   Unless otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, any person
or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a class 2 misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in
§ 10-99 of this code.



('80 Code, § 26-7)  (Ord. 2084, passed 9-1-82)



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Arizona Revised Statutes





References to 1980 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




References to Arizona Revised Statutes



 

A.R.S. Section
 
Code Section




4-101
 
71-01, 170-03


4-201 et seq.
 
Ch. 71


4-207(D)(2)
 
154-10.01


4-223
 
Ch. 71


Title 9, Chapter 5, Art. 7
 
92-15


Title 9, Chapter 6, Art. 6.2
 
153-01


Title 9, Chapter 7, Art. 1, § 807
 
150-181


9-240(A)
 
Ch. 36


9-240(B)(3)(a)
 
210-99


9-240(B)(3)(b)
 
Ch. 210


9-240(B)(4)
 
Ch. 210


9-240(B)(7)
 
Ch. 131


9-240(B)(8)
 
Ch. 170


9-240(B)(9)
 
Ch. 170, Ch. 210


9-240(B)(11)(a)
 
Ch. 136


9-240(B)(11)(b)
 
Ch. 136


9-240(B)(11)(c)
 
Ch. 136


9-240(B)(12)
 
Ch. 32


9-240(B)(14)
 
210-99


9-240(B)(16)
 
Ch. 130, 130-003, 130-080


9-240(B)(18)
 
Ch. 70


9-240(B)(19)
 
10-22, Ch. 70


9-240(B)(20)(b)
 
130-095


9-240(B)(21)
 
210-02


9-240(B)(25)
 
213-29


9-240(B)(28)(a)
 
30-25


9-240(B)(28)(b)
 
10-99


9-240(29)
 
30-25


9-243
 
210-09


9-276(A)(1)
 
90-04, Ch. 170, 170-04


9-276(A)(4)
 
210-05


9-276(A)(5)
 
Ch. 210


9-276(A)(7)
 
112-30


9-276(A)(16)
 
10-22


9-276(A)(20),(22)
 
Ch. 210


9-461 et seq.
 
154-02.01, 154-04.04


9-461.05 - 9-461.07
 
154-04.04


9-462 et seq.
 
Ch. 154


9-462
 
154-04.05


9-462.01(G)(1)
 
154-01.07


9-462.02
 
154-02.02


9-462.02(G)
 
154-15.18


9-462.05
 
154-02.03


9-462.06
 
154-02.06


9-462.06.A
 
154-02.02


9-462.08.B
 
154-02.02


9-463.05
 
157-01, 157-03


9-463.05(C)
 
157-01, 157-05


9-463.05(D)
 
157-05


9-463.05(G)(1), (2)
 
157-05


9-464 et seq.
 
154-02.01


9-467
 
150-001


9-499
 
112-30


9-500.05
 
157-01


9-500.18
 
157-01


9-511 et seq.
 
Ch. 170, 170-04


9-582
 
92-30


9-582(C)
 
92-17


9-601 et seq.
 
Ch. 210


9-801 et seq.
 
10-19, 150-045, 150-060, 150-076, 150-090, 150-170, 211-12


9-804
 
10-19


9-807
 
150-181


9-811 et seq.
 
30-25


9-821 et seq.
 
Ch. 33


9-951 et seq.
 
Ch. 131


9-1201 - 9-1205
 
154-01.07, 154-03.06


9-1204
 
154-01.07


10-302
 
70-30


11-258
 
70-21


11-981(B)
 
34-06


11-981(B)(1)
 
34-06


11-1001 et seq.
 
130-002


11-1008
 
130-022


11-1010
 
130-022


12-116.01
 
39-03


12-116.02
 
39-03


12-821.01
 
38-16


12-901 et seq.
 
111-02


12-942
 
38-02


12-954
 
39-03


12-962
 
34-04


13-105
 
38-02


13-105.13
 
38-02


13-1601 et seq.
 
112-01


Title 16
 
Ch. 33


Title 17
 
114-15


17-101
 
114-15


Title 20, Chapter 2, Articles 3, 9
 
34-06


22-137(E)
 
39-30


Title 23, Chapters 5 and 6
 
34-06


Title 26, Chapter 2, Article 2
 
151-26


26-307
 
Ch. 35


26-308
 
Ch. 35


Title 28
 
76-04, 213-12


Title 28, Chapter 5
 
212-99


Title 28, Chapter 5, Article 4
 
211-07


Title 28, Chapter 25, Article VII
 
154-14.05


28-101
 
211-07, 211-09, 213-10, 213-15


28-602
 
211-41


28-626
 
211-99, 213-12


28-627
 
32-47, 32-49, 211-57


28-627(1)
 
212-18


28-627(A)(8)
 
212-99


28-628
 
212-30


28-643
 
211-12


28-776
 
211-56


28-811
 
213-04


28-812
 
213-10


28-874
 
211-99


28-881(I)
 
212-19


28-883(A),(B)
 
212-19


28-883(C)
 
212-19


28-1006(C)
 
211-21


28-1591 - 28-1601
 
211-10, 212-99


28-4801 - 28-4884
 
134-08


28-8471
 
154-14.05


28-8473
 
154-14.05


28-8475
 
154-14.05


28-8481
 
154-14.05


28-8481(C)
 
154-14.05


Title 32, Chapter 1
 
Charter Art. XII § 2


32-101
 
111-02


34-409(A)
 
212-19


35-701 et seq.
 
70-30


35-752
 
70-30


35-801 et seq.
 
70-30


Title 36
 
150-002


36-1471 - 36-1491
 
157-02


36-1601 et seq.
 
139-005


36-1601
 
139-001


36-1611
 
139-005


38-431 et seq.
 
Ch. 30


38-431.02
 
30-03


38-431.02(C),(D)
 
30-02


38-431.03
 
30-08


38-501 et seq.
 
36-70


38-502
 
36-01


38-541 et seq.
 
Ch. 33


38-841 et seq.
 
Ch. 131


Title 40, Chapter 2, Article 6.2
 
151-11


40-201 et seq.
 
92-02


Title 41, Chapter 9, Article 8
 
150-016, 150-171


41-619
 
150-061


41-1492
 
154-16.02


41-1492 et seq.
 
150-015, 150-016


41-1750
 
34-03


41-2142
 
154-06.01


41-2535
 
Charter Art. XII § 1, 36-32, 36-34


42-1472
 
92-02


44-1621 et seq.
 
74-15


44-1709
 
130-001


Title 45, Chapter 6
 
151-11


47-2106
 
130-001


Title 48, Chapter 4, Article 6
 
157-01


Title 48, Chapter 21, Article 1
 
151-11


48-3609(H)
 
151-11


48-3613
 
151-11, 151-12


Title 49, Chapter 2, Article 3.1
 
191-02


Title 49, Chapter 9, Article 8
 
150-015, 150-170


49-201
 
131-01


49-281
 
132-01


49-283
 
132-01


49-285
 
132-01, 132-02


49-391
 
191-11


49-457
 
156-11


49-504.4
 
156-11


49-701 et seq.
 
Ch. 190


49-1001
 
132-01


 
 
 




 



References To 1980 Code



 

1980 Code Section
 
1999 Code Section




1-2
 
10-05


1-4
 
10-19


1-8
 
10-20


1-9
 
10-21


1-10
 
10-99


1-11
 
10-22


2-1
 
11-01


2-2
 
38-01


2-3
 
38-15


2-4
 
38-16


2-7
 
38-17


2-18
 
30-01


2-19
 
30-02


2-20
 
30-03


2-21
 
30-03


2-22
 
30-03


2-23
 
30-05


2-24
 
30-06


2-25
 
30-07


2-26
 
30-08


2-27
 
30-09


2-30
 
30-11


2-42
 
30-25


2-43
 
30-26


2-44
 
30-27


2-45
 
30-28


2-46
 
30-29


2-141
 
50-20


2-142
 
50-21


2-143
 
50-22


2-144
 
50-23


2-145
 
50-24


2-146
 
50-25


2-147
 
50-26


3-1
 
90-01


3-3
 
90-02


3-4
 
90-03


3-5
 
90-04


3-6
 
90-99


4-1
 
71-01


4-2
 
71-02


4-7
 
71-99


4-23
 
71-15


4-24
 
71-16


4-25
 
71-17


4-26
 
71-18


4-27
 
71-19


4-28
 
71-20


4-29
 
71-21


4-30
 
71-22


5-1
 
72-01


5-2
 
72-99


6-1
 
130-001


6-2
 
130-002


6-3
 
130-003


6-3.1
 
130-004, 130-999


6-4
 
130-005


6-5
 
130-007


6-6
 
130-008


6-8
 
130-009


6-9
 
130-010


6-10
 
130-010


6-11
 
130-010


6-12
 
130-010


6-13
 
130-010


6-14
 
130-999


6-30
 
130-110


6-31
 
130-111


6-32
 
130-112


6-33
 
130-113


6-34
 
130-114


6-51
 
130-020


6-51.1
 
130-021


6-52
 
130-022


6-53
 
130-023


6-54
 
130-023


6-55
 
130-024


6-56
 
130-024


6-57
 
130-025


6-58
 
130-026


6-59
 
130-027


6-60
 
130-028


6-77
 
130-050


6-78
 
130-051


6-79
 
130-052


6-80
 
130-053


6-81
 
130-054


6-82
 
130-055


6-83
 
130-056


6-84
 
130-057


6-85
 
130-058


6-86
 
130-058


6-87
 
130-058


6-88
 
130-058


6-89
 
130-058


6-90
 
130-058


6-91
 
130-059


6-103
 
130-070


6-104
 
130-071


6-105
 
130-072


6-106
 
130-073


6-107
 
130-074


6-108
 
130-075


6-109
 
130-076


6-126
 
130-080


6-127
 
130-081


6-128
 
130-082


6-129
 
130-083


6-130
 
130-084


6-131
 
130-085


6-132
 
130-086


6-133
 
130-087


6-134
 
130-088


6-135
 
130-089


6-150
 
130-095


6-151
 
130-096


6-152
 
130-096


6-153
 
130-097


6-154
 
130-097


6-155
 
130-098


6-156
 
130-099


7-1
 
150-001


7-39
 
150-120


7-40
 
150-121


7-41
 
150-122


7-42
 
150-123


7-43
 
150-124


7-44
 
150-125


7-45
 
150-126


7-46
 
150-127


7-47
 
150-128


7-48
 
150-129


7-49
 
150-130


7-50
 
150-131


7-56
 
150-030


7-57
 
150-031


7-58
 
150-999


7-59
 
150-032


7-60
 
150-033


7-61
 
150-034


7-62
 
150-035


7-91
 
150-155


7-92
 
150-156


7-93
 
150-157


7-94
 
150-158


7-116
 
150-170


7-117
 
150-171


8-1
 
136-01


8-4
 
136-99


9-16
 
35-01


9-17
 
35-02


9-18
 
35-03


9-35
 
35-15


9-36
 
35-16


9-37
 
35-17


10-1
 
33-01


10-3
 
33-02


11.5-21
 
132-01


11.5-22
 
132-02


11.5-23
 
132-03


11.5-24
 
132-04


11.5-25
 
132-05


11.5-31
 
132-15


11.5-32
 
132-16


11.5-33
 
132-17


11.5-34
 
132-18


11.5-35
 
132-19


11.5-40
 
134-01


11.5-41
 
134-02


11.5-42
 
134-03


11.5-43
 
134-04


11.5-44
 
134-05


11.5-45
 
134-06


11.5-46
 
134-07


11.5-47
 
134-99


12-1
 
38-02


12-2
 
38-03


12-16
 
36-01


12-17
 
36-02


12-18
 
36-03


12-19
 
36-04


12-20
 
36-05


12-31
 
36-90


12-32
 
36-91


12-33
 
36-92


12-41
 
36-15


12-42
 
36-16


12-43
 
36-17


12-44
 
36-18


12-51
 
36-30


12-52
 
36-31


12-53
 
36-32


12-54
 
36-33


12-55
 
36-34


12-56
 
36-35


12-57
 
36-36


12-58
 
36-37


12-59
 
36-38


12-60
 
36-39


12-61
 
36-40


12-62
 
36-41


12-63
 
36-42


12-71
 
36-55


12-72
 
36-56


12-73
 
36-57


12-74
 
36-58


12-81
 
36-70


12-82
 
36-71


12-83
 
36-72


12-84
 
36-73


12-85
 
36-74


12-86
 
36-75


12-87
 
36-76


12-88
 
36-76


12-89
 
36-77


13-1
 
131-01


13-17
 
131-15


13-18
 
131-16


13-19 - 13-21
 
131-17


13-22
 
131-18


13-24
 
131-19


13-26
 
131-20


13-27
 
131-21


13-28
 
131-99


14-1
 
190-01


14-2
 
190-99


14-18
 
190-15


14-19
 
190-16


14-20
 
190-17


14-21
 
190-18


14-22
 
190-19


14-23
 
190-19


14-24
 
190-20


14-25
 
190-20


14-26
 
190-20


14-27
 
190-21


14-28
 
190-22


14-29
 
190-23


14-38
 
190-35


14-39
 
190-36


14-40
 
190-37


14-41
 
190-37


14-42
 
190-37


14-43
 
190-37


14-44
 
190-38


14-56
 
190-50


14-57
 
190-51


14-58
 
190-52


14-71
 
190-65


14-72
 
190-66


14-73
 
190-67


14-74
 
190-68


14-75
 
190-69


14-76
 
190-70


14-77
 
190-71


14-78
 
190-72


14-79
 
190-73


14-80
 
190-74


14-128
 
112-30


14-129
 
112-31


14-130
 
112-32


14-142
 
112-45


14-143
 
112-46


14-144
 
112-47


14-145
 
112-47


14-146
 
112-47


14-147
 
112-47


14-148
 
112-47


14-149
 
112-48


14-150
 
112-49


14-151
 
112-50


14-152
 
112-51


14-153
 
112-52


14-154
 
112-52


14-155
 
112-52


14-156
 
112-52


14-157
 
112-52


14-158
 
112-53


14-159
 
112-53


14-160
 
112-53


14-161
 
112-54


14-162
 
112-55


15-16
 
150-090


15-16.1
 
150-091


16-16
 
70-01


16-17
 
70-02


16-18
 
70-99


16-19
 
70-03


16-20
 
70-04


16-21
 
70-05


16-22
 
70-05


16-22.1
 
70-06


16-23
 
70-07


16-24
 
70-08


16-25
 
70-09


16-26
 
70-10


16-27
 
70-11


16-28
 
70-12


16-29
 
70-13


16-30
 
70-14


16-31
 
70-15


16-32
 
70-16


16-33
 
70-17


16-34
 
70-18


16-35
 
70-19


16-36
 
70-20


16-37
 
70-21


16-41
 
75-01


16-42
 
75-02


16-43
 
75-03


16-44
 
75-04


16-45
 
75-05


16-46
 
75-06


16-47
 
75-07


16-48
 
75-08


16-49
 
75-09


16-50
 
75-10


16-51
 
75-11


16-52
 
75-12


16-53
 
75-25


16-54
 
75-26


16-55
 
75-27


16-56
 
75-28


16-57
 
75-29


16-58
 
75-99


16-59
 
75-13


18-20
 
73-01


18-21
 
73-02


18-22
 
73-03


18-23
 
73-04


18-24
 
73-05


18-25
 
73-06


19-48
 
134-08


19-61
 
135-01


19-62
 
135-02


19-63
 
135-03


19-64
 
135-04


19-65
 
135-05


19-66
 
135-99


19-67
 
135-06


19-80
 
112-15


19-81
 
112-16


19-82
 
112-17


19-83
 
112-18


19-84
 
112-19


19-85
 
112-99


19-86
 
112-20


19-87
 
112-21


20-1
 
110-01


20-2
 
110-02


20-3
 
110-03


20-4
 
110-04


20-5
 
110-99


20-22
 
111-01


20-23
 
111-02


20-24
 
111-03


20-25
 
111-04


20-26
 
111-05


20-27
 
111-06


20-28
 
111-07


20-49
 
112-01


20-50
 
112-01


20-104
 
113-01


20-107
 
113-02


20-108
 
113-03


20-120
 
113-15


20-121
 
113-16


20-122
 
113-17


20-123
 
113-18


20-135
 
113-30


20-136
 
113-31


20-137
 
113-32


20-138
 
113-33


20-139
 
113-34


20-154
 
113-45


20-155
 
113-46


21-1
 
170-99


21-2
 
170-01


21-5
 
170-02, 170-99


21-6
 
170-03


21-39
 
170-04


21-40
 
170-04


22-1
 
34-01


22-2
 
34-02


22-3
 
34-03


22-4
 
34-04


23-16
 
154-02.01


23-17
 
154-02.01


23-18
 
154-02.01


23-19
 
154-02.01


23-20
 
154-02.01


23-21
 
154-02.01


23-22
 
154-02.01


23-23
 
154-02.01


23-24
 
154-02.01


23-25
 
154-02.01


23-26
 
154-02.01


23-27
 
154-02.01


23-28
 
154-02.01


23-29
 
154-02.01


23-30
 
154-02.01


23-31
 
154-02.01


23-32
 
154-04.05


24-11
 
150-060


24-13
 
150-062


24-14
 
150-999


25-16
 
32-01


25-17
 
32-02


25-18
 
32-03


25-19
 
32-04


25-20
 
32-05


25-21
 
32-06


25-22
 
32-07


25-39
 
32-20


25-40
 
32-21


25-41
 
32-22


25-42
 
32-23


25-43
 
32-24


25-44
 
32-25


25-45
 
32-26


25-46
 
32-27


25-47
 
32-28


25-48
 
32-29


25-49
 
32-30


25-50
 
32-31


25-51
 
32-32


25-52
 
32-33


25-53
 
32-34


25-54
 
32-35


25-55
 
32-36


25-61
 
32-45


25-62
 
32-46


25-63
 
32-47


25-64
 
32-48


25-65
 
32-49


26-1
 
214-01


26-2
 
214-02


26-3
 
214-03


26-4
 
214-04


26-5
 
214-05


26-6
 
214-06


26-7
 
214-99


27-1
 
74-01


27-2
 
74-02


27-3
 
74-99


27-72
 
74-15


27-73
 
74-16


27-74
 
74-17


27-75
 
74-18


27-76
 
74-19


27-77
 
74-20


27-89
 
74-21


27-90
 
74-22


27-91
 
74-23


28-1
 
210-01


28-2
 
210-02


28-3
 
210-03


28-4
 
210-04


28-5
 
210-05


28-6
 
210-05


28-7
 
210-07


28-8
 
210-08


28-9
 
210-09


28-10
 
210-99


28-25
 
210-20


28-26
 
210-21


28-27
 
210-22


28-28
 
210-23


28-45
 
210-35


28-46
 
210-36


28-47
 
210-37


28-48
 
210-38


28-49
 
210-39


28-50
 
210-40


28-51
 
210-41


29-1
 
37-01


29-2
 
37-02


30-1
 
211-01


30-2
 
211-02


30-3
 
211-03


30-6
 
211-04


30-7
 
211-05


30-8
 
211-99, 212-99


30-9
 
211-06


30-10
 
211-07


30-11
 
211-08


30-26
 
211-12


30-27
 
211-13


30-28
 
211-14


30-29
 
211-15


30-46
 
212-01


30-47
 
212-02


30-48
 
212-03


30-49
 
212-04


30-50
 
212-05


30-51
 
212-06


30-52
 
212-07


30-53
 
212-08


30-54
 
212-09


30-55
 
212-10


30-56
 
212-11


30-57
 
212-12


30-58
 
212-13


30-59
 
212-14


30-60
 
212-15


30-61
 
212-16


30-63
 
212-17


30-64
 
212-18


30-65
 
212-19, 212-99


30-81
 
212-20


30-93
 
212-30


30-94
 
212-31


30-95
 
212-32


30-96
 
212-33


30-97
 
212-34


30-98
 
212-35


30-99
 
212-36


30-100
 
212-37


30-101
 
212-38


30-118
 
211-20


30-119
 
211-21


30-120
 
211-22


30-121
 
211-22


30-122
 
211-23


30-123
 
211-24


30-124
 
211-25


30-125
 
211-26


30-126
 
211-27


30-127
 
211-28


30-128
 
211-29


30-145
 
211-40


30-146
 
211-41


30-147
 
211-42


30-148
 
211-43


30-149
 
211-44


30-150
 
211-45


30-151
 
211-46


30-189
 
211-55


30-190
 
211-56


30-191
 
211-57


30-192
 
211-58


30-193
 
211-59


30-194
 
211-60


30-195
 
211-61


30-196
 
211-62


30-197
 
211-63


30-214
 
213-01


30-215
 
213-02


30-216
 
213-03


30-217
 
213-04


30-219
 
213-05


30-220
 
213-06


30-221
 
213-07


30-222
 
213-08


30-223
 
213-09


30-224
 
213-10


30-225
 
213-11


30-226
 
213-12


30-227
 
213-13


30-239
 
213-25


30-240
 
213-26


30-241
 
213-27


30-242
 
213-28


30-245
 
213-29


30-257
 
211-75


30-258
 
211-76


30-259
 
211-99


31-1
 
193-01


31-2
 
193-02


31-3
 
193-03


31-4
 
193-04


31-5
 
193-99


31-20
 
193-85


31-21
 
193-86


31-22
 
193-87


31-23
 
193-88


31-57
 
193-45


31-58
 
193-46


31-59
 
193-47


31-60
 
193-48


31-61
 
193-49


31-62
 
193-50


31-63
 
193-51


31-64
 
193-52


31-65
 
193-53


31-81
 
193-15


31-83
 
193-16


31-84
 
193-17


31-85
 
193-18


31-86
 
193-19


31-87
 
193-20


31-88
 
193-21


31-89
 
193-22


31-90
 
193-23


31-91
 
193-24


31-92
 
193-25


31-93
 
193-26


31-94
 
193-27


31-95
 
193-28


31-96
 
193-29


31-110
 
193-65


31-111
 
193-66


31-112
 
193-67


31-113
 
193-68


31-114
 
193-69


31-115
 
193-70


31-116
 
193-71


31-117
 
193-72


31-118
 
193-73


31-143
 
192-01, 192-09


31-144
 
192-02


31-146
 
192-03


31-147
 
192-04


31-148
 
192-04


31-149
 
192-04


31-150
 
192-06


31-151
 
192-07


31-152
 
192-07


31-153
 
192-07


31-154
 
192-08


31-155
 
192-08


31-156
 
192-08


31-157
 
192-08


31-158
 
192-08


32-1
 
114-01


32-2
 
114-02


32-3
 
114-03


32-4
 
114-04


32-5
 
114-99


32-6
 
114-05


32-23
 
114-15


32-24
 
114-16


32-25
 
114-17


32-42
 
114-30


32-43
 
114-31


32-44
 
114-32


App. A10
 
154-01.01


App. A20
 
154-04.05


App. A30
 
154-15.02


App. A40
 
154-01.07


App. A50
 
154-05.01


App. A60
 
154-05.02


App. A70
 
154-05.03


App. A71
 
154-05.04


App. A72
 
154-07.01


App. A73
 
154-07.03


App. A74
 
154-06.01


App. A75
 
154-06.02


App. A80
 
154-06.03


App. A85
 
154-06.04


App. A90
 
154-08.01


App. A95
 
154-10.01, 154-10.03


App. A100
 
154-03.07, 154-08.02


App. A110
 
154-08.03


App. A111
 
154-08.04


App. A112
 
154-08.05


App. A113
 
154-03.08, 154-14.01


App. A114
 
154-01.07, 154-02.04, 154-03.09, 154-14.04, 154-999


App. A115
 
154-11.01


App. A120
 
154-09.01


App. A121
 
154-09.02


App. A121.5
 
154-09.03


App. A122
 
154-01.07, 154-03.10, 154-14.05, 154-21.03


App. A123
 
154-14.06


App. A124
 
154-15.10


App. A140
 
154-15.03


App. A160
 
154-16.01 - 154-16.09


App. A161
 
154-01.07, 154-17.01 - 154-17.03, 154-17.05, 154-17.07, 154-999


App. A180
 
154-18.01 - 154-18.04


App. A181
 
154-01.07, 154-20.01 - 154-20.03, 154-20.05, 154-20.06


App. A190
 
154-15.05


App. A195
 
154-14.07


App. A200
 
154-01.03


App. A211
 
154-02.05, 154-03.02, 154-03.04


App. A215
 
154-03.02, 154-03.05


App. A220
 
154-01.04


App. A250
 
154-03.03


App. BI
 
153-02


App. BII
 
153-15 - 153-18, 153-20


App. BIII
 
153-30, 153-31


App. BIV
 
153-45 - 153-47, 153-50, 153-51


App. BV
 
153-60 - 153-63


App. BVI
 
153-03 - 153-06


App. BVII
 
153-75 - 153-79, 153-99


 
 
 




 



References To Resolutions



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




1532
 
8-20-69
 
70-31


2064
 
8-16-78
 
170-04


2242
 
8-5-81
 
34-05


2301
 
4-20-83
 
70-30


2346
 
12-21-83
 
34-05


2542
 
4-6-88
 
37-02


2631
 
7-18-90
 
37-02


2662
 
7-6-94
 
170-04


2815
 
12-7-94
 
37-02


R96-51
 
11-6-96
 
37-02


R96-55
 
12-18-96
 
210-09


R98-26
 
5-20-98
 
37-02


R2002-02
 
1-2-02
 
210-09


R2002-54
 
11-1-02
 
37-02


R2003-29
 
5-21-03
 
37-02


R2003-67
 
10-1-03
 
131-15


R2006-32
 
 
 
193-18


R2006-48
 
 
 
37-02


R2007-06
 
 
 
37-02


R2008-31
 
 
 
37-02


R2009-13
 
3-4-09
 
210-09


R2009-68
 
10-21-09
 
37-02


R2009-89
 
12-2-09
 
150-002


R2011-28
 
 
 
37-02


R2013-09
 
 
 
150-020


R2015-01
 
 
 
37-02


R2015-014
 
 
 
37-02


R2015-028
 
 
 
150-045, 150-060, 150-065, 150-076


R2016-22
 
 
 
37-02


R2018-002
 
3-21-18
 
190-65


R2018-029
 
10-3-2018
 
150-015


R2018-030
 
10-3-2018
 
150-180


R2018-031
 
10-3-2018
 
150-170


R2018-032
 
10-3-2018
 
150-090


R2018-033
 
10-3-2018
 
150-018


R2018-034
 
10-3-2018
 
131-15


 
 
 
 
 




 



References To Ordinances



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




18
 
8-4-03
 
136-01, 136-99


93
 
5-25-11
 
193-04, 210-01


104
 
9-17-12
 
210-35 - 210-41


110
 
6-10-13
 
210-23


113
 
2-3-14
 
32-01 - 32-04


119
 
1-8-15
 
74-01


128
 
12-14-15
 
11-01


133
 
4-11-16
 
74-01, 74-02


143
 
2-13-17
 
30-03


157
 
6-18-18
 
214-01, 214-02


260
 
9-26-27
 
210-20 - 210-22


327
 
5-12-31
 
90-01


349
 
5-17-35
 
71-01, 71-15, 71-17, 71-18, 71-20 - 71-22


352
 
4-7-36
 
70-01 - 70-03, 70-07 - 70-19, 70-99


405
 
10-7-41
 
210-02, 210-03


552
 
6-5-51
 
32-05


583
 
9-16-52
 
154-01.01, 154-01.03, 154-01.04, 154-01.07, 154-02.04, 154-02.05, 154-03.02 -
154-03.05, 154-03.07 - 154-03.10, 154-04.05, 154-05.01 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01
- 154-06.04, 154-07.01, 154-07.03, 154-08.01 - 154-08.05, 154-09.01 -
154-09.03, 154-10.01, 154-10.03, 154-11.01, 154-14.01, 154-14.04 - 154-14.07,
154-15.02, 154-15.03, 154-15.05, 154-15.10, 154-16.01 - 154-16.09, 154-17.01
- 154-17.03, 154-17.05, 154-17.07, 154-18.01 - 154-18.04, 154-20.01 -
154-20.03, 154-20.05, 154-20.06, 154-21.03, 154-999


653
 
1-3-56
 
32-06, 32-07


729
 
10-15-57
 
70-04, 70-05


766
 
1-20-59
 
154-02.01, 154-04.03, 154-04.04


781
 
9-15-59
 
35-01 - 35-03, 35-15 - 35-17


800
 
5-17-60
 
154-16.01 - 154-16.09


847
 
3-20-62
 
71-01, 71-21


852
 
8-6-62
 
112-01


929
 
3-4-64
 
154-02.01


977
 
4-21-65
 
211-12


1012
 
4-20-66
 
153-02 - 153-06, 153-15 - 153-18, 153-20,  153-45 - 153-47, 153-50, 153-51


1064
 
7-5-67
 
211-05


1096-A
 
8-7-68
 
32-20 - 32-33, 32-35, 32-36


1170
 
10-15-69
 
112-45, 112-47, 112-51 - 112-55, 190-01


1256
 
3-15-72
 
212-18


1315
 
7-5-73
 
193-01, 193-45 - 193-53


1336
 
11-7-73
 
112-47 - 112-50


1340
 
12-5-73
 
134-08


1362
 
6-5-74
 
112-30 - 112-32


1378
 
9-4-74
 
154-01.03


1381
 
9-18-74
 
170-04


1382
 
9-18-74
 
71-16


1384
 
12-4-74
 
211-20 - 211-28


1400
 
12-18-74
 
30-01, 30-02, 30-05 - 30-07, 30-11, 30-25 - 30-28


1417
 
6-4-75
 
190-15 - 190-20, 190-35 - 190-38, 190-50 - 190-52, 190-65 - 190-74


1418
 
6-4-75
 
211-22


1478
 
2-18-76
 
74-15 - 74-23


1496
 
5-19-76
 
153-03 - 153-06


1497
 
5-19-76
 
154-15.05


1535
 
9-15-76
 
70-05


1540
 
10-6-76
 
154-02.01


1546
 
10-27-76
 
154-14.07


1564
 
12-1-76
 
154-05.01


1568
 
12-15-76
 
154-05.01


1627
 
7-6-77
 
154-03.07, 154-08.02


1670
 
10-12-77
 
192-01 - 192-09


1694
 
12-21-77
 
212-30 - 212-38


1696
 
12-21-77
 
211-22


1796
 
12-6-78
 
154-02.01


1798
 
12-20-78
 
10-99, 71-02, 73-01 - 73-06, 110-01 - 110-03, 111-01 - 111-07, 113-01 -
113-03, 113-15 - 113-18, 113-30 - 113-34, 113-45, 113-46,  114-01 - 114-05,
114-15 - 114-17, 114-30 - 114-32, 114-99, 130-001 - 130-005, 130-007 -
130-010, 130-020, 130-022 - 130-028, 130-050 - 130-055, 130-057 - 130-059,
130-070 - 130-076, 130-080 - 130-087, 130-095 - 130-099, 130-110 - 130-114,
193-02 - 193-04, 210-04 - 210-07, 211-01 - 211-04, 211-13 - 211-15, 211-29,
211-40 - 211-46, 212-01 - 212-17, 212-20, 212-38, 213-01 - 213-12, 213-25 -
213-29


1812
 
2-7-79
 
154-16.01 - 154-16.09


1826
 
4-18-79
 
130-049, 130-050


1836
 
6-20-79
 
192-02, 192-04, 192-05, 192-07


1837
 
6-20-79
 
154-01.07, 154-03.10, 154-14.05, 154-21.03


1857
 
7-18-79
 
150-120 - 150-131


1874
 
11-7-79
 
150-090, 150-091


1899
 
1-16-80
 
193-15 - 193-29, 193-65 - 193-73, 193-85 - 193-88


1902
 
2-20-80
 
212-20


1908
 
3-5-80
 
110-04


1938
 
6-18-80
 
150-155 - 150-158


1939
 
6-18-80
 
153-15 - 153-18, 153-20, 153-45 - 153-47, 153-50, 153-51, 154-03.03, 154-03.07


1946
 
7-2-80
 
38-01


1953
 
8-6-80
 
130-004, 130-999


1966
 
10-1-80
 
153-02, 153-15 - 153-18, 153-20, 153-45 - 153-47, 153-50, 153-51


1979
 
1-7-81
 
154-01.01, 154-09.01 - 154-09.03


1982
 
1-21-81
 
30-29


1983
 
1-21-81
 
211-58, 211-59


1987
 
2-18-81
 
193-25


2005
 
5-6-81
 
30-01 - 30-03, 30-08, 30-09


2010
 
5-6-81
 
114-31


2018
 
6-17-81
 
36-01 - 36-05, 36-15 - 36-18, 36-30 - 36-42, 36-55 - 36-58, 36-70 - 36-77,
36-90 - 36-92


2019
 
6-17-81
 
70-20


2021
 
7-1-81
 
150-030 - 150-035, 150-999


2023
 
7-15-81
 
32-20 - 32-36


2024
 
8-5-81
 
70-20


2037
 
9-2-81
 
193-71


2039
 
9-2-81
 
193-22, 193-23


2047
 
10-7-81
 
38-01


2071
 
5-5-82
 
154-08.01


2075
 
6-16-82
 
38-02


2080
 
7-21-82
 
38-15, 38-16


2084
 
9-1-82
 
10-99, 70-99, 71-99, 72-99, 74-99, 90-99, 110-01, 110-04, 110-99, 114-99,
130-999, 190-99, 193-99, 210-99, 211-99, 212-99, 214-99


2086
 
9-1-82
 
193-22, 193-29


2089
 
9-22-82
 
38-03


2091
 
9-22-82
 
153-75 - 153-79, 153-99


2094
 
10-20-82
 
170-01, 170-99


2095
 
10-20-82
 
193-29


2096
 
11-3-82
 
154-08.03, 154-08.04, 154-15.03


2098
 
11-17-82
 
150-090, 150-091


2101
 
11-17-82
 
153-60 - 153-63


2107
 
1-19-83
 
130-021


2109
 
2-2-83
 
154-06.01, 154-06.03


1730
 
4-19-83
 
154-04.05


2125
 
5-4-83
 
154-01.07, 154-02.04, 154-03.09, 154-14.04, 154-999


2128
 
5-18-83
 
193-86


2131
 
6-15-83
 
190-15, 190-17, 190-20 - 190-22, 190-37, 190-52


2142
 
8-3-83
 
33-02


2144
 
8-3-83
 
153-15 - 153-18, 153-20, 153-45 - 153-47, 153-50, 153-51


2166
 
11-2-83
 
154-14.06


2168
 
11-16-83
 
193-21, 193-73


2169
 
11-16-83
 
211-01, 211-02, 211-99, 212-99


2235
 
1-20-84
 
154-15.03


2181
 
2-1-84
 
211-03, 211-05, 211-06, 211-62, 211-63, 212-02, 212-07, 212-18


2193
 
3-21-84
 
154-01.07, 154-17.01 - 154-17.03, 154-17.05, 154-17.07, 154-999


2195
 
4-4-84
 
36-32, 36-34


2202
 
4-18-84
 
110-04


2232
 
10-1-84
 
154-05.01


2235
 
11-20-84
 
154-04.05, 154-06.03, 154-09.02, 154-09.03, 154-09.03, 154-15.05


2243
 
12-19-84
 
154-01.07, 154-09.01, 154-09.01, 154-17.01 - 154-17.03, 154-17.05, 154-17.07,
154-999


2266
 
6-5-85
 
190-15, 190-17, 190-22, 190-23, 190-36, 190-50


2314
 
4-16-86
 
154-17.03


2337
 
11-19-86
 
170-02, 170-99


2341
 
12-4-86
 
32-45 - 32-49


2352
 
3-18-87
 
154-01.07, 154-03.10, 154-14.05, 154-21.03


2356
 
5-6-87
 
154-06.03


2359
 
6-4-87
 
151-03


2368
 
8-19-87
 
135-01 - 135-06, 135-99


2374
 
9-16-87
 
37-01


2375
 
9-16-87
 
154-15.02


2383
 
1-6-88
 
211-22


2384
 
1-6-88
 
153-02 - 153-06


2388
 
2-3-88
 
150-090, 150-091


2396
 
3-2-88
 
154-18.01 - 154-18.04


2399
 
4-20-88
 
154-05.01, 154-06.01, 154-08.01, 154-08.02, 154-09.01 - 154-09.03, 154-14.07,
154-16.03


2400
 
4-20-88
 
37-02


2426
 
11-2-88
 
154-03.03


2446
 
4-5-89
 
38-17


2448
 
4-19-89
 
134-08


2433
 
7-6-89
 
70-05, 70-06


2434
 
7-6-89
 
70-05


2452
 
7-6-89
 
190-15


2475
 
12-20-89
 
135-02


2498
 
8-1-90
 
37-02


2500
 
9-5-90
 
212-19, 212-99


2504
 
9-17-90
 
154-08.04


2514
 
2-20-91
 
75-01 - 75-13, 75-25 - 75-29, 75-99


2515
 
2-20-91
 
154-15.10, 154-16.07


2523
 
6-5-91
 
154-05.01, 154-06.01, 154-06.03, 154-08.01 - 154-08.04, 154-09.01 - 154-09.03


2526
 
7-17-91
 
130-056


2531
 
8-21-91
 
112-49, 112-52, 190-15, 190-18, 190-35, 190-36, 190-38, 190-51, 190-65


2533
 
9-4-91
 
154-17.03


2547
 
12-18-91
 
150-170, 150-171


2549
 
12-18-91
 
150-090, 150-091


2566
 
3-4-92
 
193-18


2567
 
3-18-92
 
213-25 - 213-29


2571
 
5-20-92
 
130-056


2572
 
5-20-92
 
130-022


2573
 
5-20-92
 
74-02


2579
 
7-15-92
 
154-08.03, 154-08.04


2584
 
9-16-92
 
154-01.07, 154-02.05, 154-20.01 - 154-20.03, 154-20.05, 154-20.06


2583
 
9-30-92
 
70-05, 70-21


2605
 
2-3-93
 
190-16, 190-19, 190-20, 190-50


2609
 
4-21-93
 
170-02, 170-03, 170-99


2617
 
6-16-93
 
34-01, 34-02


2636
 
11-17-93
 
132-01 - 132-05


2638
 
11-30-93
 
211-07, 211-08


2641
 
3-17-94
 
34-03


2655
 
6-1-94
 
132-15 - 132-19


2657
 
7-6-94
 
131-01, 131-15 - 131-21, 131-99


2662
 
7-6-94
 
36-32, 36-34, 70-11, 113-45, 170-04, 210-38, 210-41, 211-12, 211-26


2663
 
7-20-94
 
154-03.08, 154-08.05, 154-14.01


2673
 
9-21-94
 
34-03


2675
 
11-2-94
 
211-12, 211-13, 211-27, 211-29, 213-07


2679
 
12-21-94
 
150-060, 150-063, 150-999


2683
 
12-21-94
 
37-02


2686
 
1-4-95
 
Repealed by O2005-74


2687
 
1-4-95
 
154-03.07, 154-05.01, 154-06.01, 154-06.03, 154-08.01 - 154-08.04, 154-15.10,
154-16.07


O95-003
 
2-1-95
 
34-04


O95-005
 
3-16-95
 
134-01 - 134-07, 134-99


O95-019
 
6-7-95
 
74-17


O95-021
 
6-27-95
 
154-06.02


O95-035
 
7-25-95
 
154-11.01


O95-040
 
9-5-95
 
154-04.05, 154-05.02 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01, 154-07.01, 154-07.01, 154-07.03,
154-15.03, 154-15.05, 154-17.03


O95-052
 
9-5-95
 
130-081, 130-082, 130-085 - 130-089, 130-095


O95-055
 
9-20-95
 
50-20 - 50-26


O95-061
 
10-5-95
 
210-09


O95-073
 
10-18-95
 
154-10.01, 154-10.03


O95-040
 
12-20-95
 
154-14.07


O95-090
 
12-20-95
 
154-01.07, 154-02.05, 154-03.02, 154-03.04, 154-03.05


O96-24
 
3-6-96
 
154-01.07, 154-08.01, 154-08.03, 154-08.04


O96-35
 
4-3-96
 
154-01.07


O96-36
 
4-3-96
 
112-15 - 112-21, 112-99


O96-55
 
6-5-96
 
154-08.03, 154-08.04


O96-56
 
6-5-96
 
154-10.03


O96-59
 
6-19-96
 
38-16


O96-62
 
6-19-96
 
211-75, 211-76, 211-99


O96-64
 
7-3-96
 
193-70


O96-77
 
8-7-96
 
154-01.07, 154-02.05, 154-20.01 - 154-20.03, 154-20.05, 154-20.06


O96-81
 
8-28-96
 
193-29


O96-82
 
8-28-96
 
134-01, 134-02, 134-04, 134-05, 134-99


O96-105
 
11-20-96
 
37-02


O97-11
 
3-5-97
 
154-15.02


O97-32
 
6-4-97
 
213-13


O97-40
 
6-18-97
 
50-20, 50-21


O97-45
 
7-2-97
 
154-02.04, 154-14.04


O97-23
 
9-3-97
 
154-06.03, 154-06.04, 154-15.02


O97-68
 
12-3-97
 
193-70


O98-02
 
1-7-98
 
92-01 - 92-05, 92-15 - 92-19, 92-30, 92-31, 92-40 - 92-44, 92-99


O98-17
 
3-4-98
 
131-15 - 131-21, 131-99


O98-21
 
3-18-98
 
212-99


O98-24
 
4-15-98
 
150-015, 150-016


O98-25
 
4-15-98
 
150-76, 150-77


O98-26
 
4-15-98
 
150-045, 150-046


O98-44
 
5-20-98
 
154-02.04


O98-48
 
6-3-98
 
37-02


O98-52
 
7-1-98
 
154-01.05


O98-61
 
7-15-98
 
31-01


O98-77
 
9-30-98
 
114-15


O98-78
 
10-14-98
 
30-01, 30-03, 30-05, 30-08, 30-09, 30-11, 33-02, 90-02


O98-83
 
11-4-98
 
35-01 - 35-03, 35-15 - 35-17


O99-22
 
4-7-99
 
37-02


O99-44
 
8-18-99
 
70-01, 70-04, 70-05, 70-19, 70-20, 70-21, 70-22


O99-52
 
8-4-99
 
92-01, 92-02, 92-15, 92-16, 92-17, 92-19, 92-20, 92-30, 92-32, Repeals 92-31


O99-57
 
12-29-99
 
Charter, Art. IV, § 6; Art. IV, § 8; Art. V, § 1(a)-(c); Art. VIII, §
4(i); Art. XII, § 1(a)


O99-88
 
12-1-99
 
37-02, 37-99


O99-90
 
12-15-99
 
39-01 - 39-14


O99-92
 
1-5-00
 
154-01.07, 154-14.03


O2000-01
 
1-5-00
 
76-01 - 76-04


O2000-16
 
5-3-00
 
193-23, 193-68


O2000-25
 
5-3-00
 
154-15.02, 154-16.03, 154-20.02


O2000-32
 
5-17-00
 
154-01.07, 154-08.01


O2000-34
 
6-21-00
 
31-01


O2000-35
 
6-21-00
 
154-01.07, 154-04.05, 154-05.01 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01 - 154-06.04,
154-07.01, 154-07.03, 154-08.01 - 154-08.05, 154-09.01 - 154-09.03,
154-10.01, 154-14.06, 154-15.03, 154-19.01 - 154-19.10


O2000-36
 
6-21-00
 
154-12.01


O2000-52
 
8-2-00
 
154-04.05, 154-08.04, 154-14.02


O2000-55
 
8-2-00
 
154-08.01, 154-17.03


O2000-73
 
10-18-00
 
154-06.04


O2001-01
 
1-3-01
 
134-02


O2001-03
 
1-3-01
 
154-01.07, 154-14.05


O2001-48
 
6-6-01
 
154-04.05


O2001-53
 
6-20-01
 
154-04.01, 154-04.05


O2001-59
 
7-3-01
 
Charter Art. III, §§ 3, 8, 14; Art. IV, § 9; Art. VII, §§  2, 3, 6;
Art. VIII, §§ 3, 4; Art. IX, § 1;  Art. XIV, § 4


O2001-74
 
9-19-01
 
150-180, 150-181, 150-182


O2001-76
 
9-19-01
 
154-08.05


O2001-77
 
9-19-01
 
154-01.07, 154-08.04


O2001-83
 
10-3-01
 
154-01.01, 154-06.01


O2001-93
 
11-20-01
 
154-20.05


O2001-94
 
11-20-01
 
154-01.07, 154-10.03, 154-14.01


O2001-103
 
12-19-01
 
154-13.01


O2002-04
 
2-6-02
 
154-14.02


O2002-08
 
2-6-02
 
154-01.07, 154-05.04


O2002-09
 
2-20-02
 
154-05.01 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01 - 154-06.04, 154-07.01, 154-07.03, 154-08.01
- 154-08.05, 154-09.01 - 154-09.03, 154-10.01, 154-14.06, 154-19.02,
154-19.04, 154-19.06, 154-19.07


O2002-10
 
2-20-02
 
150-123, 150-128


O2002-11
 
3-20-02
 
150-060, 150-061, 150-063, 150-180, 150-999


O2002-15
 
3-6-02
 
138-01 - 138-15, 138-99; Ch. 138 Appendix


O2002-24
 
5-1-02
 
153-01 - 153-06, 153-15 - 153-18, 153-30, 153-31, 153-45 - 153-47, 153-50,
153-51, 153-75, Repeals 153-32, 153-33, 153-34, 153-48, 153-49


O2002-30
 
8-7-02
 
154-01.07, 154-14.05, 154-15.02


O2002-31
 
6-5-02
 
37-02


O2002-32
 
6-19-02
 
39-03, 39-10


O2002-46
 
8-7-02
 
154-17.03


O2002-51
 
8-21-02
 
30-01


O2002-54
 
9-18-02
 
212-01


O2002-58
 
11-6-02
 
33-02


O2002-62
 
11-6-02
 
37-02


O2002-64
 
11-26-02
 
154-08.04


O2003-01
 
1-15-03
 
154-08.05


O2003-05
 
2-19-03
 
75-01 - 75-13, 75-25 - 75-30, 75-99


O2003-06
 
2-19-03
 
138-01 - 138-15, 138-98, 138-99, Ch. 138 Appendix


O2003-22
 
5-21-03
 
154-01.07, 154-15.10


O2003-28
 
6-18-03
 
37-02


O2003-34
 
8-6-03
 
154-01.07


O2003-38
 
8-20-03
 
154-01.07, 154-14.01


O2003-40
 
9-3-03
 
154-08.03, 154-08.04


O2003-48
 
10-15-03
 
92-02, 92-15, 92-16, 92-30


O2003-49
 
10-15-03
 
150-015, 150-016


O2003-50
 
10-15-03
 
150-170, 150-171


O2003-51
 
10-15-03
 
150-076, 150-077


O2003-52
 
10-15-03
 
131-15, 131-16, 131-18 - 131-21, Repeals 131-22


O2003-61
 
11-19-03
 
154-10.03


O2003-66
 
12-3-03
 
154-03.01 - 154-03.03


O2004-07
 
3-3-04
 
154-14.05


O2004-17
 
4-21-04
 
Ch. 91


O2004-24
 
5-19-04
 
30-11


O2004-33
 
6-16-04
 
154-07.01


O2004-35
 
6-16-04
 
150-016, 150-046, Repeals 150-062, 150-077, 150-175


O2004-45
 
7-21-04
 
151-03


O2004-47
 
7-21-04
 
31-01


O2004-49
 
8-4-04
 
154-05.03


O2004-52
 
8-4-04
 
154-01.07, 154-08.01, 154-10.01, 154-10.03


O2004-53
 
8-18-04
 
154-16.03


O2004-58
 
12-1-04
 
Repealed by O2005-74


O2004-61
 
10-6-04
 
112-01


O2004-62
 
10-6-04
 
213-12


O2004-64
 
12-1-04
 
38-01, 38-02, Repeals 38-03


O2004-68
 
11-17-04
 
135-02, 135-99


O2004-70
 
12-1-04
 
71-01, 71-21 - 71-23


O2004-71
 
12-1-04
 
154-08.03, 154-08.04


O2004-72
 
12-1-04
 
156-03, 156-10, 156-11


O2005-15
 
2-15-05
 
194-01 - 194-19, 194-99


O2005-16
 
3-2-05
 
Repeals 137-01 - 137-07


O2005-32
 
5-4-05
 
70-19


O2005-39
 
7-1-05
 
37-02


O2005-40
 
6-1-05
 
153-18, 153-19, 153-20


O2005-42
 
6-15-05
 
194-17


O2005-47
 
7-6-05
 
154-03.01 - 154-03.06


O2005-49
 
7-20-05
 
150-180, 150-181


O2005-55
 
7-20-05
 
37-02


O2005-74
 
9-7-05
 
157-01 - 157-06, 157-07, 157-09 -157-11, 157-13


O2005-91
 
10-5-05
 
154-01.07, 154-17.05


O2005-98
 
11-2-05
 
Repeals 155-01 - 155-10


O2006-11
 
1-18-06
 
154-15.06


O2006-14
 
2-1-06
 
154-16.07


O2006-15
 
2-1-06
 
154-08.02


O2006-20
 
3-1-06
 
154-02.01


O2006-21
 
3-1-06
 
10-15, 30-05, 30-06, 30-09, Repeals 30-10, 30-11, 30-25 - 30-28, 33-01


O2006-22
 
3-22-06
 
150-016


O2006-25
 
4-19-06
 
150-090, 150-091, Repeals 150-092 - 150-096 and 150-140 - 150-145


O2006-35
 
5-17-06
 
193-18


O2006-38
 
6-21-06
 
156-01 - 156-11


O2006-39
 
6-21-06
 
154-03.04, 154-05.02 - 154-05.04, 154-07.01


O2006-41
 
6-21-06
 
31-01


O2006-46
 
7-5-06
 
37-02, 37-99


O2006-53
 
8-16-06
 
151-01 - 151-30


O2006-74
 
11-1-06
 
153-51


O2006-77
 
12-6-06
 
154-15.07


O2007-05
 
1-17-07
 
150-045, 150-046, Repeals 150-047


O2007-06
 
1-17-07
 
150-065, 150-067


O2007-10
 
2-21-07
 
37-02


O2007-22
 
4-18-07
 
150-181


O2007-28
 
5-16-07
 
157-06, 157-07, 157-09 -157-11, 157-13


O2007-30
 
5-16-07
 
150-181


O2007-34
 
6-20-07
 
Charter, Art. IV, §§ 4, 8, 13; Art. VI, §§ 1, 2, 5, 14, Repeals §§ 6,
7, 8, 9; Art. VII, § 6; Art. VIII, § 4; Art. XI, §§ 3, 4; Art. XII, § 1;
Art. XIII, § 10


O2007-41
 
7-18-07
 
Charter, Art. III, § 16


O2007-52
 
10-3-07
 
154-01.07, 154-17.05


O2007-53
 
10-3-07
 
154-04.01


O2007-55
 
11-7-07
 
150-060, 150-061


O2007-61
 
11-20-07
 
154-02.04


O2007-69
 
11-20-07
 
137-01


O2007-75
 
12-5-07
 
112-60, 112-61, 112-99


O2007-78
 
12-19-07
 
195-01 - 195-15


O2008-05
 
2-20-08
 
154-17.02


O2008-06
 
2-20-08
 
154-17.06


O2008-17
 
6-4-08
 
37-02


O2008-29
 
7-16-08
 
37-02


O2008-31
 
8-6-08
 
154-02.04, 154-03.08, 154-14.01


O2008-33
 
8-6-08
 
154-01.07, 154-05.02 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01, 154-06.03, 154-06.04, 154-07.01,
154-07.03, 154-08.01


O2008-46
 
11-19-08
 
Repeals 152-01 - 152-07


O2008-55
 
12-3-08
 
154-03.04


O2009-02
 
1-7-09
 
130-001, 130-040, 130-041


O2009-04
 
1-21-09
 
154-01.07


O2009-07
 
1-21-09
 
Charter, Art. III, § 16


O2009-19
 
3-4-09
 
154-14.08


O2009-22
 
4-1-09
 
150-076, 150-077; Repeals 150.075, 150-078


O2009-28
 
5-6-09
 
154-02.03


O2009-29
 
10-7-09
 
154-01.07, 154-05.02, 154-05.04, 154-15.12


O2009-54
 
10-21-09
 
154-01.07, 154-02.04, 154-03.08, 154-03.09, 154-10.01, 154-10.02, 154-10.03,
154-13.01, 154-14.01, 154-14.04, 154-17.06, 154-19.03, 154-19.08


O2009-55
 
9-16-09
 
154-01.07


O2009-60
 
10-21-09
 
154-01.07


O2009-62
 
10-21-09
 
37-02


O2010-04
 
1-6-10
 
36-37


O2010-07
 
1-20-10
 
154-17.06


O2010-09
 
2-3-10
 
154-01.07, 154-08.01, 154-14.02, 154-14.03, 154-17.01 - 154-17.03, 154-17.05,
154-17.07


O2010-10
 
2-3-10
 
154-04.02


O2010-11
 
2-16-10
 
154-09.02


O2010-12
 
2-3-10
 
154-04.01


O2010-14
 
3-3-10
 
157-01 - 157-04


O2010-20
 
3-3-10
 
Charter, Art. XII, § 2


O2010-32
 
7-7-10
 
154-01.01 - 154-01.05, 154-01.07, 154-02.01 - 154-02.06, 154-03.01 -
154-03.10, 154-04.01 - 154-04.05, 154-05.01 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01 -
154-06.04, 154-07.01, 154-07.03, 154-08.01 - 154-08.05, 154-09.01 -
154-09.03, 154-10.01 - 154-10.03, 154-11.01, 154-12.01, 154-13.01, 154-14.01
- 154-14.08, 154-15.01 - 154-15.12, 154-16.01 - 154-16.09, 154-17.01 -
154-17.07, 154-18.01 - 154-18.04, 154-19.01 - 154-19.10, 154-20.01 -
154-20.06, 154-21.01 - 154-21.04, 154-999, Ch. 154, App. A


O2010-37
 
8-18-10
 
112-17, 112-99


O2010-45
 
9-1-2010
 
154-04.01, 154-05.05


O2010-46
 
9-1-10
 
154-04.01, 154-07.02, 154-07.03


O2010-47
 
9-1-10
 
133-01 - 133-03, 133-99


O2010-56
 
11-17-10
 
154-02.04


O2010-57
 
11-17-2010
 
154-20.05


O2010-62
 
12-1-10
 
153-31, 153-47, 153-62


O2010-63
 
12-1-10
 
154-05.02 - 154-05.04, 154-06.01, 154-06.03, 154-06.04, 154-07.01, 154-07.03,
154-08.01


O2010-64
 
12-15-10
 
154-05.02 - 154-05.05, 154-07.01 - 154-07.03, 154-999


O2010-66
 
1-5-11
 
34-02, 34-05, 50-02, 50-21, 70-31, 150-016, 150-175, 193-86, 154-02.04,
154-02.05


O2011-05
 
2-16-11
 
154-17.03, 154-999


O2011-03
 
3-2-11
 
130-001 - 130-010, 130-020 - 130-029, 130-040, 130-041, 130-050 - 130-059,
130-070 - 130-076, 130-080 - 130-092, 130-095 - 130-099, 130-110 - 130-114,
130-999


O2011-06
 
3-2-11
 
154-22.01 - 154-22.03


O2011-10
 
4-20-11
 
154-02.02, 154-03.05


O2011-11
 
4-20-11
 
157-05


O2011-16
 
5-4-11
 
154-02.04


O2011-21
 
6-15-11
 
50-01 - 50-07


O2011-25
 
7-6-11
 
Repeals 157-07


O2011-27
 
7-20-11
 
Charter, Art. IV, § 4, Art. VI, § 14


O2011-30
 
9-7-11
 
154-14.05


O2011-32
 
9-7-11
 
114-15


O2011-34
 
10-5-11
 
130-110


O2011-35
 
10-19-11
 
37-02


O2011-37
 
11-2-11
 
154-16.07


O2011-39
 
2-1-12
 
36-06


O2011-46
 
12-21-11
 
Repeals 157-08, 157-12


O2012-03
 
3-7-12
 
130-076


O2012-05
 
3-7-12
 
154-15.12


O2012-06
 
3-21-12
 
157-06, 157-09, 157-10, 157-11, 157-13, 157-99


O2012-10
 
5-2-12
 
157-01 - 157-05


O2012-18
 
10-3-12
 
154-17.02


O2012-20
 
11-7-12
 
154-01.07, 154-15.07.01


O2012-22
 
11-21-12
 
154-01.07, 154-08.03, 154-08.04, 154-10.01


O2012-25
 
11-21-12
 
70-04, 70-05, 70-21, 70-99


O2013-02
 
1-16-13
 
154-01.07, 154-08.01, 154-08.03, 154-08.04


O2013-08
 
2-20-13
 
154-10.01


O2013-09
 
2-20-13
 
30-11


O2013-11
 
4-3-13
 
150-180, 150-181


O2013-12
 
4-3-13
 
150-170, 150-171


O2013-13
 
4-3-13
 
150-090, 150-091


O2013-14
 
4-3-13
 
150-015, 150-016


O2013-15
 
4-3-13
 
150-020, 150-021


O2013-23
 
5-1-13
 
31-01


O2013-26
 
5-1-13
 
139-001, 139-002, 139-004 - 139-007, 139-099


O2013-28
 
5-15-13
 
154-01.07, 154-08.02, 154-08.03, 154-08.04


O2013-29
 
5-15-13
 
154-08.04


O2013-31
 
6-5-13
 
157-13


O2013-32
 
6-19-13
 
36-91, 38-16, 134-04, 134-05


O2013-37
 
8-7-13
 
154-01.07, 154-10.01


O2013-41
 
8-7-13
 
70-04, 70-05, 70-21


O2013-49
 
9-18-13
 
150-015, 150-170


O2013-53
 
10-16-13
 
139-099


O2013-54
 
10-16-13
 
150-181


O2013-62
 
12-4-13
 
151-04, 151-06, 151-17, 151-22, 151-99


O2014-06
 
2-19-14
 
154-01.07, 154-20.03, 154-20.04


O2014-09
 
3-19-14
 
193-29, 193-67 , 193-71


O2014-14
 
5-7-14
 
154-15.05


O2014-16
 
8-27-14
 
Ch.154, Appendix A


O2014-19
 
7-16-14
 
154-09.02


O2014-20
 
8-27-14
 
154-01.07, 154-02.02, 154-08.02, 154-08.03, 154-08.04, 154-09.01, 154-09.02,
154-09.03, 154-15.13, 154-15.14


O2014-29
 
10-1-14
 
154-05.03, 154-05.04, 154-05.05, 154-07.01, 154-07.02, 154-07.03, 154-15.15


O2014-32
 
12-3-14
 
193-29, 193-71, 193-73


O2014-36
 
12-17-14
 
131-15 - 131-19


O2014-38
 
12-17-14
 
157-01


O2015-02
 
2-4-15
 
37-02


O2105-03
 
2-4-15
 
37-02


O2015-05
 
2-4-15
 
154-17.04


O2015-006
 
2-18-15
 
37-02


O2015-009
 
3-4-15
 
115-01, 115-02, 115-99


O2015-010
 
3-4-15
 
211-46


O2015-013
 
5-20-15
 
111-02


O2015-015
 
3-18-15
 
37-02


O2015-019
 
4-15-15
 
213-01, 213-05 - 213-11, 213-14, 213-15


O2015-021
 
4-15-15
 
154-01.07, 154-05.01 - 154-05.05, 154-06.01 - 154-06.04, 154-07.01 -
154-07.03, 154-08.01 - 154-08.05, 154-09.01 - 154-09.03, 154-10.01,
154-11.01, 154-13.01


O2015-022
 
4-15-15
 
154-09.02


O2015-023
 
4-15-15
 
154-02.01, 154-04.04, Repeals 154-04.03


O2015-029
 
5-20-15
 
37-02


O2015-030
 
6-3-15
 
31-01


O2015-033
 
7-1-15
 
150-008


O2015-037
 
7-15-15
 
150-045, 150-046


O2015-038
 
7-15-15
 
150-060, 150-061


O2015-039
 
7-15-15
 
150-065, 150-067, Repeals 150-066


O2015-040
 
7-15-15
 
150-076, 150-077


O2015-057
 
11-4-15
 
211-09, 211-10


O2015-058
 
11-18-15
 
138-02, 138-04, 138-05, 138-06


O2015-061
 
12-16-15
 
211-09


O2016-012
 
5-18-16
 
34-06


O2016-018
 
7-20-16
 
150-002


O2016-020
 
7-20-16
 
131-16


O2016-023
 
8-3-16
 
37-02


O2016-028
 
10-5-16
 
154-01.07, 154-17.04, 154-17.99, 154-999


O2016-031
 
10-19-16
 
39-25


O2016-033
 
11-16-16
 
130-055, 130-999


O2017-006
 
3-1-17
 
39-02, 39-30


O2017-013
 
5-3-17
 
154-01.07, 154-05.01 - 154-05.04, 154-07.01, 154-07.03, 154-08.01, 154-14.05,
154-15.16


O2017-014
 
5-3-17
 
154-01.07, 154-17.01, 154-17.03, 154-17.06


O2017-016
 
5-17-17
 
154-01.07, 154-16.01 - 154-16.07, 154-16.09, 154-16.10


O2017-022
 
6-21-17
 
154-14.09


O2017-023
 
7-19-17
 
211-21, 211-22


O2017-024
 
8-2-2017
 
154-01.07, 154-20.01 - 154-20.06


O2017-025
 
8-16-17
 
212-11


O2017-026
 
8-16-17
 
154-01.07, 154-05.04, 154-05.05, 154-06.01, 154-07.01 - 154-07.03, 154-08.01


O2017-027
 
8-16-17
 
154-02.01


O2017-029
 
9-6-17
 
157-01, 157-02


O2017-031
 
9-6-17
 
193-21, 193-23


O2017-035
 
9-20-17
 
154-15.15


O2018-007
 
3-21-18
 
210-09


O2018-015
 
5-2-18
 
139-001 - 139-009, 139-099


O2018-014
 
8-1-18
 
154-19.02, 154-19.03, 154-19.09, 154-19.11


O2018-019
 
8-1-18
 
92-02, 92-04, 92-05, 92-15 - 92-20, 92-30, 92-32, 92-40 - 92-44, 92-99


O2018-032
 
8-1-18
 
154-14.09


O2018-033
 
8-1-18
 
154-01.07, 154-15.17


O2018-035
 
8-1-18
 
37-02


O2018-037
 
9-5-18
 
212-11, 212-99


O2018-040
 
10-17-18
 
Repeals 137-02


O2018-041
 
10-17-18
 
50-06


O2018-043
 
11-21-18
 
50-21


O2018-048
 
11-21-18
 
211-07


O2018-050
 
12-5-18
 
150-015, 150-016


O2018-051
 
12-5-18
 
150-180, 150-181


O2018-052
 
12-5-18
 
150-170, 150-171


O2018-053
 
12-5-18
 
150-090, 150-091


O2018-054
 
12-5-18
 
150-018, 150-019


O2018-055
 
12-19-18
 
131-15 - 131-19


O2019-001
 
1-16-19
 
154-01.07, 154-05.01, 154-09.02, 154-09.03, 154-14.05, 154-15.15, 154-15.18


O2019-007
 
2-6-19
 
191-01 - 191-14, Repeals 191-01 - 191-08. 191- 20 - 191-31, 191-40 - 191-62,
191-75 - 191-80, 191-99


O2019-008
 
2-20-19
 
71-21, 71-22


O2019-013
 
3-6-19
 
37-02


O2019-017
 
4-17-19
 
193-71


 
 
 
 
 




 


