Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL AND SLOGAN
Chapter 1.12 CITY HOLIDAYS
Chapter 1.16 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 1.20 ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.24 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.28 ADOPTION OF COUNTY ORDINANCES

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted the city of American Canyon Municipal Code, as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 94-11 § 1, 1994)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
     This code shall be known as the city of American Canyon Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the city of American Canyon Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the city of American Canyon Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the city of American Canyon Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 94-11 § 2, 1994)

 

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
     Whenever a reference is made to this code as the city of American Canyon Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of American Canyon, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 94-11 § 3, 1994)

 

1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
     Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 94-11 § 4, 1994)

 

1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 94-11 § 5, 1994)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Interpretation of code and other ordinances.
     A.    The provisions of the ordinances of this city and all proceedings under them are to be construed to effect its objects and to promote justice.

     B.     All the provisions of this code and all other city ordinances shall be interpreted to refer to the appropriate or designated officer or office of the city, and whether an ordinance, uniform code, statute, or other matter which is adopted by reference refers to any department, officer, employee, inspection, police, or other function, unless the context requires otherwise, all references shall be to the appropriate or designated office, officer, department, agency, employee, or function of the city, or to the person or agency performing the function for the city. (Ord. 94-04 § 1, 1994; prior code § 1.01.010)

 

1.04.020 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
     Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment by this code of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance previously in effect in the city or within the territory currently comprising the city, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for the violation of any ordinance, which violation was committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty on such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation of such ordinances, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations pertaining to such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of such ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Prior code § 1.01.020)

 

1.04.030 Partial invalidity.
     If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of any ordinance of the city is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional; and if for any reason the code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 94-04 § 2, 1994; prior code § 1.01.030)

 

1.04.040 Territorial limitation.
     The ordinances of the city shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city of American Canyon and that territory outside of the city over which the, city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (Ord. 94-04 § 3, 1994; prior code § 1.01.040)

 

1.04.050 Local signification.
     All references in the ordinances of the city to places, acts, persons or things and all else in relation to such ordinances shall be construed to mean that the same are applicable to this city, whether the city is mentioned in each particular section or not. Ordinances of the city have been adopted from or relate to the same subject as is set forth in the Napa County Code. To the extent that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of any such ordinances is in conflict with the Napa County Code provisions that are adopted, the later-adopted portion of the ordinances shall control and shall take precedence over the inconsistent portions of the Napa County Code. (Ord. 94-04 § 4, 1994; prior code § 1.01.050)

 

1.04.060 Rules of construction.
     Unless the provisions of the ordinances of the city otherwise specifically provided, or the context of the ordinances indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in the following sections of this chapter shall govern the construction of the ordinances of the city. The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 94-04 § 5, 1994; prior code § 1.01.100)

 

1.04.070 Effect of headings.
     The title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in the ordinances of the city shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent or the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section of this code or the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 94-04 § 6, 1994; prior code § 1.01.110)

 

1.04.080 Interpretation of language.
     All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may be acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 94-04 § 7, 1994; prior code § 1.01.120)

 

1.04.090 Grammatical interpretation.
     The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

     A.    Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

     B.     Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

     C.     Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 94-04 § 8, 1994; prior code § 1.01.121)

 

1.04.100 Acts by deputies.
     Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by, a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless the ordinances of the city expressly provide otherwise. (Ord. 94-04 § 9, 1994; prior code § 1.01.130)

 

1.04.110 Acts by agents.
     When an act is required by this code or an ordinance, the, same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 94-04 § 10, 1994; prior code § 1.01.131)

 

1.04.120 Computation of time.
     Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an action is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 94-04 § 11, 1994; prior code § 1.01.140)

 

1.04.130 References to ordinances—Application to amendments.
     Whenever any reference in this code is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such ordinance of the city, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of this city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now, or hereafter added to this code. (Prior code § 1.01.150)

 

1.04.140 Statute of limitations.
     When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation. (Prior code § 1.01.160)

 

1.04.150 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

     “Calendar year” means the period from January 1st through December 31st of any given year.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon, or the area within the territorial limits of the city, and such territory outside the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

     “City manager” means the appointed official of the city who occupies the position of a chief administrative officer of the city.

     “Council” means the city council of the city of American Canyon. “All its members” or “all councilmembers” means the total number of councilmembers holding office.

     “Councilmember” means a person duly elected to the council.

     “County” means the county of Napa, California or the area within the limits of Napa County, and such territory outside Napa County over which the county has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provisions.

     “Fiscal year” means from July 1st of any given year through June 30th of the following year.

     “Goods” means and include wares and merchandise.

     “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

     “May” is permissive.

     “Months” means the calendar months, unless otherwise expressed.

     “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

     “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

     “Operate” means and includes carrying on, keeping, conducting or maintaining.

     “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

     “Person” includes any natural person, firm, company, corporation, club, trust, or similar organization, partnership, association, public corporation, political subdivision, city (except the city of American Canyon), the county of Napa, any district in the county of Napa, the state of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency or any employee, manager, officer, agent, lessee or servant of any thereof, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.

     “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things and actions, any evidences of debt.

     “Police,” “police chief,” or “chief of police” means the agency which performs the appropriate law enforcement functions of the city, and the head of the agency or division thereof which at the time involved has responsibility for performing the police function for, or within, the city.

     “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

     “Property” includes real and personal property.

     “Quarterly” where used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar months.

     “Real property” includes land, tenements, and hereditaments.

     “Sale” includes any sale, exchange, barter, or offer for sale.

     “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

     “State” means the state of California.

     “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the state.

     “Tenant” or “occupant” applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

     “Written” or “writing” includes materials which are printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in a permanent visible form.

     “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 94-04 § 12, 1994; prior code § 1.01.170)

Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL AND SLOGAN
1.08.010 Adoption.
     A logo for the city is adopted, the design of which logo shall be as follows in Section 1.08.020. This logo design was presented to the city on July 4, 1992. (Ord. 92-14 § 1.05.010, 1992; prior code § 1.04.010)

 

1.08.020 Design.
     The logo adopted in Section 1.08.010 shall be circular in form. Around its circumference shall appear the words “American Canyon.” The circle is horizontally bisected with a ribbon banner showing the words “City Of.” The upper portion of the central field of the circle will display an American flag positioned horizontally with the field of stars to the right rear. The flag will be flowing to symbolize the rolling hills of American Canyon. Above and adjacent to the field of stars will be two clusters of grapes with grape leaves to symbolize the city’s association to the Napa Valley. The lower portion of the central field will show the words “Incorporated 1992.” (Ord. 92-14 § 1.05.020, 1992; prior code § 1.04.020)

 

1.08.030 Official slogan.
     The official slogan of the city shall be “Gateway to the Napa Valley,” reflecting both the city’s geographic location and the fact that it is in fact the main entrance to the Napa Valley from the San Francisco Bay area and beyond. (Ord. 97-10 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 1.12 CITY HOLIDAYS
1.12.010 Holidays observed by the city.
     A.    Excluding those offices which must remain open for the continuation of essential public services such as police and fire protection, the public offices of the city shall be closed on Saturdays and Sundays, and on the following:

     1.     January 1st;

     2.     The third Monday in January, known as “Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day”;

     3.     February 12th, known as “Lincoln Day”;

     4.     The third Monday in February, known as “Washington Day”;

     5.     The last Monday in May, known as “Memorial Day”;

     6.     July 4th;

     7.     The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day”;

     8.     September 9th, known as “Admission Day”;

     9.     The second Monday in October, known as “Columbus Day”;

     10.   November 11th, known as “Veterans Day”;

     11.   The fourth Thursday in November, known as “Thanksgiving Day”;

     12.   The day following Thanksgiving Day;

     13.   December 25th;

     14.   Every day appointed by the President of the United States or the Governor of the state of California as a holiday.

     B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the city manager shall be authorized, by administrative regulation or otherwise, to direct that all or a portion of the public offices of the city shall remain open for business, on a full or reduced staff basis, on any of the days or holidays prescribed above, when he determines it to be necessary in the public interest to do so. (Prior code § 2.55.010)

Chapter 1.16 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
1.16.010 Notices—Service.
     A.    Whenever a notice is required to be given, or may be given, under any provision of this code or any provision of any code adopted by reference by this code or any provision of any ordinance or resolution of the city not included within this code, such notice may be given as herein provided.

     B.     Unless different or special provisions are otherwise specifically made in this code or in some other applicable enactment, any such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be noticed, or by deposit in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at that person’s last known business address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matters to which such notice is directed.

     C.     Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office or in the official receptacle thereof. (Prior code § 1.01.300)

 

1.16.020 Notices—Proof.
     Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by the affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1.01.310)

Chapter 1.20 ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE
1.20.010 Notice to appear in lieu of arrest.
     In any case in which a person is arrested for a violation of any provision of this code and does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, such person may, in lieu of being taken before a magistrate, be issued a written notice to appear in court and may then be released, all pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures prescribed by California Penal Code Section 853.6, et seq. (Prior code § 1.08.010)

 

1.20.020 Issuance of citations by designated officers and employees.
     A.    Officers and employees of the city who have the discretionary duty to enforce a statute or ordinance may, pursuant to Section 836.5 of the Penal Code and subject to the provisions of this section, arrest a person without a warrant whenever any such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed an offense in the officer’s or employee’s presence which he or she has the discretionary duty to enforce, and to issue a notice to appear, and to release such person on his or her written promise to appear in court, pursuant to Section 853.6 of the Penal Code.

     B.     No officer or employee shall be allowed by his or her superior to exercise the arrest and citation authority conferred in this section unless such officer or employee is within a classification of city officers and employees designated by resolution of the city council to exercise such arrest and citation authority as to specified violations.

     C.     The city manager shall establish and cause to be administered a special enforcement training program designated to instruct each officer or employee who will exercise such arrest and citation authority, regarding the provisions of the statutes and ordinances to be enforced, the evidentiary prerequisites to proper procedures for making arrests or otherwise prudently exercising such arrest and citation authority, and the legal and practical ramifications and limitations attendant thereto. Any such officers or employees shall be appropriately instructed to deposit executed citations or notices with the police department for filing with the court, after review for legal sufficiency. (Prior code § 1.08.020)

Chapter 1.24 GENERAL PENALTY
1.24.010 Violation—Infraction.
     A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code or any provision of any ordinance of the city not included within this code. Any person violating any of such provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code or any code adopted by reference by this code or any other city ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction, unless such violation is specifically designated as constituting a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code, or any provision of any code adopted by reference by this code, or of any other city ordinance, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and may be punished accordingly.

     B.     Any provision or requirement of this code or otherwise as referred to above, the violation of which or the failure to comply with which, is designated as an infraction, may be prosecutable as a misdemeanor upon a fourth violation and each violation thereafter of the same provision by the same individual. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1, 2017; Ord. 94-01 § 1, 1994; prior code § 1.01.200)

 

1.24.020 Aiding and abetting.
     Whenever in the ordinances of the city any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 94-04 § 13, 1994; prior code § 1.01.210)

 

1.24.030 Establishment of offenses as infractions.
     Any violation expressly declared to be punish-able, in the discretion of the court, by either a fine, or by a fine or imprisonment, or both, shall become an infraction for all purposes under any of the following circumstances:

     A.    Where a judgment imposes a punishment of a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars in the case of a first offense; or

     B.     When the court grants probation to a defendant without the imposition of a sentence and, at the time of granting probation, or on application of the defendant or probation officer thereafter, the court declares the offense to be an infraction; or

     C.     When the city attorney or any deputy district attorney files in a court having jurisdiction over misdemeanor offenses a complaint specifying that the offense is an infraction. (Ord. 94-01 § 2, 1994; prior code § 1.01.220)

 

1.24.040 Punishments.
     A.    Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars. (Ord. 94-01 § 3, 1994; prior code § 1.01.230)

 

1.24.050 Violation of administrative provisions.
     The violation of, or the failure or omission to perform in accordance with any administrative provision of this code by any officer or employee of the city shall generally not be considered a criminal act, but may be deemed a failure to perform the duties or to observe the rules or regulations of the department, office, commission or board within the meaning of the rules and regulations of the city, or of the civil service or other personnel regulations of the city if applicable. (Prior code § 1.01.270)

Chapter 1.28 ADOPTION OF COUNTY ORDINANCES
1.28.010 County enactments to remain in effect.
     A.    All ordinances of the county of Napa which have been applicable within the territory now incorporated as the city of American Canyon, to the extent that they applied before incorporation, shall remain in full force and effect as ordinances of the city.

     B.     Additionally, the resolutions, rules and regulations of the county which have been so applicable in implementation of the aforesaid ordinances and state law (such as, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act and regulations pertaining to traffic), to the extent that they applied before incorporation shall remain in full force and effect as resolutions, rules and regulations, respectively, of the city and which may be amended or repealed in the future by any form of enactment (motion, resolution or ordinance) deemed appropriate by the council. (Ord. 1 § 1, 1992)

 

1.28.020 Declaration of intent.
     Certain provisions of the county enactments referred to in Section 1.28.010 of this chapter reflect the county governmental structure and contain references to officials, official titles, commissions, and other designations which are not a part of the structure of this city’s government. In order to effectively and intelligently administer the county enactments to the extent that they are continued in effect by this chapter, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the substitution of the appropriate city official, title or designation in county enactments. (Ord. 1 § 2, 1992)

 

1.28.030 Substitution of appropriate reference to city.
     A.    Whenever in the enactments of the county which are continued in effect by the city there is a reference to “board of supervisors,” this reference shall be interpreted to mean the “city council of the city of American Canyon.”

     B.     Whenever in the enactments of the county which are continued in effect by the city there is a reference to an office, official title, or designation in the governmental structure of the city, or if there is none, any official or titleholder of the city who has been specifically directed by the council or the city manager to perform the functions referred to or the duties imposed.

     C.     Whenever it is appropriate under the circumstances, and in the enactments of the county which are continued in effect by the city, there is a reference to the “county of Napa,” “county,” or “unincorporated area,” or “territory” of the county of Napa, such reference shall be interpreted to mean the “city of American Canyon.”

     D.    Whenever in the enactments of the county which are continued in effect by the city there is a reference to “planning commission,” “board of zoning adjustment,” “board of appeals,” “zoning administrator,” or any other person or body of the county where the context so indicates, this reference shall be interpreted to mean that these agencies or officials are acting as the agents of the city. (Ord. 1 § 3, 1992)

 

1.28.040 Duration of county ordinances within city.
     Each ordinance or enactment of the county which remains in effect as a city ordinance or enactment by virtue of Section 1.28.010 of this chapter shall remain in effect as a city ordinance for a period of one hundred twenty days or until the council adopts an ordinance or enactment superseding it, whichever last in time occurs. (Ord. 94-01 § 6, 1994; Ord. 1 § 4, 1992)

 

1.28.050 Matter of superseding county ordinances within one hundred twenty-day period.
     No city ordinance enacted within the one hundred twenty-day period of time shall be deemed to supersede a county ordinance unless the city ordinance specifically refers to the county ordinance and states an intention to supersede it. (Ord. 1 § 5, 1992)

 

1.28.060 Enforcement of continuing county ordinances.
     The enforcement of the county ordinances continuing in effect in the incorporated area shall be by the city except insofar as services of enforcement are furnished by the county in accordance with Government Code Section 57384. (Ord. 1 § 6, 1992)

 

1.28.070 Authority for enactment.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted under Government Code Section 57376. (Ord. 1 § 7, 1992)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.02 MAYOR
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.16 CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.20 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.24 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND GENERAL SERVICES
Chapter 2.28 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 2.29 PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
Chapter 2.32 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.36 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
Chapter 2.40 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
Chapter 2.41 CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE
Chapter 2.44 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
Chapter 2.48 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER RELIEF
Chapter 2.50 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.52 EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
Chapter 2.56 DATES FOR GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Chapter 2.58 FILING FEE FOR CANDIDATES
Chapter 2.60 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.64 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS

Chapter 2.02 MAYOR
2.02.010 The mayor.
     The mayor shall be elected from the city at large on the consolidated city general municipal election, held on even-numbered years, consistent with Section 2.56.020 of Chapter 2.56 of the city municipal code. The mayor shall receive compensation as provided in Section 2.04.060 of Chapter 2.04 of the city municipal code for council-members plus any additional compensation as provided by council ordinance or by a majority vote of the electors voting on the proposition at a municipal election pursuant to Government Code Section 36516.1. (Ord. 2006-12 § 1, 2006)

 

2.02.020 Qualifications.
     A.    To be qualified for the office of mayor, a person must be a citizen of the United States, a registered voter of the city at the time nomination papers are issued to the candidate as provided in Elections Code Section 10227.

     B.     An existing councilmember may be a candidate for the office of mayor; provided, that if the councilmember holds a term of office which expires in an even-numbered year concurrent with the election of the mayor then that councilmember may not also seek re-election as a councilmember.

     C.     If a councilmember holds a term of office which expires in an even-numbered year after any even-numbered year in which the office of mayor is to be filled by election, is elected mayor, then the resulting councilmember vacancy may be filled by the council appointing the individual running for councilmember offices subject to election receiving the most votes but not elected or by calling for a special election. (Ord. 2006-12 § 1, 2006)

 

2.02.030 Term of office, the mayor.
     The mayor shall be elected to a term of four years. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast for all candidates for the office at the election shall be declared elected. The mayor shall continue in office until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the date of the general municipal election, and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. (Ord. 2012-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2006-12 § 1, 2006)

 

2.02.040 Vacancy—Filling of.
     In the case of a vacancy in the office of the mayor for any reason, the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment of the vice mayor, unless declined by the vice mayor then the council shall fill the vacancy by appointment of a councilmember. If the council fails to fill the vacancy within thirty days, it shall call an election to fill the vacancy to be held on the next established election date to be held not less than one hundred fourteen days thereafter. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 2006-12 § 1, 2006)

 

2.02.050 Vacancy—What constitutes.
     The office of mayor shall be declared vacant by the council when the person elected appointed thereto fails to meet the qualifications for office of the mayor within ten days after his or her term is to begin, dies, resigns, ceases to be a resident of the city or absents him or herself continuously from the city for a period of more than thirty days without permission from the council, is convicted of a felony, is judicially determined to be an incompetent, is permanently so disabled as to be unable to perform the duties of his or her office, forfeits his or her office under any provision of the city municipal code, or is removed from office by judicial procedure. (Ord. 2006-12 § 1, 2006)

 

2.02.060 Functions, powers and duties.
     The mayor shall be the chief elective officer of the city, responsible for providing leadership and taking issues to the people and marshalling public interest in and support for municipal activity. The mayor shall have those powers, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in Government Code Sections 40602, 40603 and 40604, municipal code Section 2.04.030 and as designated by the council from time to time by motion or resolution. (Ord. 2006-12 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Date of regular meetings and study sessions.
     The regular meetings and regular study sessions of the council commencing in January, 1992, shall be held as determined by enactment of the council. (Prior code § 2.04.010)

 

2.04.020 Place of meetings and study sessions.
     The regular meetings and study sessions of the council shall be held at City Hall, located at 4381 Broadway Street, American Canyon. Special meetings of the council shall be held at the place designated in this section for regular meetings or such other place as provided for in the notice and call of the meeting. (Ord. 2009-14 § 1, 2009; prior code § 2.04.020)

 

2.04.030 Duties of mayor, vice mayor and mayor pro tempore.
     The mayor shall preside at city council meetings, sign ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council, and perform other functions of a mayor of general law city as required by state law and city ordinances and resolutions. If the mayor is for any reason absent from an official function, or is unable to perform his or her official duties, the vice mayor or mayor pro tempore may perform the official duties of the mayor until the mayor returns or is able to act. (Ord. 98-06 § 1, 1998)

 

2.04.040 Improper conduct at meeting.
     Any member or other person using profane, vulgar, loud or boisterous language at any meeting or otherwise interrupting the proceedings, who refuses to be seated or keep quiet when ordered to do so by the mayor or other presiding officer of the council, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.030)

 

2.04.050 Adoption of procedures.
     The council shall, by resolution, adopt rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its meetings, any of its other functions and activities, and regulations pertaining thereto. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.040)

 

2.04.060 Compensation and reimbursement.
     A.    Compensation shall be paid to each member of the council in the amount authorized by Section 36516 of the Government Code and established by ordinance in addition to any other compensation permitted by applicable law.

     1.     Consistent with Government Code Section 36516(a)(1), the city council establishes the compensation to be paid to each member at three hundred dollars per month.

     2.     Consistent with Government Code Section 36516(c), the compensation to be paid to members shall be increased by five percent, which is an increase of fifteen dollars to the three hundred dollars.

     3.     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective on the 31st day from the date of its final passage.

     4.     Notwithstanding the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, consistent with Government Code Section 36516.5, the salaries of the members of the city council shall not be increased to three hundred fifteen dollars per month until November 3, 2004.

     B.     The compensation prescribed in this section is and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of official duties for the city; and, accordingly, each member of the council shall receive reimbursement for such actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties of the city, pursuant to the provisions of Section 36514.5 of the Government Code, as amended from time to time. Such reimbursement shall be as established by a policy resolution adopted by the council. (Ord. 2004-13, 2004; Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.050)

 

2.04.070 Commission appointments.
     Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by state law, all city board and commission appointments, except ex officio members where applicable, shall be made by the council. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.060)

 

2.04.080 Appeals to council.
     A.    Except when an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her pursuant to any of the provisions of this code or other city ordinance, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the city, if the denial, suspension, or revocation of such permit or the determination of such administrative decision involves the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this code or other city ordinance, may appeal in writing to the council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal.

     B.     No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this chapter unless such decision to appeal has been first taken up with the department head concerned and with the city manager, and each such official has not adjusted the matter to the appellant’s satisfaction.

     C.     No right of appeal to the council from any administrative decision made by an official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of this code or other city ordinance shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of this code or other city ordinance, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit or any other administrative decision. Also, there shall be no such right of appeal with regard to law enforcement activities involving state law. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.100)

 

2.04.090 Notice of appeal—Time limit—Contents.
     A.    Any notice of appeal to the council must be filed within fifteen days of the date of service of notice of the decision or action pursuant to Section 1.01.300 of this code, or within fifteen days of the decision or action if no notice of the decision or action is required to be given.

     B.     The notice of appeal shall set forth: (1) the specific action appealed from; (2) the specific grounds of the appeal; and (3) the relief or action sought from the council. In the event any notice of appeal fails to set forth any information required by this section, the city clerk shall return the same to the appellant with a statement of the respects in which it is deficient, and the appellant shall thereafter be allowed five days in which to perfect and refile the notice of appeal.

     C.     Except in those instances where an appeal is filed by the city manager or other public official in pursuance of official duties, the written notice of appeal from the action of an administrative official or from an administrative body of the city, as the case may be, shall be accompanied by a fee of fifty dollars or such other fee as may be required by other enactment of the council. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.110)

 

2.04.100 Appeals—Hearings—Notices.
     Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, the city clerk shall schedule the matter promptly upon the council agenda at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be given the appellant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless notice is waived in writing by the appellant. The city clerk shall also cause a copy of the notice of appeal to be transmitted to the official or body whose action has been appealed from. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.120)

 

2.04.110 Appeals—Hearings.
     A.    The council at the hearing may limit participation in the hearing to the directly interested parties, or may allow participation by the public. Such public participation, however, shall only be appropriate when the council deems the same necessary in the public interest. If a hearing is ordered open to public participation, notice thereof shall be given by publishing notice of the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than five days prior to the date of such hearing, and by such other means as the council deems necessary.

     B.     At the time of consideration of the appeal by the council the appellant shall be limited to a presentation on the specific grounds of the appeal and matters set forth in his notice of appeal and shall have the burden of establishing cause why the action appealed from should be altered, reversed or modified. The council may continue the matter from time to time, and at the conclusion of its consideration may affirm, reverse or modify the action appealed from and may take any action which might have been legally taken in the first instance by the official or body from whose action the appeal has been taken. In ruling on the appeal the findings and action of the council shall be final and conclusive in the matter. (Ord. 98-06 § 2, 1998; prior code § 2.04.130)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Office created—Term.
     The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the council wholly on the basis of administrative and executive ability and qualifications. The city manager shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the council. (Prior code § 2.08.010)

 

2.08.020 Eligibility.
     No member of the council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the council. (Prior code § 2.08.020)

 

2.08.030 Compensation.
     The city manager shall receive such compensation and expense allowances as the council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate. (Prior code § 2.08.030)

 

2.08.040 Expense reimbursement.
     The city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his official duties. (Prior code § 2.08.040)

 

2.08.050 Designation of acting city manager.
     The city manager, by a letter filed with the city clerk, shall designate a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his temporary absence or disability. The council may appoint an acting or interim city manager. (Prior code § 2.08.050)

 

2.08.060 Powers and duties.
     The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, he or she shall be expected to, and shall have the power to:

     A.    Enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the council are faithfully observed;

     B.     Except as provided for in subsection C, appoint, remove, promote, and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except elective officers and the city attorney, but including the offices of city clerk and city treasurer, subject to all applicable personnel rules and regulations which may be adopted by the council;

     C.     Appoint, with the consent of the council, the community development director;

     D.    Control, order and give directions to all department heads who are subject to his or her appointment and removal authority, and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads;

     E.     Conduct studies and effect such organization and reorganization of offices, positions or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business;

     F.     Recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary;

     G.    Attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the council as a whole, except when his or her removal is under consideration;

     H.    Prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the council for its approval;

     I.      Direct and supervise all the purchasing activities of the city;

     J.      Keep the council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city;

     K.    Make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof and any contract or the proper performance of any of the obligations of the city; and further, to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city;

     L.     Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the council;

     M.    Have the same authority as the mayor (as conveniences to the parties may dictate) to sign documents specified in Section 40602 of the Government Code of the state whenever such documents have been approved by the council for execution by resolution, motion, minute order or other appropriate action; and

     N.    Perform such other responsibilities and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the council. (Ord. 2007-03 § 1, 2007; prior code § 2.08.060)

 

2.08.070 Relations with council.
     A.    The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the council not any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the city manager. For purposes hereof, “inquiry” means any and all communications short of giving orders, directions or instructions to any member of the administrative staff. Such members shall give all information reasonably requested by any councilmember.

     B.     The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the council and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager. The council shall instruct the city manager in matters of policy. Any action, determination or omission of the city manager shall be subject to review by the council. The council may not overrule, change or modify any such action, determination or omission except by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the council. (Prior code § 2.08.070)

 

2.08.080 Departmental cooperation.
     It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney, city clerk and city treasurer to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Prior code § 2.08.080)

 

2.08.090 Attendance at commission meetings.
     The city manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission, and any other commission, board or committee created by the council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the council. At such meetings which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he or she wishes to address the members thereof. He or she shall inform such members as to the status of any matter being considered by the council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the council. (Prior code § 2.08.090)

 

2.08.100 Removal—Method—Notice.
     The removal of the city manager shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of Sections 2.08.110 through 2.08.160. In case of his or her intended removal by the city council, the city manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him or her and the reason therefor at least thirty days before the effective date of his or her removal. (Prior code § 2.08.100)

 

2.08.110 Removal—Hearing.
     Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager such notice required in Section 2.08.100, he or she may, by written notification to the city clerk, request a hearing before the council. Thereafter, the council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the thirty-day period, at which the city manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. (Prior code § 2.08.110)

 

2.08.120 Removal—Suspension pending hearing.
     After furnishing the city manager with written notice of intended removal, the council may suspend him or her from duty, but his or her compensation shall continue until his or her removal by resolution of the council passed subsequent to the hearing described in Section 2.08.110. (Prior code § 2.08.120)

 

2.08.130 Removal—Council discretion.
     In removing the city manager, except as provided in Section 2.08.150, the council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present to the council his or her grounds of opposition to his or her removal prior to its action. (Prior code § 2.08.130)

 

2.08.140 Removal—Limitation.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 2.08.100 through 2.08.130, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly-elected member of the council or a reorganized council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of such ninety-day period aforementioned, the provisions of Sections 2.08.100 through 2.08.130 as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Prior code § 2.08.140)

 

2.08.150 Wilful misconduct—Determination.
     In the event the intended removal of the city manager is for wilful misconduct in office, written notice to the city manager as provided in Section 2.08.100 shall state that the reason for removal is wilful misconduct in office and shall state specific facts which constitute such wilful misconduct. The procedure for hearing and for suspension pending hearing shall be followed as stated in Sections 2.08.100 through 2.08.140. A determination of wilful misconduct in office shall be evidenced by specific findings of facts constituting such wilful misconduct. The determination of what constitutes wilful misconduct shall be within the sole discretion of the council provided that it shall relate to the welfare of the city. (Prior code § 2.08.150)

 

2.08.160 Wilful misconduct—Defined.
     Wilful misconduct includes conduct directly related to conduct in office and directly related to the duties of the office. It includes the refusal to follow the lawful directions of the city council. It also includes conduct not directly related to the performance of official duties of the office when such conduct has a direct and harmful effect on the welfare of the city. Evidence of such direct and harmful effect shall include but shall not be limited to, conviction of a felony. (Prior code § 2.08.160)

 

2.08.170 Agreements with council.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional` terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 2.08.170)

Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
2.12.010 Office created—Term.
     The office of city clerk is created and established. The city clerk shall hold such office at the pleasure of the city manager. The city manager may assign to him or herself the official duties of city clerk and, if this is done, then the city manager shall hold the office of city clerk at his or her own pleasure. The fact of the city manager has assigned to him or herself the official duties of city clerk shall not affect the city manager’s power to subsequently relinquish the duties of city clerk and appoint another to assume such duties. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2, 2007)

 

2.12.020 Compensation.
     If the city manager appoints a separate person to the office of city clerk, the city clerk shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Ord. 2007-03 § 2, 2007)

 

2.12.030 Functions.
     A.    The city clerk shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities granted to and imposed upon the office of the city clerk by the provisions of Chapter 2 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code of the state, other general laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the ordinances and resolutions of the council; provided, however, pursuant to the provisions of Section 40805.5 of the Government Code, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code shall be performed by the director of finance and general services.

     B.     The principal functions of the city clerk shall be to:

     1.     Attend all meetings of the council and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a record of all the actions of the council;

     2.     Keep all ordinances and resolutions of the council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily accessible and open to the public. The city clerk shall attach to the original copy of each ordinance a certificate which shall state the date the ordinance was adopted and, as to ordinance requiring publication, that the ordinance has been published or posted in accordance with law;

     3.     Keep all records of the council and of the office of the city clerk in such manner that the information contained therein will, be readily accessible and open to the public until such time as any of the records may be destroyed, or reproduced and the original destroyed, in accordance with state law;

     4.     Serve as the official custodian of all city records;

     5.     Be the custodian of the seal of the city;

     6.     Prepare the council agendas, in conjunction with and under the direction of the city manager;

     7.     Perform the duties prescribed by the elections code of the state in conducting municipal elections;

     8.     Perform the duties imposed upon city clerks by the California Political Reform Act;

     9.     Be responsible for the publication of all the official advertising of the city;

     10.   Be responsible for the maintenance and distribution of the municipal code;

     11.   Process all claims filed against the city and its officers, agents, or employees, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1 of Part 3 of Division 3 of Title 1 of the Government Code of the state and Chapter 3.08 of Title 3 of this code; and

     12.   Perform such other duties consistent with this code as may be required of the city clerk, by the council. (Prior code § 2.10.030)

 

2.12.040 Deputy city clerk.
     The city clerk shall have the authority and is hereby authorized to appoint a deputy city clerk as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the duties of the office. (Prior code § 2.10.040)

Chapter 2.16 CITY TREASURER
2.16.010 Office created—Term.
     The office of city treasurer is created and established. The city treasurer shall hold such office at the pleasure of the city manager. (Ord. 2007-03 § 3, 2007)

 

2.16.020 Compensation.
     The city treasurer shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the city council shall designate. (Ord. 2007-03 § 3, 2007)

 

2.16.030 Functions.
     The city treasurer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by Sections 41000 through 41007 of the Government Code of the state and by any other provisions of law applicable to deposit and investment and safekeeping of public funds of the city. (Prior code § 2.15.030)

Chapter 2.20 CITY ATTORNEY
2.20.010 Office created.
     A.    The office of the city attorney is established. It shall consist of the city attorney and such assistants as may be authorized by the council.

     B.     The city attorney shall administer the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. He or she shall serve under the direct supervision and control of the council as its legal advisor.

     C.     The council may enter into a contract with a private law firm to perform the services of city attorney and, in that connection, may designate a city attorney and such assistant city attorneys as are deemed necessary, and references in this chapter to city attorney or the office of city attorney will include any applicable law firm and performance of the functions by any of its members or employed attorneys.

     D.    The city attorney may retain or employ other attorneys, assistants or special counsel as may be needed to take charge of any litigation or legal matters or assist the city attorney therein; provided, however, that such employment or retainer shall be reported to the council at the regular meeting thereof next following the employment or retainer. (Prior code § 2.16.010)

 

2.20.020 Compensation.
     The city attorney shall receive such compensation and expense allowance as the city council shall from time to time determine or contract for, and such compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the city as the council shall designate. (Prior code § 2.16.020)

 

2.20.030 Functions.
     The functions of the office of the city attorney shall be to:

     A.    Advise the council and all city officers in all matters of laws pertaining to their offices;

     B.     Furnish legal service at all meetings of the council, except when excused or disabled, and give advice or opinions on the legality of all matters under consideration by the council or by any of the boards and commissions or officers of the city;

     C.     Prepare and/or approve all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, contracts, and other legal instruments as shall be required for the proper conduct of the business of the city and approve the form of all contracts and agreements and bonds given to the city;

     D.    Prosecute on behalf of the people cases for violation of city ordinances when not otherwise prosecuted by the district attorney of Napa County; and

     E.     Perform such other legal duties as may be required by the council or as may be necessary to complete the performance of the foregoing functions. (Prior code § 2.16.030)

Chapter 2.24 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE AND GENERAL SERVICES
2.24.010 Office created.
     The office of the director of finance and general services is created and established. The director of finance and general services shall be the chief fiscal officer of the city. (Prior code § 2.12.010)

 

2.24.020 Appointment.
     The director of finance and general services shall be appointed by the city manager, and he shall serve at and during the pleasure of the city manager. The director of finance and general services shall be qualified by sufficient technical accounting training, skill and experience to be proficient in the office and shall show evidence of executive ability. (Prior code § 2.12.020)

 

2.24.030 Duties.
     The duties of the director of finance and general services shall be as follows:

     A.    To serve as the chief fiscal officer of the city;

     B.     To assist and advise the administration and the city council in all matters pertaining to city finances;

     C.     To perform all financial and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the California Government Code;

     D.    To develop and maintain, in accordance with the state laws and the city ordinances and the best accepted procedures, adequate financial records, reports and budgetary control of all receipts, disbursements and reserves of the city;

     E.     To supervise the keeping of current inventories of all property of the city departments, offices and agencies;

     F.     To prescribe and develop accounting forms, reports and procedure in conjunction with administrative needs and requests, and as required by law;

     G.    To audit all demands in accordance with Sections 3.08.020 through 3.08.050 and 3.08.090;

     H.    To prepare annually for budget purposes an estimate of revenues for the city manager, and assist the city manager in compiling the annual budget in accordance with the prescribed chart of accounts and accepted procedures;

     I.      To assist the city council and the city manager in formulating a long-range financial plan and program;

     J.      To perform such purchasing duties as delegated to the director of finance and general services by the city manager; and

     K.    To perform such other duties related to administrative and general services for the municipal government and business operations as may be delegated to the director of finance and general services by the city manager. (Prior code § 2.12.030)

 

2.24.040 Independent audit.
     The council shall require annually an independent audit of the accounts and records of the treasurer and department of finance and general services. This auditor shall be selected by the council and shall be qualified as a certified public accountant. (Prior code § 2.12.040)

 

Chapter 2.28 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
2.28.010 General rules regarding appointments, terms and vacancies.
     A.    Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution, or unless by the very nature of a situation the provisions of this chapter may not be made applicable, all members of boards and commissions of the city shall be appointed by the city council for four-year terms, commencing on January 1st following the year of appointment. Interim vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term of the member replaced. This rule shall not, however, apply in regard to a newly established board or commission to which initial appointments are made on a staggered-term basis, provided that the longest such term shall not exceed four years, commencing on January 1st following the appointment.

     B.     Any member of a board or commission of this city may be removed from office at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the city council, except in cases where the mayor or city council are not the appointing authority (in which cases such regular appointing authority may exercise this power of removal).

     C.     Commissioners and board members are expected to attend all meetings, regular and special. If a commissioner or board member cannot attend a regular or special meeting, he shall notify either the commission or board chair or the appropriate staff person assigned to support that commission or board. The full commission or board will make a determination to either excuse the absence or not excuse it.

     1.     Whenever a commissioner or board member has more than three unexcused absences in a twelve-month period, then that commissioner or board member shall be removed from office. The commission or board chair shall be responsible for notifying the commissioner or board member. The chair shall also notify the city council regarding the removal and request the appointment of a replacement commissioner or board member. This rule of three unexcused absences shall apply to regular meetings only.

     2.     In lieu of attending a regular or special meeting in person, a commissioner or board member may participate by telephonic means, subject to any state or federal laws or regulations.

     D.    Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution of the city council, all members of any board or commission shall be initially, and during their incumbencies, bona fide residents of the city. No such member shall, at or during his incumbency, be an employee of the city.

     E.     Except in cases where the mayor or city council is not the appointing authority, the method of selecting any member of a board or commission shall be determined by the city council in open session. However, if an open recruitment is selected, the following procedures shall apply:

     1.     A public notice announcing the opening shall be posted in the same areas as other public notices;

     2.     A minimum of seven calendar days will be allowed for receiving applications;

     3.     The public notice must include a date and certain time after which applications will no longer be accepted. This deadline will be strictly enforced;

     4.     The city council may establish any other procedures for selecting among the eligible candidates. (Ord. 2005-05 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.28.020 Chairpersons, vice-chairpersons—Selection—Terms.
     A.    Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution, each board and commission of the city shall annually at a public meeting held prior to December 31st, choose one of its number as chairperson and one as vice-chairperson. Each chairperson and vice-chairperson shall have authority and perform such duties as are commonly associated with their respective titles, or as may be specially prescribed by law or by the bylaws or other rules of the board or commission.

     B.     Vacancies in either such position occurring prior to January 1st may be filled as in the first instance. A new chairperson or vice-chairperson may also be chosen at any time by the majority vote of all members of the board or commission. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.28.030 Meetings—Rules and records.
     A.    Any board or commission established under this section shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. Minutes of any board or commission shall be filed with the city clerk.

     B.     A majority of commissioners or board members shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.28.040 Actions taken—Appeals.
     A.    All actions taken by any commission shall be reported to the city clerk, and shall be placed on the next available agenda of the city council after receipt of the report by the city clerk. Actions taken by the commission shall not be considered final until the city council has heard and further considered the matter, or has determined that further consideration of the matter is not required. Exceptions shall be made for the planning commission, as may be set forth in state law, in which case the planning commission’s actions are final, subject to appeal, pursuant to Section 2.32.025. When placed on the agenda of the city council, the city council may elect to consider the matter and may schedule the matter for a hearing or public hearing before the city council.

     B.     Unless otherwise provided by law, or by ordinance or resolution, the city council shall consider any appeal of an action taken by any board or commission by an interested person or organization through the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.04 of this code. The decision of the city council, after considering or hearing the matter, shall be final. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 2.29 PARKS AND COMMUNITY SERVICES COMMISSION
2.29.010 Creation of parks and community services commission—Terms of commissioners.
     There is created a parks and community services commission for the city. It shall consist of five members, appointed in the manner and for the terms prescribed in Sections 2.04.070 and 2.28.010, respectively. The city council shall set the initial term of office for each commissioner in such a manner as to stagger the terms. (Ord. 2008-02 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.29.020 Jurisdiction and functions of commission.
     A.    The parks and community services commission for the city shall perform all functions as described in subsection B of this section, and shall serve in an advisory capacity to the community services department and the city council.

     B.     The functions, powers and duties of the parks and community services commission shall include review of issues referred to the commission by the city council, the city manager, the community services department, or residents or organizations of the city; to provide advice, comment and make recommendations regarding such issues as requested; to organize or facilitate community benefit activities or functions; and other duties as assigned by the city council. (Ord. 2003-04 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.29.030 Compensation of parks and community services commissioners.
     A.    The members of the parks and community services commission shall each receive a stipend payable out of the general fund of the city, provided adequate funds have been budgeted. Standing, or temporary committee, or subcommittee members shall not be compensated. The stipend for commissioners shall be established by resolution of the city council and exclusive of any amounts payable as reimbursement for actual or necessary expenses authorized by the city council and incurred in the performance of official duties for the city.

     B.     The stipend shall be paid to each commissioner that attends each regular or special meeting of the commission. (Ord. 2018-09 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2005-05 § 2, 2005; Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.29.040 Designation of chairperson and vice-chairperson, committees and staff.
     A.    Designation of the chairperson and vice chairperson for the commission shall be governed by Section 2.28.020.

     B.     The commission may from time to time create committees or subcommittees to study issues, to perform work on behalf of the commission, to provide a service to the residents or a segment of the residents of the city, or to improve the quality of the environment of the city and living conditions of the residents of the city.

     C.     Standing committees of the commission shall be the activities committee and the natural resources committee. Standing or temporary committees or subcommittees shall have at least one commissioner assigned to the committees. The commission shall make appointments of committee or subcommittee members with the approval of the city manager or designee.

     D.    The city manager may appoint a department head and other staff and provide compensation for their services as may be authorized by the city council and by the annual city budget. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.29.050 Time and place of meetings.
     The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at such time, date and place designated by the commission. The chairperson or a majority of the commission, after giving notice to the commissioners, and to any media and members of the public who have previously requested such notices in writing, so that the notice is received at least twenty-four hours before the meeting, may hold special meetings. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 
Chapter 2.32 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.32.010 Creation of planning commission.
     There is created a planning commission for the city. It shall consist of five members, appointed in the manner and for the terms prescribed in Sections 2.04.070 and 2.28.010, respectively, of this code, except that the terms of members of the initial commission shall be set by lot, with three members serving until June 30, 1994, and two members serving until June 30, 1996. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.32.020 City planning commission—General jurisdiction and functions.
     A.    The functions, powers and duties of the planning commission shall be all those functions, powers and duties of a planning commission and board of zoning adjustment as provided in Chapters 3 and 4 of Title 7 commencing with Section 65100 of the Government Code of the state (the planning and zoning law), as the same may be hereafter amended. The planning commission shall perform such other duties and functions as may be designated by the city council.

     B.     In addition, with the exception of decisions on lot line adjustments and certificates of compliance, all discretionary decisions designated in the development code to be made by the planning officer or other officers or offices shall be made by the planning commission of the city. Further, the planning commission shall review and the city council shall act upon all requests for planned residential developments, subject to all other applicable provisions of the city’s ordinances. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.32.025 Appeal of actions taken by the commission.
     All actions of the planning commission are subject to appeal to the city council in the manner set forth in the development code, and if not otherwise set forth, then by delivery by the applicant or other person affected by the decision of a written notice of appeal to the city clerk within seven days after the decision of the planning commission or giving of notice of same where notice is required. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.32.030 Compensation of planning commissioners.
     A.    The members of the planning commission shall each receive a stipend payable out of the general fund of the city, provided adequate funds have been budgeted. Standing, or temporary committee, or subcommittee members shall not be compensated. The stipend for commissioners shall be established by resolution of the city council and exclusive of any amounts payable as reimbursement for actual or necessary expenses authorized by the city council and incurred in the performance of official duties for the city.

     B.     The stipend shall be paid to each commissioner that attends each regular or special meeting of the commission. (Ord. 2018-09 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2005-05 § 3, 2005; Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.32.040 City council sitting as planning commission.
     If the city council sits as the city planning commission, the city council shall not receive additional compensation under Section 2.32.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.32.050 Chair—Committee staff.
     Designation of chairpersons for the commission shall be governed by Section 2.28.020 of this code. The commission shall be authorized to appoint and fix the membership of such number of standing and temporary committees as it may find expedient for the performance of its duties. The city manager may appoint an executive secretary and other staff and provide such compensation for their services as may be authorized by the city council and the annual city budget of expenditures. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

 

2.32.060 Meetings.
     The commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month at such time, date and place designated by the commission. Special meetings may be called by the chair or a majority of the commission, provided notice has been given to all members at least twenty-four hours prior to the meeting. (Ord. 2001-04 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 2.36 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
2.36.010 Administrative decisions—Judicial review—Time limits.
     The provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state are adopted by the city council, and the provisions are made applicable in the city as further specified in Section 2.36.020 of this chapter. (Prior code § 2.50.010)

 

2.36.020 Decisions affected.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to “decisions,” as defined by Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state, that are final on and after January 1, 1992. (Prior code § 2.50.020)

Chapter 2.40 CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE
2.40.010 Adoption of conflict of interest code.
     A.    In compliance with the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Section 81000, et seq., the city adopts a conflict of interest code which shall be applicable to all councilmembers, officials and designated employees and consultants of the city pursuant to Government Code Section 87300. Regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission contain the terms of a standard model conflict of interest code which may be incorporated by reference into the city code and which may be amended by the Fair Political Practices Commission to conform to amendments in the Political Reform Act after public notice and hearing.

     B.     Accordingly, the terms of the Fair Political Practices Commission regulation set forth at 2 California Code of Regulations Section 18730 and any amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practice Commission (“model code”) are adopted and incorporated by reference into the municipal code of the city and with the Appendix A in which designated employee positions are set forth, Appendix B in which disclosure categories are set forth and the other provisions set forth in this chapter constitutes the conflict of interest code of the city which is the “agency” referenced in the model code. Appendices A and B are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 92-11 § 1, 1992)

 

2.40.020 Statements of economic interest—Place and time of filing.
     All persons holding designated positions shall file a statement of economic interest with the city clerk at the times specified in Section 5 of the model code which has been adopted and incorporated by reference in this chapter. (Ord. 92-11 § 2, 1992)

 

2.40.030 Statement of economic interest—Contents and manner of reporting.
     The contents of any statement of economic interest filed by the person holding a designated position and the manner of reporting any reportable interest shall be consistent with Sections 6 and 7 of the model code which has been adopted and incorporated by reference in this chapter. (Ord. 92-11 § 3, 1992)

 

2.40.040 Incompatible employment.
     No councilmember, official or employee shall engage in or accept any private employment, or render services for private interest, when such employment or service is incompatible with proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of those duties. (Ord. 92-11 § 4, 1992)

 

2.40.050 Disclosure of confidential information.
     No councilmember, official or employee shall, without proper authorization of the council, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the city, nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial interest of himself, herself or others. (Ord. 92-11 § 5, 1992)

 

2.40.060 Gifts and favors.
     No councilmember, official or employee shall knowingly accept any gift which creates a conflict of financial interest and is given by any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city. No councilmember, official or employee shall accept any gift regardless of amount, retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action by the city council, a city commission or a city agency. (Ord. 92-11 § 6, 1992)

 

2.40.070 Interest in city contracts.
     No councilmember, official or employee shall have an investment or monetary interest in any contract with the city made by them in their official capacity, or by any board or body of which they are members except as permitted by Government Code Section 1090, et seq. (Ord. 92-11 § 7, 1992)

 

2.40.080 Ex parte communications.
     A.    No councilmember, official or employee shall encourage, make or accept any ex parte or other unilateral application or communication that excludes the interests of other parties in a matter under consideration when such application or communication is designed to influence the official decision or conduct of the official or other officials, employees or agencies in order to obtain a more favored treatment or special consideration to advance the personal or private interest of him or herself or others. The purpose of this provision is to ensure that all interested parties to any matter shall have equal opportunity to express and represent their interests.

     B.     Any written ex parte communication received by a councilmember, official or employee in matters where all interested parties should have an equal opportunity to be heard shall be made a part of the record by the recipient.

     C.     Any oral ex parte communication received under such conditions should be written down in substance by the recipient and also be made a part of the record.

     D.    A communication concerning only the status of a pending matter shall not be regarded as an ex parte communication. (Ord. 92-11 § 8, 1992)

Chapter 2.41 CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE
2.41.010 Findings.
     A.    The city council finds that public access to campaign disclosure information is a vital and integral component of a fully informed electorate. Transparency in campaign financing is critical in order to maintain public trust and support of the political process.

     B.     Since the enactment of the Political Reform Act, candidates and committees have complied with filing requirements by filing paper copies of campaign statements and reports. The city clerk’s office has expended a significant amount of staff time to make such paper filings readily available to the public.

     C.     In July 2012, the California Legislature approved Assembly Bill 2452 which authorizes local jurisdictions to require the filing of campaign statements and reports solely in an electronic format. The Governor approved the legislation on July 13, 2012 and it took effect on January 1, 2013.

     D.    The city council finds that by eliminating manual processing of filings, electronic filing requirements will conserve resources and ensure the public has access to information disclosed in campaign statements and reports in a timelier manner. The electronic filing system will operate securely and effectively and will not unduly burden filers. (Ord. 2019-08 § 1, 2019)

 

2.41.020 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to require online electronic filing of campaign statements and require online reporting of contributions and independent expenditures relating to elections of candidates to city offices and the qualification or passage of local ballot measures within the city as currently required under the Political Reform Act, (commencing with California Government Code Section 84200 et seq.) in order to facilitate review and maximize the availability of this information to the public. (Ord. 2019-08 § 2, 2019)

 

2.41.030 Authority.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to California Government Code Section 81013, which authorizes local agencies to impose additional requirements on any person so long as the requirements do not prevent the person from complying with the Political Reform Act. (Ord. 2019-08 § 3, 2019)

 

2.41.040 Relationship to the Political Reform Act of 1974.
     This chapter is intended to supplement the Political Reform Act as amended. Unless a word or term is specifically defined in this chapter or the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, words and terms shall have the same meaning as when they are used in Title 9 of the California Government Code, in which the Political Reform Act is codified, and as supplemented by the Regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission as set forth in Title 2, Division 6 of the California Code of Regulations (“Regulations”), as well as any amendments to the Act or to the Regulations. If any provision of this chapter is held invalid, the terms of the Act and its Regulations control and supersede the terms of this chapter to the extent necessary to bring this chapter into full compliance therewith. (Ord. 2019-08 § 4, 2019)

 

2.41.050 Definitions.
     The following definitions used in this ordinance shall have the meanings set forth below.

 

     “Candidate” shall be defined as set forth in the Political Reform Act provided that the term shall be limited to candidates for city office.

     “Committee” means any person or combination of persons who, directly or indirectly, does any of the following: (1) receives contributions totaling two thousand dollars or more in any calendar year; or (2) makes independent expenditures totaling two thousand dollars or more in any calendar year. A person or combination of persons that becomes a committee shall retain its status as a committee until such time as that status is terminated pursuant to California Government Code Section 84214. A “committee” includes, but is not limited to, “controlled committee,” “independent committee,” and “general purpose committee.”

     “Contribution” means the same as that defined at Government Code Section 82015.

     “Controlled committee” means a committee which is controlled directly or indirectly by a candidate or which acts jointly with a candidate or controlled committee in connection with the making of expenditures. A candidate controls a committee if he or she, his or her agent, or any other committee such candidate controls has a significant influence on the actions or decisions of the committee.

     “Election” and/or “city election” means any primary, general, special or recall election held in the city.

     “Election cycle” means the period of time commencing ninety days prior to an election and ending on the date of the election.

     “General purpose committee” means a committee to support or oppose candidates or measures voted on in the city.

     “Independent committee” means all committees other than controlled committees.

     “Independent expenditure” means an expenditure made by any person including a payment of public moneys by a state or local governmental agency, in connection with a communication which expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate or the qualification, passage or defeat of a clearly identified measure, or taken as a whole and in context, unambiguously urges a particular result in an election but which is not made to or at the behest of the affected candidate or committee.

     “Person” means an individual, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, committee, and any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. A “person” shall include, but is not limited to, a committee or candidate.

     “Political Reform Act” means the California Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code Section 81000 et seq., as amended). (Ord. 2019-08 § 5, 2019)

 

2.41.060 Application of chapter.
     The provisions of this chapter shall only apply to candidates seeking election to a city office, their controlled committees or committees formed or existing primarily to support or oppose their candidacies, and to committees formed or existing primarily to support or oppose a candidate or to support or oppose the qualification, passage or defeat of, a local ballot measure which is being voted on only in the city, and to local general purpose committees active only in the city. In the event a city candidate also runs for a non-city office, the provisions of this chapter do not apply to the local candidate’s campaign for such other office, nor to any committee established solely for the purpose of running for such state, federal, city, special district, or other non-city office. (Ord. 2019-08 § 6, 2019)

 

2.41.070 Electronic campaign disclosure.
     A.    Each candidate, candidate controlled committee and independent committee that is required to file a semi-annual campaign statement, a pre-election campaign statement, or an amended campaign statement with the city clerk pursuant to the Political Reform Act, and that receives a total of two thousand dollars or more in contributions or makes a total of two thousand dollars or more in independent expenditures, shall file the statement with the city clerk in an electronic format.

     B.     In addition to any other report required by this chapter, all persons subject to the requirements of subsection A. shall file the following reports with the city clerk in an electronic format:

     1.     A report disclosing a contribution received by or made to a candidate or local ballot measure, or an independent expenditure made for or against a candidate or local ballot measure, of two thousand dollars or more during an election cycle. The report shall be filed within twenty-four hours of the independent expenditure or receipt of the contribution.

     2.     A report disclosing a contribution received by or made to a candidate or a local ballot measure, or an independent expenditure made for or against a candidate or local ballot measure, of two thousand dollars or more at any time other than during an election cycle. The report shall be filed within ten business days of the independent expenditure or receipt of the contribution.

     C.     A candidate or committee that has filed an electronic statement or report is not required to file a paper copy.

     D.    Once a candidate or committee is subject to the electronic filing requirements imposed by this chapter, the candidate or committee will remain subject to the electronic filing requirements until the candidate or committee files a termination statement pursuant to the Political Reform Act.

     E.     Any candidate or committee not required to file an electronic statement or report by this section may voluntarily opt to file an electronic statement or report by submitting written notice to the city clerk’s office. A candidate or committee that opts to file an electronic statement or report is not required to file a paper copy. (Ord. 2019-08 § 7, 2019)

 

2.41.080 Administrative penalties.
     If any person violates any provision of this chapter, he or she shall be liable to the city clerk’s office in the amount of ten dollars per day of violation, in addition to any other legal remedies provided by law. This amount shall be deemed a penalty in accordance with Government Code Section 91013. The following procedures shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of administrative penalties:

     A.    Notice of Violation. If any person subject to this chapter fails to comply with any provision herein, a notice of violation may be issued by the city clerk or designee.

     B.     Content of Notice of Violation. The notice of violation shall contain the information listed below:

     1.     Date, location and approximate time the violation was observed or discovered.

     2.     The chapter section violated and a brief description of the violation.

     3.     The amount of the penalty imposed for the violation.

     4.     Instructions for the payment of the penalty, the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the penalty within this time period.

     5.     Instructions on how to appeal the notice of violation.

     6.     The signature of the city clerk or designee.

     C.     Service of Notice of Violation. Service of notice of violation shall be effective upon deposit in United States mail in accordance with this chapter. A copy of the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the person who has violated the chapter, at the address listed for the person on the Fair Political Practices Commission Form 410 Statement of Organization.

     D.    Penalties.

     1.     The penalties assessed for each violation shall be ten dollars per day and shall not exceed the cumulative amount stated in the late statement or report, or one hundred dollars, whichever is greater.

     2.     Payment of the penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action.

     3.     The penalties assessed shall be payable to the city clerk’s office.

     E.     Administrative Appeal.

     1.     Notice of Appeal. The recipient of a notice of violation carrying a penalty may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk’s office. The written notice of appeal must be filed within twenty days of the service of the notice of violation. Failure to file a written notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal. The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:

     a.     A brief statement setting forth appellant’s interest in the proceedings;

     b.     A brief statement of the material facts which appellant claims supports his or her contention that no violation has occurred, no administrative penalty should be imposed or that an administrative penalty of a different amount is warranted;

     c.     An address at which the appellant agrees notice of any additional proceeding or an order relating to the imposition of the administrative penalty may be received by mail.

     d.     The signature of the appellant.

     2.     The city clerk, or designee, shall review the appeal and issue a notice of decision within thirty days of receipt of the notice of appeal. The notice of decision shall be final.

     3.     In addition to any other available remedies, the city clerk’s office may bring a civil action and obtain a judgment in Superior Court for the purposes of collecting any unpaid monetary penalties, fees, or civil penalties imposed pursuant to Government Code Section 91013.5. (Ord. 2019-08 § 8, 2019)

 

2.41.090 Enforcement.
     The city clerk’s office, or designee, shall have the primary responsibility to monitor compliance with this chapter at his or her discretion, to investigate alleged violations of this chapter, to issue notices of violations as appropriate, to review appeals to the notices of violations, and to collect administrative penalties as set forth herein. (Ord. 2019-08 § 9, 2019)

Chapter 2.44 PEACE OFFICER STANDARDS AND TRAINING
2.44.010 Declaration of intent.
     The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1, Title 4, Part 4, of the California Penal Code. (Prior code § 2.44.010)

 

2.44.020 Adherence to state standards.
     Pursuant to Section 13522 of the Chapter 1 referred to in Section 2.44.010, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to said Chapter 1, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission of Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Prior code § 2.44.020)

Chapter 2.48 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER RELIEF
Article I. Organization of City for Emergency Response
2.48.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to comply with the provisions of the California Emergency Services Act, Title Two, Division One, Chapter Seven of the Government Code of the state of California (commencing with Section 8550); to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency; to provide for the mitigation of the effects of natural, man-made, or war-caused emergencies which result in conditions of disaster or extreme peril to life, property, or the resources of the city; and to create an organization based on the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) to coordinate the efforts of the various emergency services agencies, both public and private, within the city dealing with emergencies. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.020 Definitions.
     As used in this article:

     “City” means the city of American Canyon in the county of Napa, California as defined in Section 1.04.150 of this code.

     “Coordinator” means the coordinator of emergency services of the city.

     “Director” means the director of emergency services.

     “Emergency” means the existence of a state of war emergency, state of emergency, or local emergency as hereinafter defined.

     “Emergency council” means the city emergency council organized pursuant to the provision of Section 2.48.60 of this chapter.

     “Emergency services organization” means all officers and employees of the city, all persons enrolled to aid such officers and employees during an emergency, and all officers and employees of public agencies, groups, organizations, or persons, who may, by agreement, or by operation of law, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property within the city during an emergency, or who may be impressed into service pursuant to law.

     “Local emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence or threatened existence, of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the territory of the city or within any portion thereof, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which are or are likely to be beyond the control of the service, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city and require the combined forces of other public agencies to combat.

     “State of emergency” means the duly proclaimed existence of conditions of disaster or extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this state caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, or conditions causing a “state of war emergency,” which conditions by reasons of their magnitude, are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of any single city and require mutual aid forces or the combined forces of more than one public agency to combat.

     “State of war emergency” means a condition with or without a proclamation thereof by the Governor whenever this state or the United States is attacked by an enemy of the United States, or upon receipt by the state of California of a warning from the federal government indicating that such an enemy attack is probable or imminent (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.030 Director of emergency services.
     The city manager is designated director of emergency services. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.040 Powers and duties of the director.
     The director is empowered to:

     A.    Direct the efforts of the emergency services organization within the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter, or of any other law, ordinance, or rules and regulations, relating to the preparation and implementation of emergency plans or programs now in effect, or as may be hereinafter adopted in accordance with law, by the city, the state of California or the United States of America;

     B.     Request that the city council proclaim the existence of a local emergency, if it is in session, or to issue such proclamation of local emergency under his or her own authority if the council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force and effect after the seventh day from the date of issuance;

     C.     Request that the Governor proclaim a state of emergency when in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with an emergency;

     D.    Promote cooperation, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise, between agencies making up the emergency services organization, and coordinate the services of and direct staff within the emergency services organization;

     E.     Subject to the approval of the city council, to enter into mutual aid agreements between the city and the county and other public agencies, or any corporation, individual, or group of individuals; provided, however, that any mutual aid contract entered into with any public agency, whose territory is located within the county of Napa, and any contract with any corporation, group of individuals or individual within the county, shall contain the express provision that in the event of a local emergency duly proclaimed by the city council or the director, the director shall direct all operations of the emergency services organization within the city so designated by said proclamation, and the director shall resolve all questions of authority or responsibilities that may arise between agencies responding to the proclamation of local emergency;

     F.     Represent the city in all dealings with the public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies;

     G.    In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as hereinabove provided, or the proclamation of a state of emergency or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered to:

     1.     Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property affected by such emergency, provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council.

     2.     Obtain necessary supplies, equipment, and such other properties found to be lacking or needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use.

     3.     Require the immediate service of any city officer or employee and, in the event of proclamation of a state of emergency, or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of any citizen as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons so impressed into such service shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by law for registered disaster service workers.

     4.     Requisition necessary personnel and materials from any department or agency of the city.

     5.     Execute all of his ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by the ordinance codified in this chapter, or by any resolution or emergency plan heretofore or hereafter adopted by the city council and all powers conferred on him by any statute, agreement or other lawful authority.

     6.     In the event of a local emergency, the director or his duly authorized representative may order any person impeding the efforts of any emergency service personnel to leave the area designated as an area within which a local emergency exists. Refusal by any person to obey the lawful directions of the director or his duly authorized representative, or the hindrance or interference by any person with the lawful duties of any emergency service personnel shall constitute a misdemeanor and a violation of this code and shall be punishable in the manner provided by Section 1.24.040(A) of this code;

     H.    The director shall designate the order of succession to that office to take effect in the event that the director is unable to attend meetings, or to otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.050 Coordinator of emergency services.
     The coordinator of emergency services shall be appointed from the classified services of the city by the director. The coordinator shall have all of the powers and duties as specified by law, and shall in addition have such additional powers and duties as may be determined by the director. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.060 Emergency council—Created—Membership.
     A.    This is created the city emergency council.

     B.     The emergency council shall consist of the following members:

     1.     The mayor or designee;

     2.     The director (city council) or designee;

     3.     The designated city chief of police or further designee;

     4.     The director of the department of public works or designee;

     5.     The city engineer or designee;

     6.     The fire chief of the city fire protection district or designee;

     7.     One member representing the public utilities engaged in the transmission of power, gas, telephonic or telegraph communications or other similar utility; and,

     8.     One member representing the general public shall be appointed annually by the director.

     C.     The mayor shall be an ex officio member and chairperson of the emergency council. In his or her absence, the director shall serve as chairperson. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.070 Powers and duties of the emergency council.
     A.    The emergency council is empowered to study and revise the city emergency plan, and to review and recommend action upon all proposed mutual aid agreements with the county, other public agencies, corporations, groups or individuals, and to review and recommend the adoption of such ordinances, resolutions and rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement the city emergency plan or any mutual aid agreement entered into pursuant to such plat, including but not limited to, the concurrent implementation of applicable state law, such as the availability of workers’ compensation benefits for involved disaster workers.

     B.     The emergency council shall be responsible for the development of the local emergency plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet conditions constituting an emergency and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the city emergency services organization.

     C.     The coordinator shall be the ex officio secretary of the emergency council and shall provide such administrative, technical, and other assistance to the emergency council as may be needed and as approved by the director.

     D.    Approval of recommendations and the taking of any action by the emergency council shall be by majority vote, a quorum of members being present. Presence in person by a majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The emergency council shall appoint such committees which shall be necessary to advise the council on questions relating to manage went of resources, communications health services, utilities, the preservation of peace and safety, and in such other areas as may be deemed necessary to the council.

     E.     The emergency council shall meet at least annually to review the city emergency plan.

     F.     The emergency council may recommend the calling and conducting of test exercises, either singularly or in conjunction with the county or any public agency, corporation, group or individual. The director shall order such exercises as it deems necessary; provided, however, that no person conducting such exercises shall have the power to command the assistance of any private citizen, and the failure of any citizen; to obey any order or regulation pertaining to the test exercise shall not constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.080 Expenditures.
     Any expenditure made in connection with the emergency services organization, including mutual aid activities, shall be , deemed conclusively to-, be for the direct protection and benefit. of the inhabitants of the property of the city. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

Article II. Preservation of Local Government
2.48.090 Definitions.
     As used in this article:

     “Disaster” means a war- or enemy-caused calamity, such as an attack by nuclear weapons, which renders unavailable a majority of the council of the city.

     “Unavailable” means that a councilmember is either killed, missing or so seriously injured as to be unable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties. Any question as to whether a particular officer is unavailable shall be settled by the city council or any remaining available members thereof. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.100 Appointment of standby officers.
     To provide for the continuation of the legislative and executive departments of the city in occasions of a disaster, the city council may appoint three standby officers for each member of such council to succeed to such member’s duties in the event of his or her unavailability as a result of a disaster.

     Standby officers shall be appointed, serve and qualify in accordance with Title 2, Division 1, Chapter 7, Article 15 of the Government Code of the state of California, commencing with Section 8635. The city council shall have discretion as to whether or not such appointments shall be made. In the event of a disaster, any vacancy occurring on the city council which cannot be filled by a standby officer because standby officers have not been appointed or are unavailable, shall be filled as provided by this section. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.110 Meeting of city council after disaster.
     The city council shall meet as soon as possible after a disaster. The meeting may be called by the mayor or by a majority of the available members of the city council. Should there be only one member of the city council available, he may call and hold such meeting and perform any acts necessary to reconstitute the city council.

     At the first meeting after the disaster the city council shall:

     A.    Ascertain the damage to the city, to personnel and properly;

     B.     Proceed to reconstitute itself by filling vacancies until there are three members of such council. Should only one member of the council, or only one standby officer be available, he shall have the power to reconstitute the city council;

     C.     Proceed to reconstitute the government of the city by appointment of qualified persons to fill vacancies in the governmental system;

     D.    Proceed to perform its functions in the preservation of law and order and in the furnishing of local services. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.120 Procedure when all members of city council are unavailable.
     Should all members of the city council be unavailable, temporary officers shall be appointed as follows:

     A.    By the chairperson of the board of supervisors of the county, and if the chairperson is unavailable:

     B.     By the mayor of any city within one hundred fifty miles of the city beginning with the nearest and most populated city and going to the farthest and least populated. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

Article III. Control of Food and Other Sources
2.48.130 Purposes.
     The declared purpose of this section is to provide for the conservation, control and distribution of those resources of this city, which are essential to survival and recovery of individuals, government and the business economy of the city, during and following a state of extreme emergency of a state or disaster, as defined in the California Disaster Act. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.140 Definition.
     As used in this article:

     “Resources” means all foods for humans or animals and all essential survival items and resources declared to be in critical supply by the director of emergency services, during and following a state of disaster or a state of extreme emergency. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.150 Duties of vendors—Possessors and producers of resources.
     The vendors, possessors and producers of resources as defined in Section 2.48.140 are prohibited from selling, giving away or otherwise disposing of controlled resources in their possession at the onset of or during a state of extreme emergency or a state of disaster except in the manner, and at the time specified, in the directives issued by the director of emergency services. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

 

2.48.160 Prohibited acts—Penalties.
     It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1.24.040(A), for any person during a state of emergency or proclaimed state disaster:

     A.    To wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay the city’s emergency services organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this section, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon the organization by virtue of this chapter;

     B.     To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this section if such act is of such nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. (Ord. 97-13 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 2.50 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Article I. General Provisions and Administration
2.50.010 Statement of purpose.
     This chapter outlines the personnel policies that govern employment with the city of American Canyon. It is designed to ensure consistent, fair, and uniform treatment of all city employees, and to attract, develop, motivate, and retain high-performing employees. These personnel policies provide city management with a foundation and policy for the management of human resources. Administrative human resources practices and procedures provide departments with specific procedural guidelines for carrying out personnel and other city policies. Departments may adopt additional practices and procedures with the approval of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.020 Authority.
     This section implements the authority granted in Sections 45000 et seq., of the Government Code of the state of California, for the city council of the city of American Canyon to establish and enable a personnel system as the council determines for the best interests of the public service. The council shall approve all subsequent additions, amendments and revisions to the provisions contained in this chapter.

     The policies contained in this chapter supersede Resolution 95-07 and any and all previously issued city policies, procedures, rules, or instructions related to matters discussed herein. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.030 Administration.
     A.    City Manager Responsibility. Pursuant to Section 2.08.060 of this code, the city manager shall be responsible for the development, implementation and control, and modification of the human resource practices and procedures which implement and ensure compliance with the provisions and intent of this chapter. In the event any provision of this chapter requires clarification, the city manager may issue administrative instructions clarifying the intent of such provision as adopted by the council.

     B.     City Human Resources Practices and Procedures. The city manager shall adopt, and as necessary, modify, the city human resources practices and procedures which incorporate the provisions of this chapter to provide direction to all city employees on human resource management.

     C.     Delegation of Responsibility. The city manager may delegate some or all of the human resource responsibilities and duties authorized in this section.

     D.    Amendments. Amendments to the personnel policies in this chapter shall be adopted by resolution of the council. Personnel practices and procedures shall be adopted by the city manager or designee. In either case, reasonable advanced written notice, at least thirty days, shall be given to each recognized employee organization affected by any ordinance, rules, resolution, or regulation, or amendment thereof, proposed to be adopted by the council or the city manager. This subsection is optional if not within the scope of representation. Upon request, the city manager or designee shall provide the opportunity to meet with any employee organization regarding amendments affecting wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, as specified in Chapter 2.52, Employer-Employee Relations, and as specified as being a matter within the scope of representation.

     E.     Emergency Provisions. As provided in Section 3500 et seq., of the Government Code, in cases of emergency, when the city council or the city manager determines that amendment(s) to personnel rules or policies must be adopted immediately without prior notice or meeting with a recognized employee organization, the city shall provide such notice and opportunity to meet at the earliest practicable time following adoption by the city council or the city manager. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.040 Prevailing policies.
     A.    At-Will Employees. Employees covered by the exempt management recognition and compensation program resolution are employed at-will. At-will employees serve at the pleasure of the city. At-will employees have no defined or definitive employment duration, and employment may be terminated by either party with or without cause for any reason that is not prohibited by state or federal law, unless otherwise defined in a contract between the city and the at-will employee. At-will employees are not covered by this chapter to the extent that there is a conflict between this chapter and their at-will status. In the event of conflict between the individual employee employment contract or the exempt management recognition and compensation program resolution and the provisions of this chapter, the terms of the employment contract and/or the exempt management recognition and compensation program resolution shall take precedence for at-will employees.

     B.     State and Federal Regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to supersede applicable state or federal law or administrative regulations related to personnel matters.

     C.     Employer-Employee Relations Agreements. Within the limitations of Chapter 2.52, if there is any conflict between this chapter and any memorandum of understanding or resolution authorizing pay, benefits, and other terms and conditions of employment between the city and a recognized employee organization, the provisions contained in such memorandum of understanding or resolution shall take precedence. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.050 Departmental cooperation.
     It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney, city clerk, and city treasurer to comply with and assist the city manager in administering the provisions of this chapter and the human resources practices and procedures efficiently, consistently and harmoniously. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

Article II. Personnel Policies
2.50.060 Equal opportunity employer/discrimination-free workplace.
     It is the policy of the city that all persons are entitled to equal employment opportunity. The city does not discriminate against its employees, contractors, consultants, citizens, or applicants regardless of race, color, national origin, age, sex, sexual preference, marital status, physical handicap, medical condition, veteran status, or religious affiliation in accordance with all applicable federal and state equal opportunity laws. It is the city’s policy to treat all employees, contractors, consultants, and applicants on the basis of merit, qualifications and competence, and to remove discriminatory employment barriers when and where they are found to exist so all individuals may compete for employment opportunities on an equal basis.

     Nondiscrimination/equal opportunity shall apply in all program areas, including but not limited to recruitment, hiring, promotions, compensation, benefits, transfers, work assignments, performance evaluations, disciplinary actions, demotions, terminations, layoffs, employee development, educational, social, and recreational programs, and the use of city facilities.

     All city human resource practices and procedures shall be administered in accordance with this equal opportunity/discrimination-free workplace provision. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.070 Healthy and safe workplace.
     The city is committed to maintaining a safe and healthful workplace for all its employees, contractors, consultants, and the public in compliance with all related federal, state, and local laws. The city manager and staff shall be responsible for developing and implementing policies which protect employees and the public from potentially dangerous, violent, or harassing situations.

     A.    Safety. The city shall develop programs and systems to protect its employees, property, and the general public from hazardous conditions, dangerous materials, and unsafe conditions. It shall be the responsibility of every employee to know and observe all safety rules, to use safety equipment and devices provided, and to work in a manner that will safeguard the employee, co-workers, and the general public.

     B.     Violence in the Workplace. The city is intolerant of any behavior by employees, contractors or consultants which creates the risk of injury or harm resulting from violence to city employees, contractors, consultants, or the public. No city employee, contractor, or consultant shall possess weapons of any type while on duty or on city property, with the exception of on-duty law enforcement personnel, nor shall any employee, contractor, or consultant threaten or intimidate any other person with a violent action.

     C.     Alcohol and Controlled Substances. The city is committed to providing a work environment that is safe, healthy and free of any adverse effects caused by alcohol or controlled substances. The city reserves the right, with or without prior notice to the employee, to conduct drug and alcohol tests, and to search all work areas and property in which the city maintains full or joint control with the employee.

     D.    Harassment. It is the policy of the city to provide a businesslike work environment, free from all forms of employee discrimination, including incidents of sexual or any other form of harassment. Harassment by an employee or of an employee on the basis of race, religion, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical or mental disability, medical condition, marital status, gender, sexual preference, or age will not be tolerated. No employee, contractor or consultant shall be subjected to any form of harassment by other employees, contractors, consultants or the general public. No employee shall sexually harass anyone or suffer harassment from anyone else. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.080 Classification system.
     The city shall establish a classification plan to provide a fair, complete, and continuous inventory of all classifications in the city service and to provide accurate descriptions and specifications for each class. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. Any variations in pay must be based on significant differences in responsibilities and required knowledge, skills, and abilities. The city council shall approve the classification system. The city manager or designee shall bring recommendations for significant modifications of or additions to, the classification system to the city council for approval. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.090 Compensation plan.
     A compensation plan shall be established by resolution of the city council. This plan shall establish the salary range and salary steps or rates of pay for each position in the city classification system in order to fairly compensate employees and maintain the city’s competitiveness in the labor market. The city council shall administer the compensation plan for the city attorney and city manager. The city manager or designee shall administer the compensation plan for all other city employees. The city manager or designee shall make recommendations to amend the compensation plan to the city council. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.100 Employee benefits.
     An employee benefits program shall be established by resolution of the city council. Employee benefits should be designed to meet changing employee needs, create an environment for performance excellence, and keep the city competitive in the labor market. The city manager or designee shall make recommendations to amend the employee benefits program to the city council. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.110 Recruitment and selection.
     It is the city’s intent to hire the most qualified and superior individuals to work in city service, while adhering to the city’s equal opportunity and discrimination-free policies. The city manager or designee shall establish and maintain a fair and open recruitment and selection process which encourages anyone who feels qualified to apply. The city manager will ensure that all recruitment information and selection decisions are fair, open, and based on the specific requirements of the job. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.120 Employee performance evaluation.
     Regular performance evaluations are critical to retaining and enhancing the city’s workforce. Evaluations shall be made as to the efficiency, competency, conduct, alignment with mission and goals, and merit of city employees. It is the responsibility of the department heads and subordinate supervisors to conduct ratings and complete employee evaluations. The city manager or designee shall provide and prescribe the forms and procedures to be used in such performance evaluations, and to assist in the training of supervisory personnel so that the evaluation program will be carried out in a sound and effective manner. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.130 Employee development.
     Continual development and enhancement of employee knowledge, skills, and abilities is required to provide the service excellence expected by city residents. The city manager or designee and the department directors should provide for the opportunities for all employees to continue to develop their capacity in order to effectively do their job, provide high quality services and proper supervision, and advance their career within the city service. Employee development is key to the recruitment and retention of a high performing workforce. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.140 Employee discipline.
     The city manager shall develop and implement disciplinary actions which are intended to be corrective and progressive in nature with the objective of obtaining compliance with rules, orders, procedures, standards of conduct and/or expected job performance. Corrective or disciplinary action taken should be limited in severity so that it is commensurate with the alleged infraction(s). While supervisors are encouraged to use a progressive approach in most circumstances, serious infractions of disciplinary standards call for an appropriate response. Counseling, warnings, reprimands, and suspensions may be bypassed if the employee’s actions justify a more severe response. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

 

2.50.150 Employee rights and responsibilities.
     The city recognizes the rights of employees in public service. Those rights include the freedom of speech, ability to submit and obtain responses to grievances, protection from retaliation for work-related action, and the city’s adherence to all applicable state and federal labor laws and standards. The city also recognizes the responsibilities of employees in public service, including ethical standards, appropriate workplace conduct, and proper use of public property. The city manager or designee shall be responsible to develop and maintain appropriate practices and procedures governing these and other employee rights and responsibilities. These practices and procedures shall be periodically reviewed and updated as appropriate. The practices and procedures shall be made available to every employee and complete copies maintained in each city office. A summary and explanation of the information in this chapter and the practices and procedures shall be included in an employee handbook and provided to every current and new city employee, contractor, and consultant. (Ord. 2004-14, 2004)

Chapter 2.52 EMPLOYER-EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
Article I. General Provisions
2.52.010 Statement of purpose.
     A.    This chapter implements Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1, of the Government Code of the state of California (Sections 3500 et seq.) captioned “Local Public Employee Organizations,” by providing orderly procedures for the administration of employer-employee relations between the city and its employee organizations. This chapter is intended to strengthen merit, civil service, and other methods of administering employer-employee relations through the establishment of uniform and orderly methods of communications between employees, employee organizations and the city.

     B.     It is the purpose of this chapter to provide procedures for meeting and conferring in good faith with recognized employee organizations regarding matters that directly affect and primarily involve the wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment of employees in appropriate units and that are not preempted by federal or state law. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict any legal or inherent exclusive city rights with respect to matters of general legislative or managerial policy, which include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     The exclusive right to determine the mission of its constituent departments, commissions, and boards;

     2.     Set standards of service;

     3.     Determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment and for termination therefrom;

     4.     Direct its employees;

     5.     Take disciplinary action;

     6.     Lay off employees;

     7.     Relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other lawful reasons;

     8.     Maintain the efficiency of governmental operations;

     9.     Determine the methods, means, and personnel by which government operations are to be conducted;

     10.   Take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and

     11.   Exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and the technology of performing its work. (Ord. 92-9 § 1, 1992)

 

2.52.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

     “Appropriate unit” means a unit of employee classes or positions, established pursuant to Article II hereof:

     “City” means the city of American Canyon, and, where appropriate herein, refers to council or any duly authorized city representative as defined in this chapter.

     “Confidential employee” means an employee who, in the course of his or her duties, has access to confidential information relating to the city’s administration of employer-employee relations.

     “Consult/consultations in good faith” means to communicate orally or in writing for the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or advising of intended actions; and, as distinguished from meeting and conferring in good faith regarding matters within the required scope of such meet-and-confer process, does not involve an exchange of proposals and counterproposals with an exclusively recognized employee organization in an endeavor to reach agreement in the form of a memorandum of understanding, nor is it subject to Article IV of this chapter.

     “Day” means calendar day unless expressly stated otherwise.

     “Employee relations officer” means the city manager or his duly authorized representative.

     “Exclusively recognized employee organization” means an employee organization which has been formally acknowledged by the city as the sole organization representing the employees in an appropriate representation unit pursuant to Article II of this chapter, having the exclusive right to meet and confer in good faith concerning statutorily required subjects pertaining to unit employees, and thereby assuming the corresponding obligation of fairly representing such employees.

     “Impasse” means that the representative of the city and a recognized employee organization have reached a point in their meeting and conferring in good faith where their differences on matters to be included in a memorandum of understanding, and concerning which they are required to meet and confer, remain so substantial and prolonged that further meeting and conferring would be futile.

     “Management employee” means an employee having responsibility for formulating, administering, or managing the implementation of city policies and, programs.

     “Proof of employee support” means: (1) an authorization card recently signed and personally dated by an employee; or (2) a verified authorization petition or petitions recently signed and personally dated by an employee. The words “recently signed” shall mean within ninety days prior to the filing of a petition.

     “Supervisory employee” means any employee having authority, in the interest of the city, to hire, transfer, suspend, lay off, recall, promote, discharge, assign, reward, or discipline, other employees, or responsibility to direct them, or to adjust their grievances, or effectively to recommend such action if, in connection with the foregoing, the exercise of such authority is not of a merely routine or clerical nature, but requires the use of independent judgment. (Ord. 92-9 § 2, 1992)

 

Article II. Representation Proceedings
2.52.030 Filing of recognition petition by employee organization.
     A.    An employee organization that seeks to be formally acknowledged as the exclusively recognized organization representing the employees in an appropriate unit shall file a petition with the employee relations officer containing the following information and documentation:

     1.     Name and address of the employee organization;

     2.     Names and titles of its officers;

     3.     Names of employee organization representatives who are authorized to speak on behalf of the organization.

     4.     A statement that the employee organization has, as one of its primary purposes, the responsibility of representing employees in their employment relations with the city.

     5.     A statement of whether the employee organization is a chapter of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner with, a local, regional, state, national, or international organization, and, if so, the name and address of each such other organization.

     6.     Certified copies of the employee organization’s constitution and bylaws.

     7.     A designation of those persons, not exceeding two in number, and their addresses, to whom notice sent by regular United States mail will be deemed sufficient notice on the employee organization for any purpose.

     8.     A statement that the employee organization has no restriction on membership based on race, color, creed, sex, national origin, age, or physical disability.

     9.     The job classification or position titles of employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate and the appropriate number of member employees therein.

     10.   A statement that the employee organization has in its possession proof of employee support as herein defined to establish that a majority of the employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate have designated the employee organization to represent them in their employment relations with the city. Such written proof shall be submitted for preliminary confirmation to the State Mediation and Conciliation Service.

     11.   A request that the employee relations officer formally acknowledge the petitioner as the exclusively recognized organization representing the employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate for the purpose of meeting and conferring in good faith.

     B.     The petition, including the proof of employee support and all accompanying documentation, shall be declared to be true, correct, and complete, under penalty of perjury, by the duly authorized officer(s) of the employee organization executing it. (Ord. 92-9 § 3, 1992)

 

2.52.040 City response to recognition petition.
     A.    Upon receipt of the petition, the employee relations officer shall determine within a reasonable time whether:

     1.     There has been compliance with the requirements of the recognition petition, and

     2.     The proposed representation unit is an appropriate unit in accordance with Section 2.53.060 of this article.

     B.     If an affirmative determination is made by the employee relations officer on the foregoing two matters, he or she shall so inform the petitioning employee organization, shall give written notice of such request for recognition to the employees in the unit and shall take no action on the request for thirty days thereafter. If either of the foregoing matters is not affirmatively determined, the employee relations officer shall inform that organization of the reasons therefor in writing. The petitioning employee organization may appeal such determination in accordance with Section 2.52.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-9 § 4, 1992)

 

2.52.050 Open period for filing challenging petition.
     A.    Within thirty days of the date written notice was given to affected employees that a valid recognition for an appropriate unit has been filed, any other employee organization may file a competing request to be formally acknowledged as the exclusively recognized employee organization of the employees in the same or in an overlapping unit (one which corresponds with respect to some but not all the classifications or positions set forth in the recognition petition being challenged), by filing a petition evidencing proof of employee support in the unit claimed to be appropriate of at least fifty percent and otherwise in the same form and manner as set forth in Section 2.52.030 of this article.

     B.     If such challenging petition seeks establishment of an overlapping unit, the employee relations officer shall call for a hearing on such overlapping petitions for the purpose of ascertaining the more appropriate unit, at which time the petitioning employee organizations shall be heard.

     C.     Thereafter, the employee relations officer shall determine the appropriate unit or units in accordance with the standards in Section 2.52.060 of this article. The petitioning employee organizations shall have fifteen days from the date notice of such unit determination is communicated to them by the employee relations officer to amend their petitions to conform to such determination or to appeal such determination pursuant to Section 2.52.100 of this article. (Ord. 92-9 § 5, 1992)

 

2.52.060 Policy and standards for determination of appropriate units.
     A.    The policy objectives in determining the appropriateness of units shall be: (1) the effect of a proposed unit on the efficient operations of the city; (2) the unit’s compatibility with the primary responsibility of the city and its employees to effectively and economically serve the public; and (3) providing employees with effective representation based on recognized community of interest considerations. These policy objectives require that the appropriate unit shall be the broadest feasible grouping positions that share an identifiable community of interest. Factors to be considered shall be:

     1.     Similarity of the general kinds of work performed, types of qualifications required, and the general working conditions.

     2.     History of representation in the city and similar employment; except however, that no unit shall be deemed to be an appropriate unit solely on the basis of the extent to which employees in the proposed unit have organized.

     3.     Consistency with the organizational patterns of the city.

     4.     Number of employees and classifications, and the effect on the administration of employer-employee relations created by the fragmentation of classifications and proliferation of units.

     5.     Effect on the classification structure and impact on the stability of the employer-employee relationship of dividing a single or related classifications among two or more units.

     B.     The employee relations officer shall, after notice to a consultation with affected employee organizations, allocate new classifications or positions, delete eliminated classifications or positions, and retain, reallocate or delete modified classifications or positions from units in accordance with the provisions of this section.

     C.     Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, managerial, supervisory and confidential responsibilities, as defined in Section 2.52.020 of this chapter, are determining factors in establishing appropriate units hereunder, and therefore such managerial, supervisory and confidential employees may only be included in units that do not include nonmanagerial, nonsupervisory and nonconfidential employees. Managerial, supervisory and confidential employees may not represent any employee organization which represents other employees. (Ord. 92-9 § 6, 1992)

 

2.52.070 Election procedure.
     A.    The employee relations officer shall arrange within a reasonable time for a secret-ballot election to be conducted by the State Mediation and Conciliation Service in accordance with its rules and procedures and subject to the provisions of this chapter. All employee organizations which have duly submitted petitions which have been determined to be in conformance with this article shall be included on the ballot. Employees entitled to vote in such election shall be those persons employed in regular permanent positions within the designated appropriate unit who were employed during the pay period immediately prior to the date which ended at least fifteen days before the date the election commences, including those who did not work during such period because of illness, vacation, or other authorized leaves of absence, and who are employed by the city in the same unit on the date of the election.

     B.     An employee organization shall be formally acknowledged as the exclusively recognized employee organization for the designated appropriate unit following an election or runoff election in which it receives a majority of the votes cast. In an election involving three or more choices, where none of the choices receives a majority of the valid votes cast, a runoff election shall be conducted between the two choices receiving the largest number of valid votes cast; the rules governing an initial election shall be applicable to a runoff election.

     C.     There shall be no more than one valid election under this chapter pursuant to any petition in a twelve-month period affecting the same unit.

     D.    The city and each employee organization appearing on the ballot shall bear its own costs. (Ord. 92-9 § 7, 1992)

 

2.52.080 Procedure for decertification of exclusively recognized employee organization.
     A.    A decertification petition alleging that the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization no longer represents a majority of the employees in an established appropriate unit may be filed with the employee relations officer only during the first month following the first full year of recognition, during the thirty-day period commencing ninety days prior to the termination date of a memorandum of understanding then having been in effect three years or less, or at any time during which a memorandum of understanding is not in effect. A decertification petition may be filed by employees or their representative, or any employee organization, and shall contain the following information and documentation declared by the duly authorized signatory under penalty of perjury to be true, correct, and complete:

     1.     The name, address, and telephone number of the petitioner and a designated representative authorized to receive notices or requests for further information.

     2.     The name of the established appropriate unit and of the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization sought to be decertified as the representative of that unit

     3.     An allegation that the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization no longer represents a majority of the employees in the appropriate unit, and any other relevant and material facts relating thereto.

     4.     Proof of employee support that at least fifty percent of the employees in the established appropriate unit no longer desire to be represented by the incumbent recognized employee organization. Such proof shall be submitted for confirmation to the employee relations officer or to a mutually agreed upon disinterested third party within the time limits specified in subsection A of this section.

     B.     An employee organization may, in satisfaction of the decertification petition requirements hereunder, file a petition under this section in the form of a recognition petition that evidences proof of employee support of at least fifty percent of the employees in the bargaining unit, that includes the allegation and information required under subsection (A)(3) of this section and otherwise conforms to the requirements of Section 2.52.030 of this article.

     C.     The employee relations officer shall initially determine whether the petition has been filed in compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. If his or her determination is in the negative, he or she shall offer to consult thereon with the representative(s) of such petitioning employees or employee organization and, if such determination thereafter remains unchanged, shall return such petition to the employees or employee organization with a statement of the reasons therefor in writing. The petitioning employees or employee organization may appeal such determination in accordance with Section 2.52.100 of this article. If the determination of the employee relations officer is in the affirmative, or if his negative determination is reversed on appeal, he or she shall give written notice of such decertification or recognition petition to the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization and to unit employees. The employee relations officer shall thereupon arrange within a reasonable time for a secret-ballot election to be conducted by the state mediation and conciliation service in accordance with its rules and procedures and subject to the provisions of this chapter, after such notice to determine the wishes of unit employees as to the question of decertification and, if a recognition petition was duly filed hereunder, the question of representation. Such election shall be conducted in conformance with Section 2.52.070 of this article.

     D.    During the “open period” specified in subsection A of this section, the employee relations officer may, on his or her own motion, when he or she has a good-faith reason to believe that a majority of unit employees no longer wish to be represented by the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization, give written notice to that organization and all unit employees that he or she will arrange for an election to determine that issue. Such written notice shall state the reasons for his or her good-faith reason to believe that a majority of the employees no longer wish to be represented by the incumbent exclusively recognized employee organization. In such event any other employee organization may within fifteen days of such notice file a recognition petition in accordance with this section, which the employee relations officer shall act on in accordance with this section. (Ord. 92-9 § 8, 1992)

 

2.52.090 Procedure for modification or clarification of established appropriate units.
     A.    Requests by employee organizations for modifications or clarifications of established appropriate units may be filed and considered by the employee relations officer only during the open periods specified in Section 2.52.080 of this article. Such requests shall be submitted in the form of a recognition petition and, in addition to the requirements set forth in Section 2.52.030 of this article, shall contain a complete statement of all relevant facts and citations in support of the proposed modified unit in terms of the policies and standards set forth in Section 2.52.060 of this chapter. The employee relations officer shall process such petitions as other recognition petitions under this article.

     B.     The employee relations officer may on his or her own motion propose during the open periods specified in Section 2.52.080 of this article that an established unit be modified. The employee relations officer shall give written notice of the proposed modification(s) to any affected employee organization and shall hold a meeting concerning the proposed modification(s), at which time all affected employee organizations shall be heard.

     C.     Thereafter the employee relations officer shall determine the composition of the appropriate unit or units in accordance with Section 2.52.060 of this article, and shall give written notice of such determination to the affected employee organizations. The employee relations officer’s determination may be appealed as provided in Section 2.52.100 of this article. If a unit is modified pursuant to the motion of the employee relations officer hereunder, employee organizations may thereafter file recognition petitions seeking to become the exclusively recognized employee organization for such new appropriate unit or units pursuant to Section 2.52.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 92-9 § 9, 1992)

 

2.52.100 Appeals.
     A.    An employee organization aggrieved by an appropriate unit determination of the employee relations officer under this article may appeal such determination to the council for final decision within fifteen days of notice of the employee relations officer’s determination or the termination of proceedings pursuant to Government Code Section 3507.3, whichever is later.

     B.     An employee organization aggrieved by a determination of the employee relations officer that a recognition petition (Section 2.52.030), challenging petition (Section 2.52.050) or decertification of recognition petition (Section 2.52.080) or employees aggrieved by a determination of the employee relations officer that a decertification petition (Section 2.52.080) has not been filed in compliance with the applicable provisions of this article may, within fifteen days of notice of such determination, appeal the determination to the city council for final decision.

     C.     Appeals to the council shall be filed in writing with the city clerk, and a copy thereof served on the employee relations officer. The council shall commence to consider the matter within thirty days of the filing of the appeal. The council may, in its discretion, refer the dispute to a third party hearing process. Any decision of the council on the use of such procedure, and/or any decision of the council determining the substance of the dispute, shall be final and binding. (Ord. 92-9 § 10, 1992)

 

Article III. Administration
2.52.110 Submission of current information by recognized employee organizations.
     All changes in the information filed with the city by an exclusively recognized employee organization under items 1 through 8 of its recognition petition under Section 2.52.030 of this chapter shall be submitted in writing to the employee relations officer within fourteen days of such change. (Ord. 92-9 § 11, 1992)

 

2.52.120 Employee organization activities—Use of city resources.
     Access to city work locations and the use of city paid time, facilities, equipment and other resources by employee organizations and those representing them shall be authorized only to the extent provided for in memoranda of understanding and/or administrative procedures, shall be limited to lawful activities consistent with the provisions of this chapter that pertain directly to the employer-employee relationship and not to such internal employee organization business as soliciting membership, campaigning for office, and organization meetings and elections, and shall not interfere with the efficiency, safety and security of city operations. (Ord. 92-9 § 12, 1992)

 

Article IV. Impasse Procedures
2.52.130 Initiation of impasse procedures.
     If the meet and confer process has reached impasse as defined in this chapter, either party may initiate the impasse procedures by filing with the other party a written request for an impasse meeting, together with a statement of its position on all issues. An impasse meeting shall then be scheduled promptly by the employee relations officer. The purpose of such meeting shall be:

     1.     To review the position of the parties in a final effort to reach agreement on a memorandum of understanding; and

     2.     If the impasse is not resolved, to discuss arrangements for the utilization of the impasse procedures provided in this chapter. (Ord. 92-9 § 13, 1992)

 

2.52.140 Impasse procedures.
     Impasse procedures are as follows:

     A.    If the parties agree to submit the dispute to mediation, the dispute shall be submitted to mediation under the State Mediation and Conciliation Service. All mediation proceedings shall be private. The mediator shall make no public recommendation, nor take any public position at any time concerning the issues;

     B.     If the parties do not agree to submit the dispute to mediation, or having so agreed the impasse has not been resolved through the mediation process, the dispute shall be referred to the council. The council may take such action regarding the impasse as it in its discretion deems appropriate in the public interest. Any legislative action by the council on the impasse shall be final and binding. (Ord. 92-9 § 14, 1992)

 

Article V. Miscellaneous Provisions
2.52.150 Construction.
     This chapter shall be administered and construed as follows:

     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny to any person, employee, organization, the city, or any authorized officer, body or other representative of the city, the rights, powers and authority granted by applicable law.

     B.     This chapter shall be interpreted so as to carry out its purposes as set forth in Article I of this chapter.

     C.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as making the provisions of the California Labor Code Section 923 applicable to city employees or employee organizations, or of giving employees or employee organizations the right to participate in, support, cooperate or encourage, directly or indirectly, any strike, sickout or other total or partial stoppage or slowdown of work. In consideration of and as a condition of initial and continued employment by the city, employees recognize that any such actions by them are in violation of their conditions of employment except as expressly otherwise provided by legally preemptive state law or contrary local law. In the event employees engage in such actions, they shall subject themselves to discipline up to and including termination, and may be permanently replaced, to the extent such actions are not prohibited by preemptive law. (Ord. 92-9 § 15, 1992)

Chapter 2.56 DATES FOR GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
2.56.010 Election date established.
     The general municipal election for positions on the council shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in even numbered years, commencing November 1994. (Ord. 93-10 § 1, 1993)

 

2.56.020 Consolidation of elections.
     The city clerk shall petition the county of Napa to consolidate the city general municipal election with the state-wide general election being held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each even numbered year, commencing November 1994, and to permit the county clerk to conduct the city general municipal election. (Ord. 93-10 § 2, 1993)

 

2.56.030 Councilmember terms.
     A.    Those councilmembers whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of this ordinance, expired on the Tuesday succeeding the second Tuesday in April of 1994, shall continue in office until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the general municipal election in November 1994, and until their successors are elected and qualified.

     B.     Those councilmembers whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of this chapter, expired on the Tuesday succeeding the second Tuesday in April of 1996, shall continue in office until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the general municipal election in November 1996, and until their successors are elected and qualified.

     C.     The terms of office for the councilmembers elected in November 1994, and in each subsequent general municipal election, shall be, in accordance with state law, for terms of four years and shall expire no later than the fourth Tuesday after the date of the general municipal election, and until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 93-10 § 3, 1993)

Chapter 2.58 FILING FEE FOR CANDIDATES
2.58.010 Filing fee.
     Each candidate for elective office within the city shall pay a filing fee of twenty-five dollars within the time period prescribed by the California Elections Code. The filing fee shall be used to cover the cost to the city of processing candidate nomination papers. (Ord. 94-08 § 1, 1994)

 

2.58.020 Waiver.
     The filing fee established in Section 2.58.010 of this chapter shall be waived for each candidate who submits a petition containing four signatures of registered voters for each dollar of the filing fee, or ten percent of the total registered voters in the city, whichever is less. The petition shall be filed within the time limits prescribed by the California Elections Code. (Ord. 94-08 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 2.60 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.60.010 Council findings.
     The city council of the city declares and finds the following:

     A.    Based on current local conditions, a need no longer exists for the American Canyon community development agency established by the council in 1993 pursuant to Ordinance No. 93-15, to operate within the city.

     B.     The American Canyon community agency has no outstanding indebtedness, and no other unpaid loans, indebtedness, or advances, and no legally binding contractual obligations with any persons or entities. (Ord. 96-08 § 2, 1997)

 

2.60.020 Dissolution of American Canyon community redevelopment agency.
     The American Canyon redevelopment agency shall be dissolved and deactivated as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 96-08 § 2, 1997)

 

2.60.030 Procedure for reestablishment of American Canyon community redevelopment agency in the future.
     A.    The city shall retain the right to reestablish the American Canyon community redevelopment agency pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq. (the “community redevelopment law”) and this chapter, if the need for a redevelopment agency in city arises in the future.

     B.     If, in the future, the city council determines that a need exists for a redevelopment agency, the question of whether the American Canyon community redevelopment agency should be reestablished shall be submitted to an advisory vote of the people at a municipal election before any action is taken to reestablish the community redevelopment agency. (Ord. 96-08 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 2.64 CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS
2.64.010 Established.
     A.    In order to conduct hearings to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of installation, and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, housing and accessibility codes of the city, there is established a construction board of appeals. The board shall consist of five members, and shall be generally representative of the following:

     1.     General building of specialized craft contractors licensed by the state of California;

     2.     Civil or structural engineers licensed by the state of California;

     3.     Architects licensed by the state of California;

     4.     A citizen representative of the public at large;

     5.     A citizen representative of the physically disabled community.

     B.     Members of the board shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. Members shall not be employees of the city. The building official of the city shall serve as the secretary ex officio to the board.

     C.     Terms of initial appointment shall be for a term of two years. Each member of the board shall be required to comply with the applicable provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Section 81000, et seq. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations, subject to approval and adoption by the city council, for conduction of its business and shall conform to the requirements of the Ralph M. Brown Act, California Government Code Section 54950, et seq., and shall render all decisions and findings in writing with a copy to the appellant.

     D.    Each member of the board shall receive as compensation the sum of fifty dollars for each meeting attended. In addition, each member shall receive necessary traveling compensation for expenses incurred in the discharge of his duties. (Ord. 94-09 § 1, 1994)

 

2.64.020 Appeals procedure.
     A.    Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building official shall have the right to appeal the decision. The appeal shall be filed with the building official within thirty business days after the rendering of the decision affecting the aggrieved person. Grounds for the appeal shall be set forth in writing.

     B.     The secretary of the board shall set the time and place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be posted in a public place. A copy of the notice of hearing shall be mailed to the appellant, at his last known address, at least ten calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing.

     C.     The decision of the board on the appeal shall not become final until ten working days after the board has made its determination in order to allow time for an appeal to be made to the city council from the board’s decision.

     D.    The city council shall set appeal fees to the construction board of appeals and the city council by resolution. There shall be no fee charged for city-initiated appeals. (Ord. 94-09 § 2, 1994)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Chapter 3.12 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 3.16 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.20 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.24 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.28 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND

Chapter 3.04 FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY
3.04.010 Investment of city moneys and deposit of securities.
     Pursuant to, and in accordance with, and to the extent allowed by, Sections 53607 and 53608 of the Government Code, the authority to invest and reinvest moneys of the city, to sell or exchange securities, and to deposit them and provide for their safekeeping, is delegated to the city treasurer. (Prior code § 3.08.010)

 

3.04.020 Authorized investments.
     Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.04.010, the city treasurer is authorized to purchase, at their original sale or after they have been issued, securities which are permissible investments under any provision of state law relating to the investing of general city funds, including but not limited to Sections 53601, 53635 and 53735.5 of the Government Code, as the sections now read or may hereafter be amended, from moneys in his custody which are not required for the immediate necessities of the city and as he may deem wise and expedient, and to sell or exchange for other eligible securities and reinvest the proceeds of the securities so purchased. (Prior code 3.08.020)

 

3.04.030 Sales of securities.
     From time to time the city treasurer shall sell the securities in which city moneys have been invested pursuant to this chapter, so that the proceeds may, as appropriate, be applied to the purchase for which the original purchase money may have been designated or placed in the city treasury. (Prior code 3.08.030)

 

3.04.040 City bonds.
     Bonds issued by the city and purchased pursuant to this chapter may be canceled either in satisfaction of sinking fund obligations or otherwise if proper and appropriate; provided, however, that the bonds may be held unconcealed and while so held may be resold. (Prior code § 3.08.040)

 

3.04.050 Reports.
     The city treasurer shall make a monthly report to the city council of all investments made pursuant to the authority delegated in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.08.050)

 

3.04.060 Deposits of securities.
     Pursuant to the delegation of authority in Section 3.04.010, the city treasurer is authorized to deposit for safekeeping, the securities in which city moneys have been invested pursuant to this chapter, in any institution or depository authorized by the terms of any state law, including but not limited to Section 53608 of the Government Code as it now reads or may hereafter be amended. In accordance with the section, the city treasurer shall take from such institution or depository a receipt for the securities so deposited and shall not be responsible for such securities delivered to and receipted for by such institution or depository until they are withdrawn therefrom by the city treasurer. (Prior code § 3.08.060)

 

3.04.070 Trust fund administration.
     Any departmental trust fund established by the council pursuant to Section 36523 of the Government Code shall be administered by the city treasurer in accordance with Sections 36523 and 36524 of the Government Code and any other applicable provisions of law. (Prior code § 3.08.070)

 

3.04.080 Codification of debts to the city.
     A.    The amount on any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever imposed by this code or by any other resolution, ordinance, rule, regulation or in any other fashion by the city shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the city.

     B.     An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of any such delinquent or unpaid ft, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this code or any other enactment.

     C.     Such action may also be commenced for the collection of any other amount or debt determined to be due the city on account of any contractual obligation or on account of any tortious act or conduct by person.

     D.    The remedy prescribed by this section shall be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or any law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof. (Prior code § 3.10.010)

 

3.04.090 Assessment and collection of city taxes by county.
     Pursuant to, and in compliance with Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state, the assessment and tax collection duties which otherwise might he performed by a city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county. (Prior code § 3.20.010)

Chapter 3.08 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
3.08.010 Claims for money or damages.
     As a prerequisite to bringing suit thereon against the city or any officer, department, commission or board of the city, any claim for money or damages (including claims which would otherwise be excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code of California) which is not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto, shall be presented and acted upon in accordance with Title 1, Division 3.6, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910), of the Government Code of California. This section shall relate only to the bringing of suit upon any claim, and shall not be deemed to apply to the authority of the director of finance and general services, the council, and other officers to process and pay, in the ordinary course of business, the just obligations of the city, such as routine salaries and wages, principal and interest on bonds, payments of purchases, and other like expenditures for which there is an express budget appropriation, and in connection with which there is no dispute as to the obligation and amount being payable. (Prior code § 3.16.010)

 

3.08.020 Auditing prerequisite to payment.
     No payment shall be made from the city treasury or out of the funds of the city unless the demand which is to be paid is duly audited as prescribed herein or by other provisions of law. (Prior code § 3.16.020)

 

3.08.030 Forms—Blanks for demands.
     Claim against the city shall be paid on demands on the treasury as herein provided on forms to be prescribed by the director of finance and general services. (Prior code § 3.16.030)

 

3.08.040 Departmental approval of claims.
     Except for tort claims, every claim and demand received against the city shall be first presented to and approved in writing by the receiving department or office, which shall certify to the actual delivery or rendition of the supplies, materials, property or service for which payment is claimed; that the quality and prices correspond with the original specifications and contracts, if any, upon which the claim is based; that the demand in all other respects is proper and valid, and which shall further indicate the budgetary account to which said demand is to be charged. (Prior code § 3.16.040)

 

3.08.050 Approval by director of finance and general services.
     Each demand approved by the receiving department or office shall be presented to the director of finance and general services who shall satisfy himself whether:

     A.    The claim is legally due and owing by the city;

     B.     There are budgeted or otherwise appropriated funds available to pay the claim;

     C.     The claim conforms to a valid requisition or order;

     D.    The prices and computations shown on the claim are verified;

     E.     The claim contains the approval of other departments and officials as required. (Prior code § 3.16.050)

 

3.08.060 Approval of claims under Section 57384 of the Government Code.
     Claims submitted by the county under Section 57384 of the Government Code for services furnished during the remainder of fiscal year 1991-92 shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of the section. Such claims shall be in compliance with all provisions of Section 57384 of the Government Code and shall be accompanied by itemized statements regarding the actual delivery of the supplies, materials, property or service for which payment is claimed, including any and all indirect charges constituting a portion of the claim. (Prior code § 3.16.055)

 

3.08.070 Prepayment of demands.
     A.    Prepayment of demands prior to audit by the finance committee and the council may be made by the director of finance and general services in conformity with the authority provided by Section 37208 of the Government Code of the state.

     B.     Whenever the director of finance and generally services determines that a refund is due of fees, taxes or other receipts collected in error or in advance of being earned, or of money the refund of which is otherwise due pursuant to specific provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of this city, they any such refund shall be deemed as conforming to the currently approved budget, and may be prepaid in the same fashion as other demands encompassed within the terms of subsection (A) of this section. (Prior code § 3.16.060)

 

3.08.080 Register of demands.
     Following audit of demands of the director of finance and general services shall prepare a register of audited demands showing the claimant’s name, amount of demand, the warrant number and date thereof, and transmit said register to the city manager for his review and presentation to the finance committee and the council, with his approval or other report. (Prior code § 3.16.070)

 

3.08.090 City council approval.
     The register of demands shall be presented to the council at the next regular meeting thereof. The council may by resolution approve, conditionally or partially approve or reject such register of demands and in connection therewith consider the recommendations of the finance committee and the city manager. (Prior code § 3.16.080)

 

3.08.100 Record of approved demands.
     Following approval of the register of demands by the council, the chairperson of the finance committee and the city manager shall endorse the resolution approving the register of audited demands to signify there was proper processing of demands therein before the council took action. (Prior code § 3.16.090)

Chapter 3.12 PURCHASING SYSTEM
3.12.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
     In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. Approval thresholds delineated for purchases of supplies and equipment and services are as specified on Chart A as shown at the end of this chapter, in accordance with the fiscal policy adopted by the city council on April 19, 2007. (Ord. 2007-05, 2007; prior code § 3.12.010)

 

3.12.020 Centralized purchasing division.
     There is created a centralized purchasing division in which is vested authority for the purchase of supplies and equipment. (Prior code § 3.12.020)

 

3.12.030 Purchasing agent.
     There is created the position of purchasing agent, who may also be known as the “purchasing officer.” He or she shall be appointed by the director of finance and general services subject to the approval of the city manager. The purchasing agent shall be the head and have general supervision of the purchasing division. The duties of purchasing agent may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing agent shall have the authority to:

     A.    Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed in this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the council or the city manager;

     B.     Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

     C.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the city;

     D.    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

     E.     Prepare and recommend to the council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the city;

     F.     Prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

     G.    Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

     H.    Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary for the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

     I.      Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications;

     J.      Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed;

     K.    Maintain an approved vendors list, vendors’ catalogue file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing division. (Prior code § 3.12.030)

 

3.12.040 Purchasing regulations.
     The purchasing agent shall be responsible for determining that the regulations and procedures in Sections 3.12.050 through 3.12.110 are carried out. (Prior code § 3.12.040)

 

3.12.050 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
     The city manager may authorize, in writing, any department to purchase specified supplies and equipment independently of the purchasing division; but he or she shall require that such purchases shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter and shall further require periodic reports from the department on the purchases made under such written authorization. (Prior code § 3.12.050)

 

3.12.060 Estimates of requirements.
     All using departments shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing agent shall prescribe. (Prior code § 3.12.060)

 

3.12.070 Requisitions.
     Using departments shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing agent by standard requisition forms, or by other means as may be established by the purchasing rules and regulations. (Prior code § 3.12.070)

 

3.12.080 Purchase orders.
     Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase orders. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no purchase order shall be issued unless the prior approval of the purchasing agent or his designated representative has been obtained. (Prior code § 3.12.080)

 

3.12.090 Encumbrance of funds.
     Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing agent shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Prior code § 3.12.090)

 

3.12.100 Inspection and testing.
     The purchasing agent shall, in his discretion, inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order. The purchasing agent shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Prior code § 3.12.100)

 

3.12.110 Bidding.
     Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 3.12.120 through 3.12.260. Bidding may be dispensed with only under conditions stated in Section 3.12.270. (Prior code § 3.12.110)

 

3.12.120 Formal (sealed) bid procedures.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, public projects, as defined in Section 20161 of the Public Contracts Code, and purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value greater than the threshold amount listed on Chart A at the end of this chapter shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the formal bid procedure as hereinafter prescribed. (Ord. 2007-05, 2007; Ord. 94-01 § 4, 1994; prior code § 3.12.120)

 

3.12.130 Notice inviting formal bids.
     Notices inviting formal bids shall include a general description of the article or service desired, shall state where bid documents and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. (Prior code § 3.12.130)

 

3.12.140 Published notice for formal bids.
     Notices inviting formal bids shall be published at least ten days prior to the date of opening of the bids. Notices shall be published at least once for non-public projects at least twice, not less than five days apart for public projects, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (Prior code § 3.12.140)

 

3.12.150 Approved vendors list.
     The purchasing agent shall also solicit formal sealed bids from responsible suppliers whose names are on the approved vendors list, or who have made written request that their names be added thereto. (Prior code § 3.12.150)

 

3.12.160 Bulletin board notice.
     The purchasing agent shall advertise the pending formal purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board at the city offices. (Prior code § 3.12.160)

 

3.12.170 Bidder’s security.
     A.    When a public project is involved, and in other cases when deemed necessary by the purchasing agent, formal bids shall be accompanied by security, either cash, cashier’s check, certified check or surety bond, in a sum equal to ten percent of the total aggregate of the bid, and shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract.

     B.     The council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder who is willing to execute the contract, or may reject all bids and readvertise. (Prior code § 3.12.170)

 

3.12.175 Other formal bond requirements.
     A faithful performance bond and labor and material bond shall be required for all public projects, unless waived by the council, in an amount reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. In addition, the council shall have authority to require a faithful performance bond or other bonds before entering into a contract other than a public project contract. If bonds are required, the form and amount thereof shall be designated in the notice inviting bids. (Prior code § 3.12.175)

 

3.12.180 Formal bid opening procedure.
     Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing agent and shall be identified as “bids” on the envelope. The purchasing officer, or designee, shall publicly open all bids at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection in the purchasing office during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. (Prior code § 3.12.180)

 

3.12.190 Rejection of formal bids.
     In its discretion, the council may reject any and all bids presented and may cause readvertising for bids pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this chapter. However, when all bids exceed the authorized budgeted amount, the city manager may authorize rejection of all bids and authorize rebidding based upon the original specifications or as they may be modified, in accordance with procedures prescribed in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.12.190)

 

3.12.200 Award of formal bid contracts.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, formal bid contracts shall be awarded by the council to the lowest responsible bidder. The determination of “lowest responsible bidder” shall be at the discretion of the council pursuant to findings and recommendations presented by the purchasing agent at the time of award of contract. (Prior code § 3.12.200)

 

3.12.210 Tie formal bids.
     If two or more formal bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the council may in its discretion accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by and after negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening or award of contract. (Prior code § 3.12.210)

 

3.12.215 No formal bids.
     When no formal bids or no responsive bids are received, the purchasing officer is authorized to negotiate for written proposals, and his recommendation shall be represented to the city manager and award, if any, shall be made in accordance with applicable provisions prescribed in this chapter. (Prior code § 3.12.215)

 

3.12.230 Open market or informal bid procedure.
     Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value of less than the amount as specified on Chart A at the end of this chapter may be made by the purchasing agent in the open market pursuant to the procedure prescribed. (Ord. 2007-05, 2007; prior code § 3.12.230)

 

3.12.240 Minimum number of informal bids.
     Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three informal bids, and shall be awarded to the bidder offering the most advantageous bid to the city after consideration of price, quality, durability, servicing, delivery time, standardization, and other factors. (Prior code § 3.12.240)

 

3.12.250 Notice inviting informal bids.
     The purchasing agent shall solicit informal bids by written requests to prospective vendors, or by telephone, or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board at the city offices. (Prior code § 3.12.250)

 

3.12.260 Record of informal bids.
     The purchasing agent shall keep a written record of all open market purchases and informal bids for a period of one year. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. (Prior code § 3.12.260)

 

3.12.270 Exceptions to competitive bidding requirement.
     Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the competitive bidding procedures and requirements may be dispensed with in any of the following instances:

     A.    When the estimated amount involved is less than two thousand five hundred dollars;

     B.     When the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor,

     C.     The city manager may authorize the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment and services where an emergency is deemed to exist and it is determined that service involving the public health, safety or welfare would be interrupted if the normal procedure were followed. All emergency purchases, which would otherwise require formal bidding procedures, made pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the council for ratification at the next regular council meeting after the purchase is authorized;

     D.    The council may authorize the execution of contracts for personal services, for professional and consultant services, and for other, nonpublic projects and for contractual services without observing the bidding procedures provided in this chapter where the amount of the contract exceeds the value of five thousand dollars;

     E.     The city manager and department directors are authorized to enter into contracts for personal services, for professional and consulting services and for other contractual services without observing the bidding procedure provided here where the amount of the contract does not exceed the amount as specified on Chart A at the end of this chapter;

     F.     Any agreement involving acquisition of supplies, equipment or service entered into with another governmental entity;

     G.    The council may authorize the execution of a lease or leases for office space for the city government without observing the bidding procedures provided in this chapter irrespective of the term of the lease or leases or the amount of rent and other charges to be paid by the city under the lease or leases. (Ord. 2007-05, 2007; prior code § 3.12.270)

 

3.12.275 Local business preference policy.
     The council may, by resolution, adopt a local business preference policy which otherwise complies with the regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-11 § 1, 2015)

 

3.12.280 Regulation re selection of contract services.
     The council shall by resolution prescribe procedures, rules and regulations governing the solicitation, selection and award of proposals or bids for the furnishing of personal services or professional or consulting services or for other contractual services, the contracts for which may be awarded without observing the bidding procedures provided for in this chapter. Such procedures, rules and regulations shall have as one purpose the obtaining of contractual services of the highest quality together with cost-effectiveness. (Prior code § 3.12.280)

 

3.12.300 Surplus supplies and equipment.
     All using departments shall submit to the purchasing agent, at such times and in such forms as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete and worn out. (Prior code § 3.12.300)

 

3.12.310 Surplus supplies—Trade-ins.
     The purchasing agent shall have authority to exchange for or trade in on new supplies and equipment all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city use. (Prior code § 3.12.310)

 

3.12.320 Surplus supplies—Sale.
     The purchasing agent shall also have authority, subject to approval of the city manager, to dispose of surplus supplies or equipment by auction or by sale or otherwise after receiving bids or proposals which, in his or her judgment, provide the maximum return to the city. (Prior code § 3.12.320)

 

CHART A
 

APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS

PURCHASES OF SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES

 

 

 

 

Threshold

Department Head

City Manager

City Council

SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT

Less than $5,000



 

 

$5,000 to $25,000

(requires 3 informal proposals)





 

Exceeding $25,000

(requires formal proposals)







SERVICES

Less than $10,000



 

 

$10,000 to $50,000

(requires 3 informal proposals)





 

Exceeding $50,000

(requires 3 formal proposals)







Petty Cash Reimbursement Limit

$100.00

 

 

 Denotes signature approval

 

 

 

 Denotes council authorization

Chapter 3.16 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.16.010 Short title—Adoption.
     This chapter shall be known as the Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the city. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 3.22.010)

 

3.16.020 Imposition—Rates.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 3.22.020)

 

3.16.030 Payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 3.22.030)

 

3.16.040 Tax inapplicable to instruments in writing to secure debts.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 3.22.040)

 

3.16.050 Government and its agencies not liable.
     Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 94-01 § 5, 1994; prior code § 3.22.050)

 

3.16.060 Tax inapplicable to instruments and writings taken in lieu of foreclosure.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of, or in lieu of foreclosure. However, the tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. In addition, the amount and nature of the consideration, amount of the unpaid debt and identification of the grantee as a beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on any deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 94-03 § 1, 1994; prior code § 3.22.051)

 

3.16.070 Tax inapplicable to instruments dividing property assets between spouses.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of dividing such property, provided that it is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to the California Family Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order. However, the exemption shall not apply unless the deed, instrument or other writing includes a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument or other writing is entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 94-03 § 2, 1994; prior code § 3.22.052)

 

3.16.080 Tax inapplicable to certain instruments of the state, political subdivision and agencies.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any deed, instrument or other writing by which the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or any agency or instrumentality of either the state or a political subdivision conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty, where the acquisition, construction or improvement of the real property was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a government unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 94-03 § 3, 1994; prior code § 3.22.053)

 

3.16.090 Tax inapplicable to conveyances to make effective plan of reorganization or adjustment.
     A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

     1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

     2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

     3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

     4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place or organization is effected.

     B.     Subsections (A)(1) through (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 3.22.060)

 

3.16.100 Tax inapplicable to make effective order of Securities and Exchange Commission.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

     A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79K of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

     B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

     C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code § 3.22.070)

 

3.16.110 Partnerships.
     A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

     1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

     2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

     B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien of encumbrances remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

     C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of termination. (Prior code § 3 .22.080)

 

3.16.120 Tax roll parcel number requirements.
     A.    Each deed, instrument or writing by which lands, tenements, or other realty is sold, granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed shall have noted upon it the tax roll parcel number. The number will be used only for administrative and procedural purposes and will not be proof of title and in the event of any conflicts, the stated legal description noted upon the document shall govern.

     B.     The validity of such a document shall not be affected by the fact that such parcel number is-erroneous or omitted, and there shall be no liability attaching to any person for an error in such number or for omission of such number. The recorder shall not accept any deed, instrument or conveyance for recording unless the tax roll parcel number has been noted upon it. A parcel which has been created by the division of an existing parcel and which at the time of recording has no separate parcel number shall have noted upon it the words “portion of” and the parcel number of the parcel from which it was created. (Prior code § 3.22.090)

 

3.16.130 Administration.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 3.22.100)

 

3.16.140 Claims for refund.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. (Prior code § 3.22.110)

Chapter 3.20 SALES AND USE TAX
3.20.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance. (Ord. 2 § 1, 1992)

 

3.20.020 Rate.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 2 § 2, 1992)

 

3.20.030 Operative date.
     “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 3, 1992)

 

3.20.040 Purpose.
     The council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: A.     To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adopts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

     D.    To adopt a sales and use tax chapter which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 4, 1992)

 

3.20.050 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 5, 1992)

 

3.20.060 Sales tax.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 2 § 6, 1992)

 

3.20.070 Place of sale.
     A.    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination.

     B.     The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

     C.     In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 2 § 7, 1992)

 

3.20.080 Use tax.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 2 § 8, 1992)

 

3.20.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 9, 1992)

 

3.20.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
     A.    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor.

     B.     The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 2 § 10, 1992)

 

3.20.110 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6068 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 11, 1992)

 

3.20.120 Exclusions.
     There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

     A.    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

     B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

     C.     The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators or aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside this city and to be used or consumed in the use of the aircraft as a common carrier under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government;

     D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 6366 and 6366.1, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators or aircraft to be used or consumed by the operators in the use of the aircraft as a common carrier under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 94-01 § 7, 1994; Ord. 2 § 12, 1992)

 

3.20.130 Amendments.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become apart of this chapter. (Ord. 2 § 13, 1992)

 

3.20.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 2 § 14, 1992)

 

3.20.150 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2 § 15, 1992)

Chapter 3.24 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.24.010 Short title.
     The short title of this chapter shall be the Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance. (Prior code § 3.24.010)

 

3.24.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for use or occupancy by transients, including but not limited to dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, timeshare project or facility, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof, duplex, triplex, single-family dwelling units except any private dwelling house or other individually owned single-family dwelling house unit rented only occasionally (infrequently) and incidentally to the normal occupancy by the owner or his family; provided that the burden of establishing that the housing or facility is a hotel as defined herein shall be upon the owner or operator thereof who shall file with the tax administrator such information as the tax administrator may require, to establish and maintain such status.

     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right or entitlement to the use or possession, of any hotel, room, rooms or any portion thereof offered for rent to be used or occupied for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes regardless of the purpose for which such rooms are rented or provided.

     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, timeshare project or facility manager or operator, or in any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or its functions through a managing agent of any type or character, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter, and shall have jointly and severally the same duties and liabilities as the principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be in compliance by both.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Rent” means the amount of the consideration charged or chargeable to the tenant or person entitled to occupancy, for the occupancy of space, valued in money whether received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including the full value of receipts, cash, credits, property or services of any kind or nature, without any deduction whatsoever. “Rent” may have been, or may be in part, payable or paid prior to or following (in whole or in part) the occupancy to which it is attributable, and may have been paid in whole or in part in advance on a long-term basis, such as in a time-share project or similar arrangement. It is not the intent of this subsection to make the operator liable for the tax on uncollected rent. However, uncollected rent must be reported.

     “Tax administrator” means the city manager or his designated agent, whether a city employee or county officer or employee.

     “Time-share occupancy” means occupancy related to the situation wherein a purchaser receives the right or entitlement in perpetuity, for life, or for a term of years or other extended term, to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit, room(s), hotel or portion thereof, or segment of real property, annually or on some other seasonal or periodic basis, for a period of time that has been or will be allotted from the use or occupancy periods into which the time-share project which is involved has been divided. The said right or entitlement to occupancy may attach in advance to a specific lot, parcel, unit, room(s), or portion of a hotel, or segment of real property, or may involve designation or selection of the same at a future time or times.

     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, timeshare arrangement or ownership or agreement, or other agreement of whatever nature, for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient if his actual total period of occupancy does not exceed thirty days. Unless day of occupancy or entitlement to occupancy by one person are consecutive without any break, then prior or subsequent periods of such occupancy or entitlement to occupancy shall not be counted when determining whether a period exceeds the stated thirty calendar days. (Prior code § 3.24.020)

 

3.24.030 Tax imposed.
     A.    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to, and shall pay, a tax in the amount of twelve percent of the rent charged by the operator or otherwise payable by the transient. Insofar as the transient is concerned, the tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the operator or to the city.

     B.     For the purposes of this section, the rent deemed payable on account of time-share occupancy by a transient shall be the rental value of the unit or room(s) which accommodated such occupancy, which rental value shall be computed by determining the pro rata share of the total purchase price of the time-share right or entitlement (whether or not involving an estate or any ownership in real property), which share is allocable to the period of transient occupancy currently involved, and adding thereto the total applicable operating costs including, but not limited to, the applicable real and personal property taxes, plus the total amount of any and all fees, assessments, charges and expenses (not including the previously referred to taxes) charged by the operator as attributable to the time-share occupancy of the transient by whatever name such fees, assessments, charges or expenses may be denominated, whether “occupying fee,” “maintenance or operations charge,” “per diem fee,” “management fee” or like name or otherwise.

     C.     In making the computation referred to above of the pro rata share of the total purchase price, in any case wherein the time-share right or entitlement is in perpetuity or for life or otherwise not for a definite or ascertainable term, such pro ration shall be made upon an assumed term of forty years. (Ord. 2010-10 § 1, 2010; prior code § 3.24.030)

 

3.24.040 Exemptions.
     A.    No tax shall be imposed upon:

     1.     Any person as to whom or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

     2.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

     B.     No exemptions shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and under penalty or perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Prior code § 3.24.040)

 

3.24.050 Operator’s duties.
     Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of the tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator; or that it will not be added to the rent; or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 3.24.050)

 

3.24.060 Registration.
     A.    Every person desiring to engage in or conduct business as operator of a hotel renting to transients within the city shall file with the tax administrator an application for a transient occupancy registration permit for each place of business. Every application for such a permit shall be made upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator and shall set forth the name under which the applicant transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information as the tax administrator may require. The application shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, if a member or partner, if an association or partnership, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the application in the case of a corporation. The transient occupancy registration permit must be in effect at all times while the business is in operation and shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall, among other things, state the following:

     1.     Name of hotel;

     2.     Name of operator;

     3.     Hotel address;

     4.     The date upon which the permit was issued;

     5.     “This Transient Occupancy Registration Permit signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax Chapter by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This Permit does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business in an unlawful manner, nor operate a hotel without strictly complying with all applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this City. This Permit does not apply in lieu of such other permits which are otherwise required.”

     B.     At the time of making an application for a registration permit, the applicant shall pay a registration fee of five dollars for each permit issued. (Prior code § 3.24.060)

 

3.24.070 Returns and remittances.
     The tax imposed under Section 3.24.030 is:

     A.    Due to the tax administrator at the time it is collected by the operator; and

     B.     Becomes delinquent and subject to penalties if not received by the tax administrator on or before the last working day of the month following the close of each calendar month. (Prior code § 3.24.070)

 

3.24.080 Reporting and remitting.
     A.    Each operator shall, on or before the last working day of the month following the close of each calendar month, file a return with the tax administrator on the forms provided by him, of the total rents charged or chargeable as provided in Section 3.24.030, whether or not received, including any rentals charged for occupancies exempt under the provisions of Section 3.24.020(G) and 3.24.040 and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies.

     B.     Each such return shall contain a declaration under penalty of perjury, executed by the operator or his authorized agent, that to the best of the signator’s knowledge, the statements in the return are true, correct and complete. Amounts claimed on the return as exempt from the tax pursuant to Section 3.24.020(G), 3.24.040 and 3.24.150 shall be fully itemized and explained on the return or supporting schedule. In determining the amount of “taxable receipts” on the tax return, “rent” as defined in Section 3.24.020(E), may not be reduced by any business expenses including but not limited to the amount of service charges deducted by credit card companies or commissions paid to travel agencies.

     C.     At the time the return is filed, the tax filed at the prevailing transient occupancy tax rate for the amount of rentals charged or chargeable, which are not exempt from tax under Sections 3.24.020(G), 3.24.040 and 3.24.150 shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish other reporting periods and may require a cash deposit or bond or a separate trust fund bank account for any permit holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until remittance thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 3.24.080)

 

3.24.090 Cessation of business.
     Each operator shall notify the tax administrator, ten days prior to the sale or cessation of business for any reason and returns and remittances are due immediately upon the sale or cessation of business. (Prior code § 3.24.090)

 

3.24.100 Delinquency.
     Any operator who fails to remit any tax to the city or any amount of tax required to be collected and remitted to the city including amounts based on determination made by the tax administrator under Section 3.24.120, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax or amount of the tax in addition to the tax or amount of tax plus interest at the rate of one-half percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the date on which the tax or the amount of any tax required to be collected becomes delinquent until the date of remittance or payment. Any operator who fails to pay any penalty imposed under this section within ten days after receipt of notice thereof shall pay interest thereon at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the date on which the penalty becomes due and payable to the city until the date of payment. (Prior code § 3.24.100)

 

3.24.110 Fraud.
     If the tax administrator determines that the failure to make any remittance or payment due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty on one hundred percent of the amount of the tax and penalties shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in Section 3.24.100. (Prior code § 3.24.110)

 

3.24.120 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax administrator.
     A.    If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due.

     B.     As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter.

     C.     In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable.

     D.    If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.

     E.     After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of the determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.24.130. (Prior code § 3.24.120)

 

3.24.130 Appeal.
     Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of any tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of serving of the assessment or determination of tax and penalties, if any, due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to the operator at his last known address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 3.24.130)

 

3.24.140 Records.
     It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and remittance to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, in the city, for a period of three years, records in such form as the tax administrator may require to determine the amount of such tax. The tax administrator shall have the right to inspect such records at all reasonable times and may subpoena the records of any operator who refuses to make them available for examination. (Prior code § 3.24.140)

 

3.24.150 Refunds.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claims shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

     B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the person or credited to rent subsequently payable by the person to the operator.

     C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

     D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records. (Prior code § 3.24.150)

 

3.24.160 Revocation of permit.
     A.    Whenever any operator fails to comply with any provision of this chapter relating to occupancy tax or any rule or regulation of the tax administrator relating to occupancy tax prescribed and adopted under this chapter, the tax administrator upon hearing, after giving the operator ten days’ notice in writing specifying the time and place of hearing and requiring him to show cause why his permit or permits should not be revoked, may suspend or revoke any one or more of the permits held by the operator.

     B.     The tax administrator shall give to the operator written notice of the suspension or revocation of any of his permits. The notices in this chapter required may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. The tax administrator shall not issue a new permit after the revocation of a permit unless he is satisfied that the former holder of the permit will comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the occupancy tax and regulations of the tax administrator. (Prior code § 3.24.160)

 

3.24.170 Closure of hotel without permit.
     During any period of time during which a permit has not been issued, or is suspended, revoked or otherwise not validly in effect, the tax administrator may require that the hotel be closed. (Prior code § 3.24.170)

 

3.24.180 Recording certificate—Lien.
     A.    If any amount required to be remitted or paid to the city under this chapter is not remitted or paid when due, the tax administrator may, within three years after the amount is due, file for record in the office of the county recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the tax administrator has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be remitted and paid.

     B.     From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be remitted together with penalties and interest constituting a lien upon all real property in the county owned by the operator or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. (Prior code § 3.24.180)

 

3.24.190 Priority and lien of tax.
     A.    The amounts required to be remitted and/or paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:

     1.     Whenever the person is insolvent;

     2.     Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his assets;

     3.     Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators, or heirs is insufficient to pay all the debts due from the deceased;

     4.     Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process law. This chapter does not give the city a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien.

     B.     The preference given to the city by this section shall be subordinate to the preferences given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Prior code § 3.24.190)

 

3.24.200 Warrant for collection of tax.
     A.    At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of any amount herein required to be remitted or paid or within three years after the last recording of a certificate under Section 3.24.160, the tax administrator may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter.

     B.     The warrant shall be directed to any sheriff, marshal, or constable and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator may pay or advance to the sheriff, marshal, or constable the same fees, commissions and expenses for his services as are provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax administrator, and not the court, shall approve the fees for publication in a newspaper. (Prior code § 3.24.200)

 

3.24.210 Seizure and sale.
     At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of any amount, the tax administrator may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner. The tax administrator shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Prior code § 3.24.210)

 

3.24.220 Successor’s liability—Withholding by purchase.
     If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successor or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax administrator showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. (Prior code § 3.24.220)

 

3.24.230 Liability of purchaser—Release.
     If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within sixty days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within sixty days from the date the former owner’s records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than ninety days after receiving the request, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the tax administrator of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. (Prior code § 3.24.230)

 

3.24.240 Responsibility for payment.
     Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been remitted to the city is a fiduciary obligation of the operator to the city and collectible in the same manner as a debt. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 3.24.240)

 

3.24.250 Withhold notice.
     A.    If any person or operator is delinquent in the remittance or payment of the amount required to be remitted or paid by him or in the event a determination has been made against him for the remittance of tax and payment of the penalty, the city may, within three years after the tax obligation became due, give notice thereof personally or by registered mail to all persons, including the state or any political subdivision thereof, having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the taxpayer.

     B.     After receiving the withholding notice, the person so notified shall make no disposition of the taxpayer’s credits, other personal property or debts until the city consents to a transfer or disposition or until sixty days elapse after the receipt of the notice, whichever expires earlier.

     C.     All persons, upon receipt of said notice, shall advise the city immediately of all such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. If such notice seeks to prevent the transfer or other disposition of a deposit in a bank or other credits or personal property in the possession or under the control of the bank, to be effective the notice shall be delivered or mailed to the branch or office of such bank at which such deposit is carried or at which such credits of personal property is held.

     D.    If any person so notified makes transfer or disposition of the property or debts required to be held hereunder during the effective period of the notice to withhold, he shall be liable to the city to the extent of the value of the release up to the amount of the indebtedness owed by the taxpayer to the city. (Prior code § 3.24.250)

 

3.24.260 Violations—Misdemeanor.
     A.    Except for failure of an operator to pay to the tax administrator taxes collected under this chapter which is punishable as a felony pursuant to Section 424 of the Penal Code, every violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     If such offense is not otherwise punishable as mentioned in subsection A of this section, any person wilfully failing to comply with, or knowingly violating, any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

     C.     Any operator other person who wilfully fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who wilfully makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 3.24.260)

 

3.24.270 Extension of time.
     The tax administrator, for good cause, may extend for not to exceed one month the time for making any return or paying any amount required to be paid under this chapter. The extension may be granted at any time, provided a request therefore is filed with the tax administrator within or prior to the period for which the extension may be granted. Any person to whom an extension is granted shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof, from the date on which the tax would have been due without the extension until the date of payment. (Prior code § 3.24.270)

 

3.24.280 Divulging of information forbidden.
     It is unlawful for any person having an administrative duty under this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of the records of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to knowingly permit any return or copy thereof or any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the amounts of any unpaid tax or amounts of tax, penalties and interest required to be collected. (Prior code § 3.24.280)

 

3.24.290 Agreement with county.
     The city is empowered to enter into a joint powers agreement with other cities and the county, and if such agreement or agreements can be made wherein central collection for the county is provided, then it shall be done upon approval of the council. (Prior code § 3.24.290)

Chapter 3.28 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.28.010 Created.
     To comply with the provisions of Sections 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code of California and to avail the city of its benefits of Sections 2015, 2106, 2107 and 2107.5 of the code, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Prior code § 3.18.010)

 

3.28.020 Moneys included.
     All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance and improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into the fund. (Prior code § 3.18.020)

 

3.28.030 Expenditures.
     All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of California. (Prior code § 3.18.030)

Title 4 REAL PROPERTY
Chapter 4.04 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR THE ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL PURPOSES
Chapter 4.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES

Chapter 4.04 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR THE ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR MUNICIPAL PURPOSES
4.04.010 Council findings/purpose of city’s land acquisition program.
     A.    Council Findings. The city council finds and declares that from time to time the city may need to acquire privately owned property for municipal projects which serve a public purpose.

     B.     Purpose of City’s Land Acquisition Program. The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for the city’s acquisition of property when necessary for municipal projects that serve the public interest and necessity in accordance with the applicable law and in consideration of the rights of property owners. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.020 Prerequisites to city’s decision to acquire privately owned property for a municipal project.
     Before making a decision to acquire privately owned property, the city shall consider whether it can use existing city property or otherwise purchase or obtain suitable property for the project. The city may acquire privately owned property by eminent domain if the following three requirements are met:

     A.    The municipal project for which the city wishes to acquire property will serve both the public interest and the needs of the public;

     B.     The municipal project for which the city wishes to acquire property is being planned and/or located in the manner that will be compatible with the greatest public good and the least injury to private interests;

     C.     The property sought to be acquired by the city is necessary for the municipal project (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.030 Nature of property interests which may be acquired by city.
     The city may acquire full ownership of privately owned property if necessary for the municipal project, or a lesser interest in the property, such as an easement, if such lesser interest would meet the city’s needs for the project The city may acquire any interest in the property necessary for the project, including submerged lands, water rights, subsurface rights, airspace rights, easements, rights of temporary occupancy, or public utility facilities and franchises. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.040 Joint powers agreements for the acquisition of property.
     In appropriate circumstances, the city may enter into a joint powers agreement pursuant to state law with one or more public agencies for the purpose of acquiring property for a project that will serve the public interest and necessity. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.050 Acquisition of nonprofit, special use property by city.
     A.    Definition of Nonprofit Special Use Property. For the purposes of this section, “nonprofit, special use property” shall be defined to mean property which is operated for a special nonprofit, tax-exempt use, such as a school, church, cemetery, hospital or similar property, but not to include property owned by a public entity.

     B.     City’s Duty to Seek Alternative Property for Municipal Project. Before making an offer to purchase nonprofit, special use property or initiating negotiations with the property owner(s), the city shall make every reasonable effort to find alternative property that may be acquired for the project that is not nonprofit, special use property.

     C.     Permissible Uses of Nonprofit, Special Use Property by City. The requirements of subsection B of this section shall not apply to property acquired by the city for the following purposes:

     1.     Transportation projects, including but not limited to, the construction, expansion or improvement of streets, highways, or railways; or

     2.     Water, sewer, electricity, telephone, natural gas, or flood control facilities, or rights-of-way, where the city’s acquisition of the property for these purposes will not require the removal or destruction of existing improvements, or cause the property to become unfit for the owner’s present or proposed use. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.060 Appraisal of property being considered for acquisition by city.
     A.    City’s Right to Conduct Appraisal/Timing for Appraisal. After the city has identified a municipal project for which the acquisition of privately owned land may be necessary, the city shall conduct an appraisal of any property which is being considered for this purpose. The appraisal must be conducted before negotiations between the city and the owner regarding the purchase of the property are begun. The city may waive its right to appraise property which has an extremely low fair market value and will be acquired from the owner by sale or donation, or as otherwise permitted by law.

     B.     Notice to Property Owner of Decision to Appraise. The city shall provide the owner with written notice of its decision to appraise the property as soon as possible after the decision is made. At a minimum, the notice shall state:

     1.     A specific geographic area is being considered by the city for a particular municipal project;

     2.     The owner’s property is located within that area;

     3.     The owner’s property, which shall be generally described may be acquired by the city for use in connection with the municipal project.

     The city shall give reasonable advance notice of the date and time of the appraisal in writing. In the absence of unusual circumstances, notice given to the owner at least ten business days before the inspection shall be considered reasonable advance notice.

     C.     City’s Provision of Written Explanation of Its Land Acquisition Procedures and Property Owner’s Principal Rights at Tune of Notice of Decision to Appraise the Property. At the time of notifying the owner of the decision to appraise the property, the city shall provide the property owner with a written explanation in nontechnical, understandable terms of its land acquisition procedures, and the principal rights and options available to the owner. This notice shall include at a minimum:

     1.     A description of the basic purpose of the city’s land acquisition procedures and a reference to the availability of the city’s policy regarding relocation benefits for which an owner or lawful occupant may be eligible;

     2.     A statement that the owner or his representative designated in writing shall be given an opportunity be present and to accompany the appraiser during the appraisal;

     3.     A statement that if the city decides to acquire the property, it shall notify the owner in writing as soon as possible after the decision is made. The city shall then give the owner a written offer to pay a fair and reasonable compensation (“just compensation”) for the property. If the owner is not satisfied with the city’s offer, he or she shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present relevant material to the city for consideration in determining the amount to be paid to the owner for the property;

     4.     A statement that the city will make reasonable efforts to reach agreement with the owner regarding the compensation to be paid for the property through negotiations., If an agreement cannot be reached, the city may either file an eminent domain action in court to acquire the property, or may abandon its decision to acquire the property. If an eminent domain action is filed, the owner shall have the right to contest the city’s acquisition of the property in court;

     5.     A statement to the owner that if the city’s acquisition of any part of the property would leave the owner with an uneconomic remnant of land as defined by Section 4.04.140 and state law, the city will offer to acquire the uneconomic remnant, if the owner so desires;

     6.     A statement that construction or development of the municipal project on the property shall be scheduled so that no person lawfully occupying the property shall be required to move his or her home, business, or farm operation without at least ninety days advance written notice from the city of the date on which the move is required;

     7.     A statement that if arrangements are made to rent the property to the owner or a tenant after the city has acquired the property for a short term or for a period subject to termination by the city on short notice, the rent will not exceed the lesser of the fair rental value of the property to the short-term occupant or the pro rata portion of the fair rental value for a typical rental period. If the owner or a tenant is the lawful occupant of a dwelling on the property, the rental for the dwelling shall be within his or her financial means;

     8.     A statement that the city will comply with applicable legal requirements regarding relocation assistance and that additional information on relocation assistance shall be available at the city offices;

     9.     If the owner is also the owner of a business conducted on the property or the remainder of the property, a statement that the owner may have a right to compensation for loss of goodwill if the city acquires the property. A copy of the pertinent provisions of the state Eminent Domain Law (Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1230.010 et seq.) shall be enclosed with the notice;

     10.   The name, title, and phone number of a contact person at the city to whom the owner may address questions;

     11.   Any other information required by state or federal law.

     D.    Property Owner’s Consent to City’s Entry on Property for Appraisal/Indemnity Agreement. The city shall attempt to obtain written consent from the property owner to enter the property to conduct the appraisal, and shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the property owner from and against any damage or injury to persons or property, including death, arising out of or resulting from, and to the extent caused by, the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the city and/or its agents in the performance of the appraisal and related activities on the property.

     E.     Manner of Conducting Appraisal. The city shall make reasonable efforts to conduct the appraisal in a manner which avoids or minimizes any interference with the use of the property by the owner or other persons who have a lawful interest in the property, or any damage to the property. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.070 Performance of tests, assessments, and related activities on the property by the city.
     A.    Right of City to Enter Property Being Considered for Acquisition for Tests, Assessment, and Related Activities. The city may also enter property that is being considered for acquisition to take photographs, or conduct studies, surveys, examinations, tests, soundings, borings, or similar activities reasonably related to the acquisition of the property, environmental assessment, or the potential use of the property for a municipal project.

     B.     Advance Notice to Property Owner. The city shall give notice to the owner of the need to enter the property and the nature of activity to be conducted to the property owner at least ten working days before the entry on to the property. The owner or his or her representative designated in writing may be present during the performance of these activities.

     C.     Consent of Property Owner and/or Authorization of City to Enter Property. The city shall attempt to obtain the written consent of the owner before entering on the property to perform these activities. If the owner declines to give consent, the city shall, when required by state law, obtain court authorization before entering the property for these purposes.

     D.    Manner of Conducting Tests and Related Activities/Indemnity Agreement. The city shall make reasonable efforts to conduct these activities in a manner which avoids or minimizes any interference with the use of the property by the owner or other persons who have a lawful interest in the property, and any damage to the property or injury to persons. The city shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the owner from and against any damage or injury to persons or property, including death, arising out of, or resulting from, and to the extent caused by, the sole negligence or wilful misconduct of the city and/or its agents in the performance of these activities on the property. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.080 Environmental analysis and assessment of property by city.
     A.    Compliance with California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The city shall take any necessary action to conduct an analysis of the environmental effects of its acquisition of the property as may be required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

     B.     Assessment of Property for Existence of Environmental Contamination. Before making a decision to acquire the property, the city may conduct a preliminary assessment of the property to determine whether environmental contamination exists, and the nature and extent of any contamination. If contamination is found to exist and the city is still considering acquisition of the property, a further assessment of the contamination may be performed. The city shall obtain permission from the owner or, if necessary, a court order, to enter the property for this purpose pursuant to Section 4.04.070. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.090 Notice of city’s decision not to acquire property.
     If, at any time after sending a notice of intent to appraise to the property owner, or an offer to pay just compensation for the privately owned property, the city decides not to acquire the property, the city shall serve a written notice of the decision not to acquire to the owner, all persons occupying the property, and other persons potentially eligible for relocation assistance within ten days after the decision. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.100 City’s determination of amount of just compensation for property.
     A.    City’s Determination of Amount of Just Compensation. If after the appraisal and other examination and consideration of the property, the city determines that it wishes to acquire the property for a municipal project by eminent domain, the city shall establish an amount that it believes to be just compensation for the property. The amount determined to be just compensation shall be no less than the fair market value of the property as improved.

     The determination of the amount established as just compensation shall be based on consideration of:

     1.     The property being acquired;

     2.     The appraisal conducted by the city;

     3.     If the property to be acquired is part of a larger parcel, the injury, if any, to the remainder of the property;

     4.     Loss of goodwill, if the owner of the real property also owns a business conducted upon the property to be acquired, or the remainder of the property, and compensation for loss of goodwill is required by the state Eminent Domain Law (Civil Procedure Section 1263.010 et seq.). Goodwill consists of the benefits that accrue to a business as a result of its location, reputation for dependability, skill or quality, and any other circumstances resulting in probable retention of old or acquisition of new patronage;

     5.     Other factors as authorized by state or federal law.

     B.     Approval of Amount of Just Compensation by City Council. The city’s appraisal of the property and amount established as just compensation shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.110 City’s written offer to pause property from owner.
     A.    City’s Written Offer to Purchase Property for Just Compensation., The city shall serve on the property owner a written offer to purchase the property for the amount determined to be just compensation, unless the circumstances set forth in subsections B and D of this section apply, and a statement of the basis for determination of just compensation. The statement must include the following:

     1.     A general statement of the municipal project for which the property is to be acquired;

     2.     A description of the location and extent of the property to be taken, with sufficient detail for reasonable identification, and the interest to be acquired;

     3.     An inventory identifying the buildings, structures, fixtures, and other improvements,

     4.     A recital of the amount of the offer and a statement that such amount:

     a.     Is the full amount believed by the city to be just compensation for the property,

     b.     Is not less than the approved appraisal of the fair market value of the property as improved,

     c.     Disregards any decrease or increase in the fair market value of the real property to be acquired prior to the date of valuation caused by the public improvement for which the property is to be acquired, other than due to physical deterioration within the reasonable control of the owner or occupant, and

     d.     Does not reflect any consideration of or allowance for any relocation assistance or other payments or benefits which the owner is entitled to received under an agreement with the city, except for an amount to compensate the owner for the loss of goodwill as provided in Section 4.04.100(A)(4),

     e.     If the property to be acquired is part of a larger parcel, the statement must include an apportionment of the total estimated just compensation for the partial acquisition, between the value of the property being taken and the amount of damage, if any, to the remainder of the larger parcel from which such property is taken,

     f.      If the owner of the real property to be acquired also owns a business conducted upon the property or the remainder, the statement must include an indication of compensation for loss of goodwill.

     B.     Circumstances in which City May Offer Less than Just Compensation to Owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may offer less than the amount determined to be just compensation for the property in the following circumstances:

     1.     Property Offered for Sale by Owner. The city may offer to purchase property for municipal projects at a price no less than the amount offered by the owner if the following requirements are met:

     a.     The owner has directly offered the property to the city for a specified price which is less than the amount determined to be just compensation before the commencement of negotiations by the city for acquisition of the property; or

     b.     The owner has offered the property for sale to the general public at an advertised or published price which is less than the amount determined to be just compensation no more than six months prior to, and the property is still available at this price at the time that the city initiates contact with the owner regarding the possible acquisition of the property; and

     c.     No federal funds are involved in the acquisition of the property or the construction or development of the municipal project for which the property would be acquired.

     2.     Acquisition by Eminent Domain Not Contemplated by City. The city may acquire property for less than the amount determined to be just compensation if the city is not contemplating the acquisition of the property by eminent domain.

     3.     The city may acquire property for less than the amount determined to be just compensation when otherwise authorized by law.

     C.     City’s Offer May be Conditional. The city’s written offer for the property may be conditioned upon the city council’s ratification of the offer by execution of an agreement for acquisition of the property or the adoption of a resolution of necessity, or both.

     D.    Exception to Requirement that City Make Written Offer to Owner. In unusual circumstances, in which the city council has made a finding that the f project for which the property to be acquired is needed is an emergency project, which is necessary to preserve or protect the public health, safety, or welfare, the city may adopt a resolution of intention pursuant to Section 4.04.150 without first making a written offer to purchase the property from the owner(s). However, in such cases, the written offer must be made by the city to the owner within a reasonable time but in any event, no later than ninety days after the adoption of a resolution of necessity. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.120 Additional information to be provided to property owner.
     A.    Review of City’s Appraisal by Owner by City. If the property sought to be acquired by the city is owner-occupied residential property and contains no more than four residential units, the owner shall be entitled to review the city’s appraisal upon request.

     B.     Additional Information to be Provided to Owner by City Upon Request. If after receiving the city’s written offer to purchase the property, the owner requests additional information regarding the determination of just compensation, the city shall provide the following information, if it was considered in the city’s determination of just compensation:

     1.     The date of valuation used;

     2.     The highest and best use of the property,

     3.     The applicable zoning;

     4.     Identification of some of the sales, contracts to sell and purchase, and leases supporting the city’s determination of value, including the names and business or residence addresses of the parties to the transaction, the location of the property subject to the transaction, the price and other significant terms of the transaction, if known. The city may make documents related to such transactions available for inspection by the owner at a designated place.

     C.     City’s Duty to Provide Additional Information Inapplicable After Initiation of Eminent Domain Action. The requirements of subsection B of this section shall not apply after an eminent domain action has been filed in court. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.130 Pre-condemnation negotiations between city and property owner.
     A.    City’s Duty to Acquire Property through Agreement with Owner, if Possible. The city shall make every reasonable effort to acquire the property through negotiation and agreement with the owner, rather than through an eminent domain action in court.

     B.     Manner of Conducting Negotiations with Owner. The city shall give the owner a reasonable time to consider the city’s written offer to purchase the property and any additional information provided by the city and shall make reasonable efforts to discuss the offer with the owner. The owner shall be given an opportunity to present material which he or she believes relevant to the issue of the value of the property and to suggest modifications in the terms and conditions of the city’s purchase of the property. The city shall carefully consider any information presented by the owner.

     C.     Adjustments in City’s Appraisal Based on New Information or Delay. If information presented by the owner or a material change in the condition of the property indicates a need for a new appraisal, or if a significant delay has occurred since the determination of just compensation, the city shall update its appraisal to reflect these circumstances. If a change in the city’s determination of just compensation is warranted, the city shall make appropriate adjustments and forward a new written offer which meets the requirements of Section 4.04.110 to the owner for consideration.

     D.    City’s Payment of Expenses Incidental to Purchase of Property Acquired Through Successful Negotiations with Owner. If the city successfully acquires the property by purchase after negotiations with the owner, the city shall pay reasonable expenses incidental to the sale of land to the city. Such reasonable expenses shall include, but are not limited to: recording fees, transfer fees and similar expenses incidental to the conveyance of real property, and the pro rata portion of charges for public services such as water, sewage and trash collection which are attributable to a period subsequent to the date of transfer of title to the city or the effective date of possession by the city, whichever is earlier. The city shall inform the property owner(s) that he or she may apply for a rebate of the pro rata portion of any real property taxes paid. (Ord.. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.140 Acquisition of uneconomic remnant of property by city.
     A.    Definition of Uneconomic Remnant. For the purposes of this chapter, “uneconomic remnant” means a parcel of real property in which the property owner retains a legal interest after the city has acquired another part of the property and which has little value or utility to the owner(s), or any other applicable definition under state law.

     B.     City’s Duty to Offer to Acquire Uneconomic Remnant. Whenever the city is acquiring part of a parcel of real property, and the remainder, or a portion of the remainder, is left in such size, shape, or condition as to constitute an uneconomic remnant, the city shall offer to acquire the uneconomic remnant if the owner(s) so desires. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.150 City’s adoption of resolution of necessity before initiating eminent domain proceedings to acquire property.
     A.    Requirement for Resolution of Necessity. If after a reasonable time, the city is unable to successfully negotiate the purchase of the property with the owner and wishes to acquire the property by eminent domain, the city council shall adopt a resolution of necessity by a two-thirds vote pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1245.230 before initiating eminent domain proceedings in court, and after giving notice and conducting a hearing as required by Sections 4.04.160 and 4.04.170.

     B.     Contents of Resolution of Necessity. In addition to any other information required by law, the resolution of necessity shall contain all of the following:

     1.     A general statement of the public use for which the property is taken by the city and a reference to the statute that authorizes the city to acquire the property by eminent domain;

     2.     A description of the general location and extent of the property to be taken, with sufficient detail for reasonable identification;

     3.     A declaration that the city council has found and determined each of the following:

     a.     The public interest and necessity require the proposed project for which the property is to be acquired by the city,

     b.     The proposed project is planned or located in the manner that will be most compatible with the greatest public good and the least private injury,

     c.     The property described in the resolution of necessity is necessary for the proposed municipal project,

     d.     That the city has either made the written offer to purchase the property to the property owner(s), or that the offer has not been made because the owner(s) cannot be located with reasonable diligence, or because the project for which the property is to be acquired is an emergency project necessary to protect or preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. However, in cases involving the adoption of a resolution of necessity for an emergency project for which the city has not given the owner a written offer to purchase, the city shall give the owner a written offer to purchase the property pursuant to Section 4.04.110(D) within a reasonable time and in no event later than ninety days after the adoption of the resolution of necessity. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.160 Notice of hearing on proposed adoption of resolution of necessity.
     A.    Persons Entitled to Notice of Hearing. Before adopting a resolution of necessity, the city shall give each person whose property is sought to be acquired by the city and whose name and address appears on the last equalized county assessment roll notice a reasonable opportunity to appear and be heard at a hearing on the adoption of the proposed resolution of necessity.

     B.     Contents of Notice. The city shall send a written notice by first-class mail to each person described in subsection A of this section at least

sixteen days before the hearing on the adoption of the resolution of necessity, which states all of the following:

     1.     The intent of the city council to adopt the resolution of necessity and a description of the property that would then be subject to acquisition by the city by eminent domain;

     2.     The right of each person who receives a notice to appear and speak or offer written comments at the hearing on the adoption of the resolution of necessity, upon the timely filing of a written request to appear and be heard with the city clerk, and the date, time, and place of the hearing;

     3.     If the recipient of the notice fails to file with the city cleric a written request to appear and be heard at the hearing on the adoption of the resolution of necessity within fifteen days after the mailing of the notice by the city, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to appear and be heard at the hearing on the resolution of necessity.

     C.     Additional Notice of Hearing. The city may give additional notice of the hearing on the proposed adoption of the resolution of necessity to affected persons and the public. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.170 Hearing on resolution of necessity.
     A.    At the hearing, the city council shall grant an opportunity to be heard to all persons who filed a timely written request to appear and be heard on the adoption of the resolution of necessity pursuant to Section 4.04.160 and the following issues:

     1.     Whether the municipal project for which the property is sought to be acquired by the city is required to serve the public interest and necessity;

     2.     Whether the municipal project is planned or located in a manner that will be most compatible with the greatest public good and the least private injury;

     3.     Whether the municipal project sought to be acquired by the city is necessary for the project;

     4.     Issues related to the city’s provision of relocation assistance.

     B.     Adoption of Resolution of Necessity by Two-Thirds Vote of City Council. If, at the conclusion of the hearing and consideration of testimony given, the council makes the findings required by Section 4.04.140 above, the resolution of necessity may be adopted by a two-thirds vote of the city council. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.180 Initiation of eminent domain action by city.
     After the adoption of the resolution of necessity, the city may file an eminent domain action in court to acquire the property pursuant to the Eminent Domain Law (California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1230.010 et seq.). (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.190 Relocation assistance.
     A.    Compliance with State and Federal Law. The city shall comply with the requirements of state law and regulations regarding the provision of relocation assistance to eligible persons displaced from lawful residential, farm, or business uses on the property to be acquired. In cases in which the municipal project for which the property is being acquired will be partially or totally funded with federal funds, the city shall comply with the requirements of federal law regarding relocation assistance, as well as state law requirements.

     B.     Notice/Advisory Assistance to Eligible Persons. The city shall inform persons who may be eligible for relocation benefits in writing of the availability of relocation benefits and the procedure for obtaining them within fifteen days after the date that the written offer to acquire is given to the property owner(s). (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.200 Displacement of person(s) from property acquired by city/short-term rental of property acquired by city to former owner/occupant.
     A.    Required Notice for Displacement of Occupants After City Has Obtained Possession of the Property. After the city has obtained possession of the property acquired for the project, the construction or development of the project shall be scheduled that, to the greatest extent practicable, no person lawfully occupying the property shall be required to move from a dwelling, or to move his or her business or farm operation, without at least ninety days’ notice from the city of the date by which such move is required.

     B.     Permissible Rent Level to be Charged Short-Term Tenants by City. If the city permits a former owner or tenant to occupy the property it has acquired on a rental basis for a short term, or for a period subject to termination by the city on short notice, the amount of rent required shall not exceed the fair market value rental value of the property to the owner or tenant, or the pro rata portion of the fair market value for a typical rental period. If the former owner or tenant is occupying a dwelling, the rent shall be within his or her financial means.

     C.     Required Notice for Termination of Short-Term Tenancy. The city shall give the former owner or other short-term, post acquisition tenants on the property it has acquired at least thirty days’ notice of the termination of the tenancy. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.210 Prohibited activities.
     A.    Coercive Actions Prohibited. The city shall not advance the time of condemnation, or defer negotiations or condemnation or the deposit of funds in court for the use of the property owner(s), or take any other coercive action to compel an agreement by the property owner(s) on the price to be paid for the property by the city.

     B.     City’s Duty to Initiate Eminent Domain Proceedings. If any interest in property is to be acquired by the city’s exercise of the power of eminent domain, the city shall institute formal condemnation proceedings in court if negotiations with the owner regarding the purchase of the property are unsuccessful. The city shall not intentionally make it necessary for the property owner(s) to initiate legal proceedings to prove the fact of the taking of his or her property. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.220 Applicability of federal and state law.
     If any other provisions of state or federal law would give the owner(s) or occupant(s) of property to be acquired by the city greater protection than this chapter, the city shall also comply with such other provisions of law. If any section of this chapter is found to conflict with applicable state or federal law, the applicable portions of state or federal law shall take precedence. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.230 Service of required notices and other documents by city.
     The city shall serve any notices or documents required to be served on the property owner or other persons pursuant to this chapter by first-class mail or in-person service. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

 

4.04.240 Annual review.
     The city shall review this chapter annually to ensure that its provisions are consistent with current state and federal law. (Ord. 97-12 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 4.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES
4.06.010 Purpose.
     A right-of-way line study may be established by the city council as provided herein for the purpose of reserving areas for future widening, extension, or creation of streets, highways, or space for future utilities, pedestrian ways, fire and police emergency access, access to property, and all public rights-of-way. (Ord. 2003-05 § 1, 2003)

 

4.06.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, words and phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Building” or “structure” shall be defined a set forth in Chapter 19.04 of this Code, and shall also include stairways, required off street parking facilities, any well, whether for water, oil, or other hydrocarbon products, and any underground storage facilities in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallon capacity. “Building” or “structure” shall not include any building or structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any public utility installed under authority of franchise, or any fence.

     B.     “Right-of-way” shall mean any land, or interest therein, which has been reserved for or dedicated to the city by deed, conveyance, agreement, dedication, usage, or other process of law, for the use of the general public for public road purposes.

     C.     “City Engineer” shall mean the city engineer of the city. (Ord. 2003-05 § 2, 2003)

 

4.06.030 Initiation.
     A right-of-way line may be initiated by:

     A.    The verified petition of one (1) or more owners of property affected by the proposed right-of-way lines, which petition shall be filed with the planning commission and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set forth by the city council by resolution. Every petition shall be accompanied by a description of the streets or portions of the streets along which such right-of-way lines are sought to be established, a map or sketch showing the streets and relation of the proposed right-of-way lines thereto, and such other plans and specifications necessary to show the proposed use of the area affected thereby; or

     B.     Resolution of the city council; or

     C.     Resolution of the planning commission. (Ord. 2003-05 § 3, 2003)

 

4.06.040 Planning commission report and recommendation.
     Before any action shall be taken by the city council as provided in Section 4.06.100 hereof, the proposal shall be referred to the planning commission and the city engineer for report and recommendation. (Ord. 2003-05 § 4, 2003)

 

4.06.050 Public hearing.
     The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on any proposed right-of-way line and shall give notice of the time and place of such public hearing by publishing notice thereof at least once and sending notices to affected property owners within three hundred feet of proposed right-of-way. Such publication shall be accomplished at least five days prior to the date fixed for said hearing. Upon review of the report and recommendation of the city engineer and completion of the hearing, the planning commission shall submit its report and recommendation to the city council. (Ord. 2003-05 § 5, 2003)

 

4.06.060 Resolution of intention.
     Upon receipt of a report and recommendation from the planning commission, but before determining and establishing any right-of-way lines, the city council shall pass a resolution of intention designating the right-of-way lines proposed to be established. The resolution shall contain a description of the property affected and a notice of the hour, day, and place when and where any and all persons objecting to the establishment of the proposed right-of-way lines may appear before the city council and object thereto. (Ord. 2003-05 § 6, 2003)

 

4.06.070 Publication and posting of resolution.
     Such resolution described in Section 4.06.060 shall be published or posted at those places where the council agendas are posted once at least ten days before the date of the hearing of objections to the proposal. Posting shall be accomplished at least ten days before the date of the hearing of objections to the proposal. (Ord. 2003-05 § 7, 2003)

 

4.06.080 Hearing—Time limit.
     The time for hearing objections to such proposal shall be not less than fourteen nor more than thirty-five days from the date of the adoption of the resolution of intention described in Section 4.06.060. (Ord. 2003-05 § 8, 2003)

 

4.06.090 Filing of protest.
     At any time not later than the close of business on the day set for hearing objections to the establishment of the proposed right-of-way line, any person having any interest in any land upon which said right-of-way lines are proposed to be established may file with the city clerk a written objection to the establishment of said right-of-way lines. (Ord. 2003-05 § 9, 2003)

 

4.06.100 Action by city council.
     At the time set for hearing, or at any time to which the hearing may be continued, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests or objections filed pursuant to Section 4.06.090, or to any objections verbally presented at the public hearing. The city council may sustain any objections and abandon such proceeding, deny any and all objections, and by ordinance establish said right-of-way lines described in the resolution, or it may deny any and all objections and by ordinance establish such right-of-way lines with such changes and modifications as it shall determine to be proper. The ordinance establishing right-of-way lines shall be recorded by the city clerk with the county recorder. (Ord. 2003-05 § 10, 2003)

 

4.06.110 Effect of right-of-way line.
     Whenever any ordinance establishing any right-of-way line or lines shall become effective, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity to construct or erect any building or structure within the right-of-way established by the newly established right-of-way line. (Ord. 2003-05 § 11, 2003)

 

4.06.120 Nonconforming structures.
     Existing buildings or structures nonconforming to the requirements of established right-of-way lines shall not be altered or enlarged in any manner. (Ord. 2003-05 § 12, 2003)

 

4.06.130 Variance procedure.
     A.    Variance may be granted from the provisions of this chapter where unnecessary or unusual hardship is shown and where such variance will not defeat the purposes of the right-of-way lines established by this chapter; provided that the applicant waives all claims for compensation and damages caused by the taking of any property affected by such a variance pursuant to the exercise of the right of eminent domain or any other right of this city or any other action.

     B.     The provisions governing the procedure for variances and appeals from the zoning ordinance of the city shall apply to the procedures for variances and appeals from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2003-05 § 13, 2003)

 

4.06.140 Yard requirements—Additional.
     Yard and other requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be separately applied as requirements additional to right-of-way line requirements required herein. All yards, setbacks, and such regulations of the zoning ordinance of the city shall be measured from the established right-of-way lines herein. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, however, that portion of any parcel that lies between established right-of-way lines shall be considered as part of the lot area when determining the number of dwelling units that may be placed on a parcel or the percentage of lot area that may be covered by buildings or structures. (Ord. 2003-05 § 14, 2003)

 

4.06.150 Previously established right-of-way lines.
     A.    Broadway Road. Broadway from American Canyon Road to American Canyon Creek, within the city of American Canyon, county of Napa, state of California, as described in Exhibit A “Proposed Broadway Right-of-way” and shown in Exhibit B, a map entitled “Broadway Realignment” prepared by Worldwide Civil Engineering and consisting of one sheet, and filed in the office of the director of public works, which plans are hereby adopted as a precise plan of said right-of-way lines. (Ord. 2003-06 § 1, 2003; Ord. 2003-05 § 15, 2003)

 

4.06.160 Effective Date.
     This ordinance shall take effect on the 31st day after adoption. (Ord. 2003-05 § 16, 2003)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.01 SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG REDUCTION
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.05 SPECIAL EVENTS
Chapter 5.06 ADULT-ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES, ADULT PERFORMERS AND FIGURE MODELS
Chapter 5.10 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS LICENSE
Chapter 5.12 CARDROOMS
Chapter 5.16 VEHICLES FOR HIRE/TAXI SERVICES
Chapter 5.20 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
Chapter 5.21 STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.60 CAREGIVER PERMIT ORDINANCE

Chapter 5.01 SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG REDUCTION
5.01.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the city’s “Single-Use Plastic Carryout Bag Reduction” ordinance, and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this chapter.” (Ord. 2015-08 § 3, 2015)

 

5.01.020 Purpose and intent.
     The purposes of this chapter are to:

     A.    Enact a bag reuse program that reduces waste and pollution, and that decreases the use of single-use plastic carryout bags in the city of American Canyon.

     B.     Protect the environment from the negative impacts of single-use carryout bags by reducing the use of single-use plastic carryout bags, with a provision that would require retail stores within the city of American Canyon to charge customers who request recycled paper bags.

     C.     Provide an incentive for customers to use reusable bags or bring their own bags by exempting application of the bag charge from those customers who use reusable bags or bring their own bags. (Ord. 2015-08 § 3, 2015)

 

5.01.030 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Customer” means any person obtaining merchandise from a retail establishment.

     B.     “Director” means the community development director of the city of American Canyon, or a designee of the community development director or city manager.

     C.     “Merchandise” means any consumer goods as that term is defined by California Civil Code Section 1791(a), except that “merchandise” shall also include clothing and consumables, as those terms are defined by California Civil Code Section 1791(c) and (d), respectively. “Merchandise” does not include prepared food. “Merchandise” includes, but is not limited to, liquor and beer, clothing, electronics and groceries that are not prepared food.

     D.    “Person” means any human person, as well as any other form of legal entity (including a corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship).

     E.     “Post-consumer recycled material” means a material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product life cycle. Post-consumer recycled material does not include materials and byproducts generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process.

     F.     “Public eating establishment” means a restaurant, take-out food establishment, or any other business that receives ninety percent or more of its revenue from the sale of prepared food to be eaten on or off its premises. “Prepared food” means food or beverages which are prepared on the premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing, or squeezing, and which require no further preparation to be consumed. Prepared food does not include any raw or uncooked meat product, or fruits and vegetables that are intended to be prepared for consumption off-site.

     G.    “Recycled paper bag” means a paper bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer in accordance with this chapter, at the check stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting merchandise out of the establishment that contains no old growth fiber and a minimum of forty percent post-consumer recycled material; is one hundred percent recyclable; and has printed in a manner on the outside of the bag the word “Recyclable,” the name and location of the manufacturer, and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content.

     H.    “Retail establishment” means any commercial establishment that sells merchandise at retail directly to the customer; and is located within or doing business within the geographical limits of the city of American Canyon. Retail establishment does not include public eating establishments.

     I.      “Reusable bag” means a bag made of cloth or other machine washable fabric that has handles, and is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse.

     J.      “Reusable plastic bag” means a bag made of durable plastic with handles that is at least 2.25 millimeters thick and is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse.

     K.    “Single-use plastic carryout bag” means a bag, provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure, for the purpose of transporting merchandise out of the establishment; provided that “single-use plastic carryout bag” specifically excludes any reusable bag or recycled paper bag and excludes any bag provided to the customer to: (1) transport produce, bulk food or meat from a produce, bulk food or meat department within a store to the point of sale; (2) hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy; (3) segregate merchandise that could damage or contaminate other merchandise when placed together in a reusable bag or recycled paper bag; or (4) contain or wrap meat, fish, or frozen foods, whether prepackaged or not. (Ord. 2015-08 § 3, 2015)

 

5.01.040 Single-use plastic carryout bags.
     A.    On and after January 1, 2016, no retail establishment shall provide a single-use plastic carryout bag to a customer.

     B.     On and after January 1, 2016, no retail establishment shall provide a recycled paper bag or a reusable plastic bag to a customer for the purpose of transporting merchandise out of the establishment unless: (1) the retail establishment charges the customer an amount of not less than ten cents per bag; and (2) the amount of the charge for each recycled paper bag or reusable plastic bag is separately itemized on the sales receipt provided by the retail establishment to the customer. Retail establishments that provide a durable bag made of cloth or other machine washable fabric may do so at no charge to their customers at the retail establishment’s discretion.

     C.     Retailers shall retain the proceeds from the collection of the charge required by subsection B for the point of sale purchase of a recycled paper bag or reusable plastic bag. This chapter does not restrict how retailers use these monies.

     D.    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit customers from using bags of any type that they bring to a retail establishment themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag. (Ord. 2015-08 § 3, 2015)

 

5.01.050 Exemptions.
     A retail establishment may provide a reusable bag or a recycled paper bag at no cost at the point of sale for the following purposes:

     A.    To a customer who is participating in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code, or a customer who is participating in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

     B.     To transport produce, bulk food or meat from a produce, bulk food or meat department within a store to the point of sale.

     C.     To hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy.

     D.    To segregate merchandise that could damage or contaminate other merchandise when placed together in a reusable bag or recycled paper bag.

     E.     To contain or wrap meat, fish, or frozen foods, whether prepackaged or not.

     F.     To contain food from a public eating establishment. (Ord. 2015-08 § 3, 2015)

 

5.01.060 Enforcement.
     The director shall have primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The director is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and regulations with respect to the enforcement of this chapter. All such rules and regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

     It is a violation of this code, subject to enforcement pursuant to Chapter 1.16 of this code and punishment and prosecution pursuant to Chapter 1.20 of this code, for any retail establishment to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-08 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
5.04.010 Enforcement.
     A.    The city manager shall have the responsibility and power to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the police chief shall render such assistance in the enforcement thereof as may from time to time be required.

     B.     The city manager or designee, who may act through deputies or duly authorized assistants, may examine or cause to be examined, all places of business in the city to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     The city manager or designee, who may act through deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, at any reasonable time, any place of business required by the provisions of this chapter to be licensed and require an exhibition of the license certificate. Any person having such license certificate issued in his or her possession or under his or her control who willfully fails to exhibit such certificate on demand shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to the penalties provided for by Section 1.24.040. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.010)

 

5.04.020 Business license required.
     A.    Subject to the provisions of this chapter, all businesses engaged in or carried on in the city shall pay annual business license fees in the amounts as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to commence, transact, engage in, or carry on any business in the city without first having obtained a valid license and paid the applicable license fee, or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Compliance with such requirements shall not be construed to be a condition precedent to engaging in any business or corporation within the city where the imposition of such a condition precedent would be contrary to law.

     C.     When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, internet or newspapers, advertise, hold out, or represent that he or she is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he or she is in business in the city, and such person fails to provide, after request by the collector, a sworn statement that he or she is not conducting a business in the city, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he or she is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 94-01 § 8, 1994; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.020)

 

5.04.030 License subject to other regulations and fees.
     A.    Persons required to pay a license fee for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any fees for the privilege of carrying on any similar or related activity required under any other ordinance of the city and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances.

     B.     No person shall be entitled to a business license and the collector shall not issue a business license to any person commencing business unless and until said person shall have complied with all applicable city ordinances. No license shall be issued covering any food or drink dispensing establishment, restaurant, pet hospital, pet shop, veterinarian, or kennel services until the applicant has obtained clearance from the county department of health. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.030)

 

5.04.040 False statements.
     It is unlawful for any person knowingly to make any false statement in any application for a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.040)

 

5.04.050 True names on reports.
     Every person making out any report or record required by the terms of this chapter or any copy shall sign his or her true name and give the true name and correct address of the licensee. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.050)

 

5.04.060 Illegal occupations.
     A license granted pursuant to this chapter does not permit any occupation or activity of any kind which is prohibited by this code or any other ordinance, or by any state statute, law, rule, order or regulation. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.060)

 

5.04.070 Refusing license.
     Before the city manager denies any license, either new or for renewal, unless a hearing already has been held, the applicant shall be notified in writing that the city manager intends to deny the license, and that the applicant may request a hearing before the city manager within five days after receipt of such notice. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.070)

 

5.04.080 Grounds for denial.
     A.    The city manager may refuse to issue a license to carry on any business, occupation or activity, if such business, occupation or activity has been, will be, or is apt to become any one or more of the following:

     1.     Prohibited by any local ordinance or by any state law, statute, rule or regulation and/or prohibited by federal law, statute, rule or regulation;

     2.     A public nuisance;

     3.     In any way detrimental to the public interest;

     4.     Prohibited by zoning laws and ordinances.

     B.     A license may also be denied on the grounds that the applicant has knowingly made a false statement in a material matter either in the application or in the testimony before the city manager or other body hearing such testimony. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 2009-08 § 2, 2009; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.080)

 

5.04.090 Real party in interest.
     The council, city manager, police department official, or other appropriate officer of body may examine under oath any applicant to determine who is the real party in interest in the business, occupation or exhibition for which a license is sought. If the council or other body or official finds that the application is in the interest of one whose license has been revoked or who has been refused a license, it may treat the application as though made by the real party in interest, and the application shall have the same effect against any future applications as if it had been made in the name of the real party in interest. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.090)

 

5.04.100 Grounds for revocation.
     A license may be revoked on any one or more of the following grounds:

     A.    Any facts exist upon which a denial of such license would be authorized;

     B.     The licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee has been convicted of violating any of the terms of this chapter, or any regulation, or of any law, statute, rule, order or regulation of the state, now or hereafter in force regulating the occupation or other activity for which the license was issued;

     C.     The licensee obtained the license by fraudulent misrepresentations;

     D.    If the license authorizes engaging in the business of repairing any property, such as radios, television, or vehicles, the licensee, or any agent or employee of the licensee has stolen, or been convicted of the theft of, such property or any part thereof;

     E.     The licensee has been guilty of, or has been convicted of, fraud, false advertising or other misrepresentation, including misstatement of the work done, such as: (1) the installation of old, or second-hand parts and the charging for new parts; or (2) charging for parts not installed or any other misdealing, dishonesty, or willful failure to comply with the terms of any contract made as a part of the exercise of the occupation or activity licensed;

     F.     The mutilation of any serial number, engine number, or other number or identifying mark on any property of other person, handled by the licensee in the course of the licensed business;

     G.    Conspiracy with any person to do anything described in subsections B, C, D, E or F of this section;

     H.    The failure or refusal of the licensee to notify the city manager of any material change in facts concerning the license within thirty days after such change. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.100)

 

5.04.110 Forfeiture of fee.
     On revocation of the license, no part of the money in the hands of the city shall be returned, but the license fee shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.110)

 

5.04.120 New license.
     When a license of any person is revoked for cause, no new or other license for the same or a similar business shall be granted to the same person within six months after such revocation. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.120)

 

5.04.130 Keeping insurance etc., in force.
     A.    Whenever this code requires the applicant for any license or permit to procure, post, or maintain in effect any bond, undertaking, deposit, surety, or policy of insurance, any license or permit so issued shall be in good standing only when such bond, undertaking, deposit, surety, or policy of insurance is in full force and effect. Such license or permit shall be automatically suspended without notice at any time such bond, undertaking, deposit, surety, or policy of insurance is not in full force and effect.

     B.     If a new bond, undertaking, deposit, surety, or policy of insurance acceptable to the city manager is filed before the cancellation or expiration of the old one becomes effective, the license or permit will continue in full force. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.130)

 

5.04.140 Administrative enforcement.
     A.    Authority of the City Manager. The city manager, upon a hearing after giving the licensee five days’ notice of the grounds for revocation or suspension, and the time and place of the hearing, and requiring him or her to show cause why the license should not be revoked, may revoke or suspend any one or more of the licenses held by such licensee. The city manager shall notify the licensee of his or her decision within three business days.

     B.     Appeals to the Council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal the decision to the council in the manner provided in Section 5.04.320.

     C.     Failure to Appeal. In the event no appeal is taken by the licensee, the decision of the city manager revoking or suspending such license shall become final and conclusive on the expiration of the time fixed for an appeal. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.140)

 

5.04.150 Compliance with laws required.
     The payment of a license fee as required by the provisions of this chapter, and its acceptance by the city, and the issuance of such license to any person shall not entitle the holder to carry on any business unless he or she has complied with all the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such license in the event such building or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.150)

 

5.04.160 License and penalties constitute debt to city.
     The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent license fee and penalties. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.160)

 

5.04.170 Remedies cumulative.
     All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.170)

 

5.04.180 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used in this chapter are defined as follows:

     “Business” means professions, trades, occupations, gainful activities, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

     “Collector” means the city manager, or other city officer or employee charged with the administration of this chapter.

     “Gross receipts” means the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or service of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares, or merchandise. “Gross receipts,” as used in this chapter, shall mean the gross receipt of the year preceding the beginning of the annual license period. Included in gross receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits, and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service, costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from gross receipts shall be the following:

     1.     Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

     2.     Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;

     3.     Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

     4.     Such part of the sale price returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

     5.     Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee, to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected and provided the agent or trustee has furnished the collector with the names and addresses of the others and the amounts paid to them;

     6.     That portion of gross receipts which has been the measure of a license tax or fee paid to any other city for sales transacted outside the city.

     “Peddler” means any person who travels by foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door, house to house, place to place, or street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting food, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any nature whatsoever, offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale. The word “peddler” means and includes the words “hawker,” “huckster,” “roadside vendor,” and “itinerant vendor.” The word “peddler” shall also mean a person offering goods, wares or merchandise for sale or future delivery from a fixed place of business if the goods, wares or merchandise are sold during a temporary or limited period of time, or seasonally.

     “Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicated, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business, or common-law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee.

     “Solicitor” means any person who travels either by foot or by any type of conveyance from door to door, house to house, place to place or street to street, taking or attempting to take subscriptions, contracts of sale, or orders for the sale of foods, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any nature whatever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished in the future, whether or not such person has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether or not he or she collects advance payments on such sales. The word “solicitor” shall include any person who uses or occupies any building, structure, room, shop conveyance or other place other than a permanent store building within the county of Napa for the purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for merchandise or service for future delivery. The word “solicitor” shall include itinerant merchants, and persons soliciting funds or otherwise peddling or soliciting for religious, political or charitable purposes.

     “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.180)

 

5.04.190 Separate license for each place or type of business.
     A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business licensed at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and provided further, that any person conducting two or more types of businesses at the same location and under the same management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books and records may, at his or her option, pay only one fee calculated on all gross receipts of the businesses under the schedule that applies to the type of business of such person which requires the highest payment on such gross receipts except that a license fee of three dollars for each additional branch, location, or type of business shall be paid. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.190)

 

5.04.200 Information confidential.
     The collector or any authorized representatives shall not make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license or pay a license fee under the provisions of this chapter or to divulge the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular information set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any other related document which contains specific information as to the amount or source of income or expenditures of any person obtaining a license to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to present the disclosure to or examination of records by another city agent for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter or auditing of accounts of the collector, federal or state officials, or a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena or in a proceeding to determine the existence or amount of any license fee liability of the particular licensee to the city; nor shall the disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued and the general type of their business be prohibited hereunder, together with general statistics regarding business fees collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.200)

 

5.04.210 Exemption—Generally.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable Statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this chapter shall file a sworn statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed and shall furnish such information and verification as may be required.

     B.     In the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.210)

 

5.04.220 Exemption—Charitable and nonprofit organizations.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation, or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license fee be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly, by any individual; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with any of the provisions of this code requiring a permit from the city council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage, or carry on any profession, trade, calling or occupation. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.220)

 

5.04.230 Exemption—Disabled veterans.
     No license fee payable hereunder shall be payable by any person who has received an honorable discharge or release from active duty in one of the United States armed services, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this state. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.230)

 

5.04.240 Exemption—Newspapers, magazines and periodicals.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the publication or sale of newspapers, magazines or other periodicals regularly issued at average intervals not exceeding three months. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.240)

 

5.04.250 Exemption—Businesses subject to franchise, etc.
     No business license shall be required of any public utility or other service organization which pays to the city a fee or tax under a franchise or similar agreement. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.250)

 

5.04.260 Exemption—Limited income.
     No business license shall be required of a person doing business and drawing social security benefits whose gross receipts do not exceed the maximum income allowed by Title 42, U.S. Code, Section 403(f)(3), as presently written or as amended. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.360)

 

5.04.265 Exemption—Business fee amnesty program.
     A.    At the discretion of the city council, a business license fee amnesty program may be conducted to encourage unlicensed businesses to come forward and pay for a current business license.

     B.     The business license fee amnesty program shall waive the penalties for a business not having a current business license and for all fees, interest and penalties due for not having a business license during any prior year.

     C.     The provisions of the amnesty program shall apply to any person, as defined in Section 5.04.180 of the municipal code, meeting the license fee liability requirement as defined in Section 5.04.020 who files an application for a business license and pays the applicable fee as defined in Sections 5.04.390 through 5.04.430. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012)

 

5.04.270 Fee adjustments required in cases of interstate commerce.
     A.    None of the license fees provided for in this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitution of the United States and the state.

     B.     In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he or she may apply to the collector for an adjustment of the fee. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his or her method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation.

     C.     The collector shall then conduct an investigation, and after having first obtained the written approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory; or if the license fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license fee upon any measure which will assure that the license fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license fee as prescribed by this chapter.

     D.    The collector may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant’s business in the city or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross incomes from local sources upon which a license fee adjustment may be based; provided, that no additional license fee during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license fee as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.270)

 

5.04.280 Application—Contents of license.
     Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the collector, and upon the payment of the prescribed license fee the collector shall, if appropriate, issue to such person a license which shall contain: (1) the name of the person to whom the license is issued; (2) the business licensed; (3) the place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; (4) the date of the expiration of such license; and (5) such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.280)

 

5.04.290 Statement of gross receipts.
     A.    In all cases where the amount of the license fee to be paid is measured by gross receipts, the applicant for license shall furnish to the collector a sworn statement setting forth such information as is required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant. Upon making application for the first license to be issued, or for a newly established business, a person shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license fee to be paid by the applicant.

     B.     The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector a sworn statement setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to ascertain the amount of the license fee to be paid by the applicant. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.290)

 

5.04.300 Statements not conclusive.
     A.    No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the collector, his or her deputies, or authorized employees or the city, who are authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due. An inspection of books and records shall be made only when the city manager has determined that there is substantial necessity to do so in order to properly administer this chapter.

     B.     All licensees, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the city are required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes aforesaid. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.300)

 

5.04.310 Failure to file or correct statement.
     A.    If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after required by the collector he or she fails to file a corrected statement, the collector may determine the amount of license fee due from such person by means of such information as he or she may be able to obtain.

     B.     If such a determination is made the collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last known address. Such person may, within fifteen days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license fee. If such application is made, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the city council. The city clerk shall give at least ten days’ notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such finding shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.310)

 

5.04.320 Appeals.
     Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector or of any other city officer made pursuant to this chapter may appeal to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Sections 2.04.070 through 2.04.100 of this code. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.320)

 

5.04.330 Additional power of collector.
     In addition to all other power conferred upon him or her, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement for a period not exceeding thirty days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further power, with the consent of the council, to compromise any claims as to amount of license fee due. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.330)

 

5.04.340 No license transferable—Amended license for changed location.
     No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, the licensee may apply to amend the license to authorize some other business location upon submittal of a complete application and paying a fee of ten dollars. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.340)

 

5.04.350 Duplicate license.
     A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any valid license which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact and, at the time of filing such statement, paying a duplicate license fee of five dollars. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.350)

 

5.04.360 Posting and keeping licenses.
     All licenses shall be kept and posted in the following manner:

     A.    Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon within the business premises.

     B.     Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business in the city.

     C.     Any licensee using a motor vehicle in connection with his or her business shall affix on the vehicle in a location prescribed by the city manager, a decal or tag, to be furnished by the city, showing that a current license has been issued. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.360)

 

5.04.370 Method and time of payment.
     Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license fees shall be due and payable in advance in full on the first business day of January of each year. Quarterly payments shall be made on the first day of the first, fourth, seventh and tenth months of the license term. Quarterly payments may be made only during the twelve-month period following the issuance of the initial license, unless otherwise specifically allowed by other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.370)

 

5.04.380 Penalties for failure to pay fee when due.
     For failure to pay a license fee when due, the collector shall add a penalty of ten percent of such license fee on the first day of each succeeding month after the due date; provided, however, the amount of such penalty to be added shall in no event exceed fifty percent of the amount of the license fee due. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.380)

 

5.04.390 License fees—Persons with fixed place of business.
     Every person who engages in business at a fixed place of business within the city shall pay a license fee based upon gross receipts at the following rates and in the following classifications:

 

 

Gross Receipts Range

Class A

Class B

Class C

0 — 10,000

$ 0.00

$ 0.00

$ 0.00

10,001 — 25,000

20.00

24.00

28.00

25,001 — 50,000

25.00

30.00

36.00

50,001 — 100,000

30.00

36.00

43.00

100,001 — 250,000

46.00

55.00

66.00

250,001 — 500,000

76.00

90.00

108.00

500,001 — 750,000

114.00

135.00

162.00

750,001 — 1,000,000

150.00

 180.00

 216.00

1,000,001 — 2,000,000

400.00

 500.00

 600.00

 2,000,001 — 3,000,000

 500.00

 625.00

 750.00

 3,000,001 — 4,000,000

 600.00

 750.00

 900.00

 4,000,001 — 5,000,000

 700.00

 875.00

 1,050.00

 5,000,001 — 10,000,000

1,000.00

1,250.00

1,500.00

10,000,001 and up

1,500.00

1,875.00

2,250.00

 

Classifications

 

Class A

     Automobile repair and services

     Laundry, dry cleaning and garment services

     Manufacturing

     Retail trade

     Wholesale trade

 

Class B

     Amusement and recreation services, including motion pictures

     Architectural services

     Automotive sales

     Barbers and hair stylists

     Beauty shops

     Engineering services

     Landscape and horticultural services

     Operators, renters and lessors of commercial property

     Services to buildings

     All other persons engaged in business not specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter

 

Class C

     Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services

     Financial services

     Insurance brokers and services

     Legal services

     Management and public relations services

     Medical and health services

     Real estate agents, brokers, managers and services.

(Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 93-06 § 1, 1993; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.390)

 

5.04.400 License fees—Persons without fixed place of business in the city.
     A.    Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city and not being otherwise licensed or classified in this chapter, who delivers any service by the use of vehicles in the city, except general and special construction contractors, shall pay a license fee as follows:

 

Capacity

Rate per Vehicle

Not exceeding one-half ton

$15.00

One-half to 2 tons

25.00

Over 2 tons to 3 tons

50.00

Over 3 tons

75.00

 

     B.     Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city and is not subject to the provisions of this section shall pay a license fee at the same rate prescribed in this chapter for persons engaged in the same type of business from and having a fixed place of business within the city. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.400)

 

5.04.410 License fees—Flat rate.
     Every person transacting and carrying on the businesses enumerated in this section shall pay a license fee as follows:

 

Advertising.

     A.    Billboards, signs not fixed on places of business: one hundred dollars per structure or sign.

     B.     Distributing handbills: one hundred dollars annually, or fifty dollars monthly, or twenty-five dollars daily.

     C.     Sound trucks: two hundred dollars annual fee per truck, or fifty dollars daily fee per truck.

     D.    Klieg lights: one hundred fifty dollars per year per light, or at licensee’s option, fifteen dollars per day per light.

 

Auctioneers.

     Auctioneers not having a fixed place of business in the city, two hundred fifty dollars per year, or at the option of the licensee, twenty-five dollars per day.

 

Card Rooms.

     One hundred fifty dollars per table per year.

 

Carnivals, Fairs.

     Two hundred dollars for the first day and one hundred fifty dollars for each additional day, for the first ten or fewer concessions; plus thirty dollars for the first day and twenty dollars for each additional day for each concession in excess of ten. For the purpose of this section, “concession” means any amusement ride, booth, exhibit, stall, tent, trailer, or stand which charges any fee for the ride, service or product offered.

 

Circuses.

     Two hundred dollars per day.

 

Commercial Filming.

     On city streets or other city property, as follows:

 

Persons Employed at Location

Rate per Day

1 — 3

$100.00

4 — 6

200.00

7 — 9

400.00

10 and over

600.00

 

     Traffic-control costs or any additional costs as required by the chief of police shall be paid entirely by the applicant.

 

Contractors.

     Every person engaged in the business of contracting which requires a state contractors’ license shall pay a business license as follows:

     A.    General contractors, one hundred dollar annual fee;

     B.     Subcontractors, fifty dollar annual fee;

     C.     Business licenses for general contractors and subcontractors may be obtained semi-annually.

 

Living Accommodations.

     Every person transacting or engaged in the rental of four or more dwelling units in any apartment house, roominghouse, houses for rent, or other living accommodations shall pay an annual fee of twelve dollars per unit, provided that hotels and motels shall be on the gross receipts basis, Class B.

 

Mobilehome, Trailer and Recreational Vehicle Parks.

     Twelve dollars per space per year.

 

Peddlers and Solicitors.

     A.    Principal, two hundred dollar annual fee.

     B.     Each additional solicitor or peddler, ten dollars quarterly.

 

Sales Representatives.

     Every person engaged in the business of soliciting of orders for sales or services by a nationally franchised business (such as AVON) wherein solicitation only occurs by previous appointment, shall pay a business license fee of twenty-five dollars per year.

 

Taxicabs.

     A.    Taxicab operator’s license, sixty dollar annual fee;

     B.     Taxicab vehicles, per vehicle, twenty-five dollar annual fee. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 93-06 § 1, 1993; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.410)

 

5.04.420 Coin-operated machines.
     Every person operating and or more vending machines, coin-operated amusement device, shuffleboard, jukebox or other similar device, shall pay a license fee based on the entire gross receipts from all of such machines operated within the corporate limits of the city in accordance with the schedule set forth in Section 5.04.390, Class B. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.420)

 

5.04.430 Waiver or reduction of fees or penalties by city manager.
     The city manager, for good and satisfactory cause shown, may on a case by case basis, waive business license penalties and interest up to $1,000. As a condition of receiving the penalty and interest waiver, the business would be required to pay any business license fees in arrears up to a maximum of three prior years. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012)

 

5.04.435 Waiver or reduction of fees or penalties by council.
     The council, for good and satisfactory cause shown, may order the issuance of a license for less than the fees provided in this chapter or without the payment of any fee whatsoever. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.430)

 

5.04.440 Rules and regulations.
     The collector may make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to supplement or clarify such provisions or aid in their enforcement. Such rules and regulations shall be known as “business license rules and regulations,” shall be placed in written form and numbered consecutively, and shall be approved by the city attorney before becoming effective. A copy of each such “business license rules and regulations” shall be filed with the city manager and with the city clerk. (Ord. 2012-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 92-20, 1992; prior code § 3.28.440)

Chapter 5.05 SPECIAL EVENTS
5.05.010 Intent and purpose.
     The intent of this chapter is to provide a regulatory framework for permitting special events and temporary outdoor promotions. The use of private property, city streets or other city-owned or controlled property by large groups causes wear and tear on turf, park equipment and facilities, and requires city staff time to provide support services, such as traffic control. Such uses can also subject neighboring residents and businesses to noise and traffic. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that special events and temporary outdoor promotions are conducted so as not to violate any other ordinance or regulation of the city, or cause detrimental effects to surrounding properties and the community-at-large. It is the intent of the city to protect the rights of the people to engage in expressive activities in the city’s public places, as well as to regulate the time, place and manner of these activities in a reasonable and minimally restrictive fashion. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.020 Definitions.
     “Air-medical operations permit” means a permit issued by the fire chief or designee, allowing the landing and takeoff of EMS air rescue or air ambulance helicopters for the purposes of special event stand-by services.

     “Applicant” means the person, corporation, association, partnership or other legal entity submitting the application for a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit.

     “Chief of police services” means the chief of police services of the city of American Canyon, or designee.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of American Canyon, or designee.

     “Departmental service charges” means the actual costs which a department of the city incurs in connection with activities for which a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit is required under this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs associated with fire safety, traffic and/or pedestrian control, water safety, the closure of streets or intersections, the diverting of traffic, the salaries of city personnel involved in administration or coordination of city services for the event, the cost to the city to provide support personnel, equipment, materials and supplies and related city costs, such as fringe benefits or employee overtime. Departmental service charges shall not include costs incurred by the city to provide ordinary levels of police protective services to those engaged in activities or conduct for which a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit is required pursuant to this chapter.

     “Event organizer” means any person who conducts, manages, promotes, organizes, aids or solicits attendance at a special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     “Expressive activity” means conduct protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2 of the California Constitution, which is the principal purpose of the event.

     “Fire chief” means the American Canyon fire protection district fire chief, or designee.

     “Indigent natural person” means a person eligible for relief and support in the county of Napa as an indigent person under Section 17000 et seq., of the California Welfare and Institutions Code, or as the/those section(s) is/are amended from time to time.

     “Medical operations permit” means a permit issued pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code, which gives the city the right to require and evaluate, modify, approve or reject the medical operations plan of any applicant wishing to conduct a special event within the city.

     “Parade” means a parade, procession, march, demonstration, motorcade, promenade or pageant consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or any combination thereof, traveling in unison and having a common purpose, design, destination or goal, which is conducted in, on, upon, or along any public street, sidewalk or other property owned or controlled by the city, or any portion thereof, which does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulations or control, or which may impede, obstruct, impair or interfere with the free use of such public street, sidewalk or other public property of the city.

     “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation, business trust or manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee, or any of them, except where the context clearly requires a different meaning.

     “Public assembly” means any group of sixty or more persons participating in an organized activity having a common purpose on or within a city street, city park, parking facility, sidewalk, or other public property or right-of-way.

     “Sidewalk” means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings, or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

     “Special event” means:

     1.     Any temporary event not exceeding thirty days, whether indoors or outdoors, involving thirty or more persons, which is inconsistent with the permanent use to which the property may legally be put, or the occupancy levels permitted on property; or

     2.     Any public assembly as defined in this section; or

     3.     Any event, regardless of the number of persons involved, requiring full or partial street closure, which occurs on a city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way, and/or which is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

     The following list of examples is illustrative, but not determinative, of activities that may constitute “special events”:

     1.     Motorized vehicle races or contests.

     2.     Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, nondomesticated animal act or exhibition, and similar activities.

     3.     Any event with mechanical amusement rides.

     4.     Promotional or fundraising activities.

     5.     Parades.

     6.     Outdoor shows, concerts and exhibitions.

     7.     Outdoor craft fairs, soapbox derbies, or other similar events.

     “Special event permit” or “permit” means a special event permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     “Spontaneous special event” means a special event that is also an expressive activity, which is precipitated by news, circumstances or events coming into public knowledge fewer than thirty working days before the proposed spontaneous special event.

     “Street” means a way or place, of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Streets include highways and alleys.

     “Temporary outdoor promotion” means an outdoor commercial event of limited duration, such as grand openings, outdoor sales, and seasonal promotions occurring on nonresidential, private property.

     “Temporary outdoor promotion permit” means a temporary outdoor promotion permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     “Venue” means the specific property, area or site for which a special event permit has been issued.

     “Working day” shall mean a weekday, e.g., Monday through Friday, in which City Hall is open and conducts business. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays are not working days within the meaning of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.030 Permit required.
     A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, operate, maintain, organize, advertise, or sell or furnish tickets to any special event or temporary outdoor promotion within the city of American Canyon subject to the provisions of this chapter, and not expressly exempt under Section 5.05.040, without having obtained a valid permit for the event.

     B.     Issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter does not obligate or require the city to provide city services, equipment or personnel in support of an event, although the city manager may provide such services, equipment or personnel if such are reasonably available and the event organizer makes provisions to reimburse the city for the cost. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.035 Special event permit.
     A.    A special event permit is required for any special event, as defined in Section 5.05.020, having any of the following characteristics:

     1.     Involves the use of public property or facilities or has a substantial impact on traffic, public property or facilities in a way that may require the provision of city public services in response; and/or

     2.     Creates noise in excess of the standards set forth in Chapter 8.12 (“Noise Control”); and/or

     3.     Involves the use of any pyrotechnic device as defined in the California Health and Safety Code; and/or

     4.     Involves the construction or installation of any temporary or permanent tents, canopies or other structures, if the construction or installation requires a permit from the city’s fire and/or community development department; and/or

     5.     Involves the use of any exotic or nondomesticated animals, or mechanical amusement rides. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.040 Exceptions to the special event permit.
     A.    A special event permit is not required for any of the following special events:

     1.     An event conducted in or on residential property in a residential zone so long as the event conforms to other provisions of the municipal code.

     2.     Block parties that conform to the other provisions of the municipal code.

     3.     Funeral processions by a licensed mortuary or funeral home.

     4.     Any activities or events held or conducted by or on behalf of a public or private school, a college or school district, the state of California or other governmental entity otherwise exempt from the provisions of this chapter under separate provision of law.

     5.     Events involving expressive activity, including but not limited to, lawful picketing, which takes place on public sidewalks owned or controlled by the city, provided that participants comply with applicable traffic regulations, laws or controls. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.045 Temporary outdoor promotion regulations.
     A.    Temporary outdoor promotions, as defined in Section 5.05.020, require permits issued pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     Temporary outdoor promotions are limited to ten consecutive days per event and a maximum of four events per year, unless provided otherwise in an approved design permit under Chapter 19.41.

     C.     Temporary outdoor promotion permits shall be issued only to approved permanent establishments in the city for on-site use. The proposed events and activities shall occur in conjunction with the principal use of the establishment or as an extension thereof.

     D.    Signage for temporary outdoor promotions shall comply with the sign ordinance in Chapter 19.23.

     E.     All signage and lighting associated with the temporary outdoor promotion shall be included on the plans.

     F.     The permit applicant must demonstrate that adequate on-site parking spaces will remain available for customer parking.

     G.    All disabled-accessible parking spaces, walkways, ramps, ingress, and egresses must remain available. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.050 Application for permit.
     A.    An application for a special event or temporary outdoor promotion required by this chapter shall be filed with the city manager on a form furnished by, or acceptable to, the city manager, and signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury. If the application is filed by an organization, the application shall be prepared, signed under penalty of perjury, and filed by an officer of such organization, who is not less than eighteen years of age. An indigent natural person may only apply on his or her own behalf and cannot apply on behalf of another person, corporation, association, partnership or other legal entity.

     B.     A completed application for a special event permit shall be filed not less than thirty working days, nor more than six months, prior to the opening date of the proposed special event. However, it is recommended that a completed application be filed at least ninety calendar days prior to the proposed special event to accommodate unforeseen circumstances or delays.

     C.     A completed application for a temporary outdoor promotion permit shall be filed not less than ten working days, nor more than six months, prior to the proposed temporary outdoor promotion. If the city manager denies the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit, the event organizer or other affected person may appeal the denial to the city council under Section 5.05.100. Once any decision of the city council on appeal becomes final, the event organizer or other affected person may then file a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Procedure Section 1094.6 or 1094.8 regarding the validity of the city’s decision to grant or deny the application.

     D.    An application will be deemed complete unless, within three working days, the applicant is given notice that the application is incomplete and told what information is missing. Notwithstanding the city manager’s acceptance of a completed application, no special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit date shall be considered confirmed until a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit is issued pursuant to Section 5.05.080.

     E.     No application filed for a special event proposed to be scheduled fewer than thirty working days from the filing of an application will be accepted, except for an application for a spontaneous special event.

     1.     An event organizer must give written notice to the city manager at least forty-eight hours in advance of any proposed spontaneous special event. Such written notice must contain all of the following information:

     a.     The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons seeking to conduct the spontaneous special event, which person or persons shall be considered the applicant for purposes of this subsection.

     b.     The name, address and telephone of the headquarters of the organization, if any, and of the organizer or responsible head of such organization by whom or on whose behalf the spontaneous special event is proposed to be conducted.

     c.     The name, address and telephone number of the person who will chair the spontaneous special event and who will be responsible for the conduct of the participants.

     d.     The location and date of the spontaneous special event, including the assembly area, disbanding area, and the route to be traveled, if applicable.

     e.     An estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating in the spontaneous special event and an estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be observing the spontaneous special event.

     f.      The time at which the spontaneous special event will begin and conclude.

     g.     The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided to assure that participants are properly directed.

     h.     The application shall be accompanied by a declaration under penalty of perjury demonstrating that the failure to submit a timely application was not within the applicant’s control because the precipitating news, circumstances or events did not exist, or could not have been known to the applicant in time to file a timely application under this chapter.

     2.     The city manager may impose reasonable time, place and manner restrictions on the spontaneous special event.

     3.     The city manager may deny permission to conduct a spontaneous special event if he or she makes a written finding requiring denial pursuant to Section 5.05.090 within twenty-four hours of receipt of the application. If the city manager makes a finding pursuant to Section 5.05.090, he or she shall immediately provide notice of the denial, including the reason or reasons for the denial, by telephone and in writing, to the applicant. In lieu of denial, the city manager may propose to the applicant an alternative time, route, venue or manner of conducting the activity which would be acceptable to the city and would obviate any finding made pursuant to Section 5.05.090. Once the city manager makes his or her final determination whether to deny or grant the permit, the applicant may file a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or 1094.8 challenging the validity of the city manager’s decision.

     4.     The applicant will be charged for the actual costs incurred for any increases in the cost of services attributable to the shortened review period. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, any staff overtime. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.060 Permit and application fee.
     A.    All applications shall be submitted with payment of a nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the city council, as may be amended from time to time, unless said special event or temporary outdoor promotion is funded in full or in part by the city as an applicant, or said fee is waived by the city council. Any application submitted without said application fee shall be deemed incomplete.

     B.     Any indigent natural person who cannot apply for a special event permit because of an inability to pay the required application fee due to such indigence shall not be required to pay said application fee set forth in subsection A. Application for indigent status shall be made at the time of submission of the special event permit application and shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the city manager, be reasonably necessary to verify such status. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.070 Application contents.
     A.    Applications for all special event and temporary outdoor promotion permits shall contain the following information, as deemed applicable:

     1.     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, the event organizer and an alternative person who may be contacted if the event organizer is unavailable.

     2.     If located on private property, signed approval from the property owner acknowledging application for a special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     3.     If the applicant is an organization or business, the name, address and telephone number of the organization or business and the authorized head of the organization or business shall be provided. The person designated as the applicant by an organization or business shall provide written authorization from the organization or business verifying such designation.

     4.     The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be present and in charge of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion on the day of the event.

     5.     A description of the nature or purpose of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion for which the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit is requested and an estimate of the maximum number of persons who will be attending the event.

     6.     Date(s) and estimated starting and ending time(s) of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     7.     Location of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion, including its boundaries, the street or other public property, and the specific area or areas, that will be utilized in connection with the proposed event, or, if on private property, the business name, street address and telephone number at which the event or activity will be conducted.

     8.     The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals or structures that will be used at the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     9.     The provision and/or operation of first aid or emergency aid stations at the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     10.   The provision and/or operation of sanitary facilities, including handicap accessible sanitary facilities.

     11.   Whether any food or beverages, including alcoholic beverages, will be sold at the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     12.   The type of security or other arrangements that will be provided: (a) to ensure that participants are properly directed; and (b) to ensure the prevention of unlawful conduct by participants and attendees.

     13.   Anticipated parking needed and parking plan for the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     14.   A proposed plan for seating for the special event or temporary outdoor promotion, if applicable, and the maximum legal occupancy of the proposed premises, if applicable.

     15.   A security plan, including the provision and use of traffic cones or barricades, for control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

     16.   Whether sound amplification equipment will be used and a plan for control of noise, including, but not limited to, the noise generated by amplification equipment, motors and other equipment that may affect nearby premises, with special attention to prevention of noise nuisance to nearby residences, if any, subject to the noise standards set forth in Section 12.04.180.

     17.   A detailed floor plan and site plan of the premises showing the building interior and exterior grounds, including parking spaces, amusement ride location, seating arrangements, dance floor area, bar location, fire exits, and the dimensions of each portion with the layout of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion, when applicable. A trash and litter collection and off-site disposal plan.

     18.   The manner of providing notice of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion conditions to special event or temporary outdoor promotion participants and those businesses or residents who may be directly affected by the conduct of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     19.   Such other information pertaining to public health and safety that the applicant may wish to include.

     20.   The application form shall inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal.

     B.     The application for special events, such as parades or public assemblies, which require full or partial street closures, shall, in addition to the above information requirements, contain the following information:

     1.     The assembly point for the special event and the time at which people and/or units of the special event will begin to assemble and the location of the disbanding area.

     2.     The proposed route to be traveled, including the maximum length of the special event in miles or fractions of miles.

     3.     Whether the parade or other special event will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traveled.

     4.     An estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating in the special event and an estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be observing the special event.

     5.     If the special event assembly or disbanding is to be conducted on private property, the applicant must submit, with the application, proof of the property owner’s permission for the property to be used for that purpose.

     C.     Medical Operations Permit. A special medical operations permit shall be required for any special event where, in the opinion of the fire chief, it is essential for public safety in a place of assembly or any other place where people congregate, due to the number of persons participating in the special event or the projected impact to the emergency medical services system within the city. Where required, the special event applicant shall submit for approval to the fire chief a medical operations plan in accordance with the criteria established by the American Canyon fire protection district. This plan may require the permit applicant to employ one or more medically qualified persons, including medically trained fire department personnel, as required and approved, to be on duty at such a place. Such individuals shall be subject to the fire chief’s orders, at all times when so employed and shall be in uniform and remain on duty during times that such places are open to the public, or when such activity is being conducted. Before the special event, such fire authority personnel shall inspect the required medical equipment to see that it is in the proper place and in good working order, and shall keep a diligent watch for medical emergencies during the time such place is open to the public or such activity is being conducted. Events that may require a special medical operations permit include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Any event in which specialized emergency medical services are provided above the level of advanced first aid, such as emergency medical technician-1, paramedics, nurses, physician assistants, and/or physicians.

     2.     Any event, by the rules of the event, which requires the need to have contract emergency ambulance service providers or personnel on-site in order to conduct such event, e.g., bicycle races or similar high-risk injury activities.

     3.     Any event utilizing standby air rescue or air ambulance services.

     4.     Any event the fire chief deems may adversely impact the emergency medical services response capability of the city based upon:

     a.     The location of the event;

     b.     Projected event participation; or

     c.     Any other applicable criteria.

     D.    Air-Medical Operations Permit Required. A special air-medical operations permit shall be required for all events utilizing standby air rescue or air ambulance services. The fire chief shall direct the landings and takeoffs of all EMS air rescue or air ambulance operations within the city. Standby fire authority and/or sheriff department resources may be required during landing or takeoff operations for safety and security reasons. An air-medical operations plan, if required, shall be submitted, subject to the approval of the fire chief to include the following information:

     1.     Name of the air rescue or air ambulance provider.

     2.     Contact person for air operations.

     3.     Type and size of aircraft.

     4.     Patient transport capability.

     5.     Level of medical staffing.

     6.     Frequency or list of frequencies available for ground-to-air contact.

     7.     Landing zone site and alternate landing zone site.

     8.     Security for landing zone site. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.080 Action by city manager.
     A.    The city manager is authorized to issue special event and temporary outdoor promotion permits pursuant to the procedures established in this chapter.

     B.     Notwithstanding any provision in the American Canyon Municipal Code to the contrary, the city manager is authorized to close any street, or portion thereof, as part of the issuance of a special event permit or temporary outdoor promotion permit when necessary to further the purpose of the underlying event and protect the health and safety of the public.

     C.     Upon the filing of a completed application, the city manager shall refer the application to such appropriate city departments, as he or she deems necessary from the nature of the application, for review, evaluation, investigation and recommendations by the departments regarding approval or disapproval of the application and the estimated number of hours of service that will be incurred by each department in connection with the special event or temporary outdoor promotion.

     D.    In determining whether to approve an application, no consideration may be given to the message of the event, the content of speech, the identity or associational relationships of the applicant, or to any assumptions or predictions as to the level or nature of emotion which may be aroused in the public by the content of speech or message conveyed by the event.

     E.     Within ten working days of the filing of a completed application, the investigation shall be completed, and the city manager shall issue a special event or temporary outdoor promotion, unless denial of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion is mandated under Section 5.05.090. The city manager shall notify the applicant of his or her action pursuant to Section 5.05.100.

     F.     The city manager shall impose conditions on any special event issued pursuant to this chapter to coordinate multiple uses of public property, assure preservation of public property and public places, prevent dangerous, unlawful or impermissible uses, and protect the safety of persons and property and to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the venue. The city manager shall impose conditions on the temporary outdoor promotion permit to prevent negative impacts to surrounding persons and properties and to ensure compliance with provisions of the municipal code. The conditions on a special events permit shall be reasonable time, place and manner restrictions only and shall not be imposed in a manner that will unreasonably restrict activities or conduct protected by the California or United States Constitutions. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     The establishment of an alternate assembly or disbanding area for a parade, or similar event, within the predesignated event routes established by the city council pursuant to Section 5.05.130;

     2.     The accommodation of a special event’s pedestrian and vehicular traffic, including restricting special events to city sidewalks, portions of a city street, or other public right-of-way;

     3.     Conditions designed to avoid or lessen interference with public safety functions and/or emergency service access;

     4.     The event shall comply with all applicable accessibility requirements, including, but not limited to, parking, walkways, ingress, egress, restrooms, ramps, seeing and hearing devices, etc.;

     5.     The number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures to be displayed or used in the special event or temporary outdoor promotion;

     6.     The inspection and approval by city personnel of stages, booths, floats, structures, vehicles or equipment to be used or operated in the special event or temporary outdoor promotion to ensure that such structures or vehicles are safely constructed and can be safely operated, and conform to the requirements of all applicable codes;

     7.     The provision and use of traffic cones or barricades in a manner and number established by standard conditions adopted by a separate city council resolution;

     8.     The provision or operation of first aid stations or sanitary facilities, including handicap accessible sanitary facilities, in a manner and number established by standard conditions adopted by a separate city council resolution;

     9.     The provision of a waste management plan, and the clean-up and restoration of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion venue, as established by standard conditions adopted by a separate city council resolution;

     10.   Restrictions consistent with the city’s noise ordinance on the use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions on the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion;

     11.   The manner of providing notice of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion conditions to special event or temporary outdoor promotion participants and those businesses or residents who may be directly affected by the conduct of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion;

     12.   The provision or use of emergency services;

     13.   The obtaining of all applicable permits and licenses, including, but not limited to, building and electrical permits, American Canyon fire protection district approval, health department, department of alcohol and beverage control, etc.;

     14.   The manner by which alcohol sales and service, if any, shall be conducted at the event;

     15.   No special event permit or temporary outdoor promotion permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable or movable to another venue or another applicant. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.090 Permit denial.
     A.    The city manager shall deny an application for a special event or temporary outdoor promotion or revoke any special event or temporary outdoor promotion if the city manager finds any of the following:

     1.     The application contains materially false or intentionally misleading information;

     2.     The event or activity is proposed to be located, or is located, in or upon a premises, building or structure, which is hazardous to the health or safety of the employees or patrons of the premises, business, activity, or event, or the general public, under the standards established by the Uniform Building or Fire Codes, or other applicable codes, as set forth in Title 16 of this code;

     3.     The event or activity is proposed to be located, or is located, in or upon a premises, building or structure, which lacks adequate on-site parking for participants attending the proposed event or activity under the applicable standards set forth in Title 19 of this code;

     4.     The event or activity is in conflict with other applicable provisions of any federal, state and/or local laws;

     5.     The event or activity is scheduled to occur at a location and time in conflict with another event or activity scheduled for the same day or weekend, where such conflict would adversely impact the city’s ability to provide adequate city services in support of other scheduled events or scheduled government functions;

     6.     The event will substantially interrupt public transportation, or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic, in the area of its location;

     7.     The event will require the diversion of public safety or other city employees from their normal duties, so as to unreasonably reduce adequate levels of service or municipal functions to any other portion of the city;

     8.     The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles will unreasonably interfere with the movement of police, fire, ambulance, and other public safety or emergency vehicles on the streets;

     9.     The event or activity: (a) will have a substantial adverse impact on the health and safety of the general public, and/or residents and businesses within a five hundred foot radius of the event; and/or (b) will violate the city’s noise ordinance;

     10.   The event or activity will take place in an area of the city, or on any public right-of-way scheduled for maintenance, construction or repair prior to the submission of the application for the event and either (a) the conduct of the event would interfere with such maintenance, construction or repair; or (b) the maintenance, construction or repair would represent a threat to the health or safety of the participants in the event;

     11.   The ability of persons to enter and exit residential or business properties impacted by the event will be unreasonably impaired considering factors such as the duration, size and scope of the event;

     12.   The proposed use, event or activity will have a significant adverse environmental impact;

     13.   The applicant has violated condition(s) of a previous special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit issued for the same or similar event or has more than one documented violation of this chapter within the prior thirty-six months. The city shall notify the applicant in writing of any such violations within sixty days of the violation.

     B.     When the grounds for denial of an application are based on any of the circumstances specified in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(13) of this section, and those circumstances can be corrected by altering the date, time, duration, route, or location of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion, the city manager shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally approve the application upon the applicant’s acceptance of conditions for special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit issuance. The conditions imposed shall provide only for such modification of the applicant’s proposed special event or temporary outdoor promotion as are necessary to achieve compliance with subsections (A)(1) through (A)(13) of this section. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.100 Notice to applicant of action on application—Appeals to city council.
     Within ten working days of the filing of a completed application, the city manager shall provide notice to the applicant of the action taken by telephone and by written notice via personal delivery, facsimile, if the applicant provides a fax number, or electronic mail, if the applicant provides an electronic mail address, together with a list of conditions imposed if the application has been granted or, if the application has been denied, the specific factual reason for the denial pursuant to Section 5.05.090. The city manager shall also provide notice to the city council. For special event or temporary outdoor promotion permits, the notice shall inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal to the city council the denial of the application, or any of the conditions imposed on the granting of the application, and shall state the last date on which such an appeal may be filed, which shall be the third working day after the date on which the notice was delivered personally or via facsimile to the applicant. The city council shall hear the applicant’s appeal no later than fourteen days following its filing at a regular meeting, if scheduled, or a special meeting, if necessary. The applicant, by written request, may waive the time limits for the hearing on appeal to the city council, but may not waive the time within which an appeal may be filed. The notice of the city manager’s decision on a spontaneous special event permit or the city council’s final decision on an appeal of a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit shall inform the applicant of his or her right to file a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or 1094.8. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.110 City council action upon appeal.
     After a hearing and consideration of the report and decision of the city manager on a special event or temporary outdoor promotion application, and any written materials submitted by the applicant or other affected person(s), the city council shall either overturn the denial and grant the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit, grant the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit with conditions, or sustain the denial of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit upon determining that issuance would result in any one of the circumstances set forth in Section 5.05.090. The decision on appeal by the city council shall be based on written findings, and shall be final and conclusive on the matter. Upon the decision on appeal by the city council, the applicant may file a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or 1094.8. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.120 Departmental service fees.
     A.    In addition to the nonrefundable permit application fee, any user fees or other fees prescribed by resolution of the city council, an applicant shall pay the city for all city department service charges incurred in connection with, or due to, the applicant’s activities under the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit. If city property is destroyed or damaged by reason of the applicant’s use, event or activity, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the actual replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged property.

     B.     Departmental service fees will be established by a separate city council resolution, and will reflect the city’s full cost of providing personnel on an hourly basis at rates established in accordance with city personnel rules and regulations and conditions contained within memoranda of understanding between the city and employee labor organizations.

     C.     At least two days prior to a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permitted under this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the city a deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the total estimated city departmental service charges identified pursuant to this section that will be incurred by the city in connection with the special event or temporary outdoor promotion. The deposit shall be paid in cash or other adequate security, as determined by the city manager. An applicant may appeal pursuant to Section 5.05.100 the amount of the deposit determined under this section.

     D.    City departments shall submit the final invoices and billings for departmental service charges to the applicant no later than twenty working days after the expiration date of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit. If the deposit is less than the final charges, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city within ten working days of being invoiced for such charges from the city. If the deposit is more than such final charges, the city shall refund the difference to the applicant within the sixty days after the event.

     E.     Any indigent natural person who cannot apply for a special event permit because of an inability to pay the required departmental service charges due to such indigence shall not be required to pay the departmental service charges set forth in this section. Application for indigent status shall be made at the time of submission of the special event application and shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the city manager, be reasonably necessary to verify such status. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.130 Event routes.
     A.    The city council may, by separate resolution, establish predesignated special event routes within the city for those events requiring either full or partial street closures.

     B.     Any special event requiring full or partial street closures shall not be conducted on streets classified by the city as arterial streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.140 Insurance and indemnity requirements.
     A.    For all special events subject to the requirements of this chapter, the city manager shall require as a condition of the issuance of a permit that the applicant shall obtain, furnish proof of, and maintain, a policy of insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state of California. The insurance policy shall be endorsed to name the city of American Canyon and its elected and appointed boards, officers, agents, and employees as an additional insured, and shall provide that any other insurance maintained by the city of American Canyon shall be in excess of, and not contributing to, the insurance coverage provided to the city of American Canyon under the applicant’s policy. The minimum limits of liability shall conform to a schedule which shall be adopted by a separate resolution of the city council; provided, however, that in no case shall the minimum limits of liability be lower than one million dollars, combined single limits, per occurrence and in the aggregate.

     B.     The applicant of special events shall also be required to sign an indemnity agreement in a form approved by the city attorney, which shall expressly provide that the applicant agrees to defend, protect, indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees and agents free and harmless from and against any and all claims, damages, expenses, loss or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever arising out of, or resulting from, the alleged acts or omissions of applicant, its officers, agents or employees, in connection with the permitted event or activity; and the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit shall expressly provide that the applicant shall, at applicant’s own cost, risk and expense, defend any and all claims of legal action that may be commenced or filed against the city, its officers, agents or employees, and that the applicant shall pay any settlement entered into and shall satisfy any judgment that may be rendered against the city, its officers, agents or employees as a result of the alleged acts or omissions of applicant or applicant’s officers, agents or employees in connection with the uses, events or activities under the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit. If an applicant provides proof that the insurance obligations, pursuant to subsection A of this section, provide contractual liability providing coverage for any obligations contemplated by the indemnity provisions herein, the city agrees not to enforce the indemnity agreement against the applicant.

     C.     Any indigent natural person who cannot apply for a special event permit because of an inability to pay for the required insurance due to such indigence shall not be required to provide the insurance obligations set forth in subsection A, or to sign an indemnity agreement required by subsection B. Application for indigent status shall be made at the time of submission of the special event permit application and shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the city manager, be reasonably necessary to verify such status. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.150 Revocation or suspension of permit.
     A     A special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit issued under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended by the city manager or chief of police services if he or she finds that one or more of the following conditions exist and have not been corrected by the applicant after timely notice of the condition’s existence has been given:

     1.     The special event or temporary outdoor promotion is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was specifically issued;

     2.     That one or more of the conditions listed in Section 5.05.090 exists;

     3.     That the activity is being conducted in a manner which violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the issuance of the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit or fails to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application;

     4.     The applicant violates or attempts to violate any federal, state or local laws and regulations;

     5.     The special event or temporary outdoor promotion is being conducted in a fraudulent or disorderly manner, or in a manner which endangers the public health or safety.

     B.     Such revocation or suspension shall become effective immediately upon order of the city manager or chief of police services and shall remain in effect until the applicant has corrected the violation or until the special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit has expired by limitation.

     C.     In the event a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit is revoked or suspended pursuant to the provisions of this section, another special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit shall not be granted to the applicant within twelve months after the date of such revocation or suspension.

     D.    The city manager or chief of police services’ determination to revoke or suspend a special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit shall be based upon written findings, and shall be subject to appeal to the city council as set forth in Section 5.05.100. The city council’s determination shall be final and conclusive in the matter, and subject to appeal under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or 1994.8. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.160 Interference prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any authorized person, vehicle or animal participating in a special event or temporary outdoor promotion for which a permit has been issued. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.170 Penalty for violation.
     A.    A violation of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor. However, at the discretion of the city attorney, the violation of any provisions of this chapter may be filed as an infraction. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction.

     B.     Unless expressly exempt, the holding or conducting of any special event or temporary outdoor promotion subject to the provisions of this chapter without a valid special event or temporary outdoor promotion permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

 

5.05.180 Severability.
     If any provision or clause of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other chapter provisions, clauses, or application thereof, and to this end, the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 5.06 ADULT-ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES, ADULT PERFORMERS AND FIGURE MODELS
5.06.010 Legislative purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-entertainment businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or communicative conduct, including adult-entertainment business products and adult entertainment communicative conduct. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to adult entertainment business products or adult entertainment communicative conduct protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment business products or adult entertainment communicative conduct to their intended market or audience. It is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

     “Adult-entertainment business” means any of the following:

     1.     “Adult arcade” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any time, and where a substantial portion of the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities.

     2.     “Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store” means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:

     a.     Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, compact discs (CDs), slides or other visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

     b.     Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.

     The items described in subsections (a) and (b) shall be referred to collectively as “adult products.”

     A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of products depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration of the specified products that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     3.     “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment that: (a) regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (b) regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity.

     4.     “Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that, (a) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs (CDs) or other photographic reproductions a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (b) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four hour period.

     5.     “Adult motion picture theater” means a building or portion thereof or area, open or enclosed, used for the presentation of motion pictures or other images in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the presentation of motion pictures distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons or customers.

     6.     “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

     7.     “Modeling studio” means a business that provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who display specified anatomical areas to be observed, drawn, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. Modeling studio does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the state Board of Education. Modeling studio further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, that does not provide, permit or make available specified sexual activities.

     “Adult-entertainment business operator” (hereinafter “operator”) means a person who supervises, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the activities at an adult-entertainment business.

     “Adult performer” means a person who engages in or participates in any live performance displaying specified anatomical areas or depicting or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-entertainment business.

     “Bar” means any commercial establishment licensed by the state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.

     “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of American Canyon or authorized representative.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of American Canyon or authorized representative.

     “Couch dancing” or “straddle dancing” means an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business intentionally touching any patron or coming within six feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, or while simulating any specified sexual activity.

     “Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” means and refers to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina. 115 Cal. App. 3. 151 (1981).

     “Figure model” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, displays specified anatomical areas in a modeling studio to be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise depicted.

     “Nudity” or “in a state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, anus or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at the areola’s highest point, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernible turgid state.

     “Operate an adult-entertainment business” means the supervising, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any other way being responsible for or in charge of activities at an adult-entertainment business.

     “Permittee” means the person to whom an adult-entertainment business permit is issued.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, limited liability company or combination of individuals of whatever form or character.

     “Regularly features” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occur on two or more occasions within a thirty-day period; three or more occasions within a sixty-day period; or four or more occasions within one hundred and eighty-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

     “Specified anatomical areas” shall include:

     1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered: (a) human genitals or pubic region, including anus; (b) buttocks; and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and

     2.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

     “Specified sexual activities” shall include the following:

     1.     Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or

     2.     Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or

     3.     Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or

     4.     Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or

     5.     Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or

     6.     Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or

     7.     Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.021 Couch dancing/straddle dancing and other sexual and related activities prohibited.
     For purposes of this section, couch dancing or straddle dancing shall be defined as an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business intentionally touching any patron or coming within six feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area, or while simulating any specified sexual activity.

     A.    No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this code, knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering or allowing any employee or independent contractor:

     1.     To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

     2.     To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;

     3.     To intentionally touch any patron at an adult-oriented business while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity;

     4.     To voluntarily be within six feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

     B.     No employee or independent contractor of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall:

     1.     Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

     2.     Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

     3.     Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity while intentionally touching a patron at the adult-oriented business;

     4.     Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity closer than six feet from any patron;

     5.     Engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of eleven p.m. and ten a.m.

     C.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall intentionally touch an employee or independent contractor who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity at the adult-oriented business.

     D.    No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee or independent contractor at the business who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

     E.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall violate any provision of this code.

     F.     No waiter(s) or waitress(es) at an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall appear on the premises in the nude, seminude, or display or expose specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.022 Establishment of an adult-oriented business.
     The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall include any of the following:

     A.    The opening or commencement of operation of any such business as a new business;

     B.     The conversion of any existing business, (whether or not an adult-oriented business), to any adult-oriented business;

     C.     The addition of any adult-oriented business to any existing adult-oriented businesses if the addition results in enlargement of the place of business. For the purposes of this paragraph, enlargement shall mean an increase in the size of the building within which the business is conducted by either construction or use of an adjacent building or any portion thereof, whether located on the same or an adjacent lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.030 Permit required for operation of an adult-entertainment business providing live performances displaying specified anatomical areas or depicting or involving specified sexual activities.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises the operation of an adult-entertainment business that provides live performances displaying specified anatomical areas or depicting or involving specified sexual activities unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit (hereinafter “adult-entertainment business permit”) from the city of American Canyon as required herein. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.040 Application for permit for an adult-entertainment business involving live performances.
     A.    Any person desiring to obtain an adult-entertainment business permit to operate an adult-entertainment business for which a permit is required pursuant to Section 5.06.030 shall apply to the chief of police on a form provided by the police department. Before submitting the application a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and report required by this chapter. The department of finance shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that such permit application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section.

     B.     The application to the chief of police shall set forth the following information:

     1.     The full and true name and any other names of each person with an ownership interest in the adult-entertainment business and of each person who will operate the adult-entertainment business;

     2.     The present address and telephone number and driver’s license number, if any, of the applicant and any operator;

     3.     The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant and any operator;

     4.     Written proof that the applicant and any operator is at least eighteen years of age;

     5.     The height, weight, color of eyes and hair of the applicant and any operator;

     6.     Five color portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches of the applicant and any operator;

     7.     The business license or tax certificate history of the applicant and any operator, including whether the person while previously operating in this or another city, county or state under license, has had a license revoked or suspended, the reason(s) therefor, and the person’s business activity or occupation subsequent to the suspension or revocation;

     8.     All criminal convictions of any person with an ownership interest and any operator of offenses specified in Section 5.06.100 within five years of the date of application;

     9.     The name and address of the lessor of the real property on which the business is to be conducted, and a copy of the lease agreement or other documentation to establish that the owner and/or landlord of the premises consents to the establishment of an adult-entertainment business on the premises;

     10.   Detailed plans of the site and building as they will be operated; and

     11.   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application.

     C.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown on its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and the residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant apply.

     D.    The chief of police shall take fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant and any operator, and shall confirm the height and weight of the applicant and any operator.

     E.     The application for a permit does not authorize conducting an adult-entertainment business until a permit has been granted. The issuance of a business operations tax certificate pursuant to Chapter 3.08 of this code shall not authorize conducting an adult-entertainment business until the necessary adult-entertainment business permit required by Section 5.06.030 has been lawfully granted. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.050 Corporate applicants—Exemption.
     The provisions of Section 5.06.040(B)(4), (5) and (7) and (D) shall not apply to require any corporate applicant to provide such information as to the corporation; provided, however, that such information shall be provided for any operator. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.060 Adult performer permits and figure model permits.
     A.    No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting or displaying specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-entertainment business unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect an adult-entertainment business performer permit (hereinafter “adult performer permit”) and complies with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws.

     B.     No person shall act as a figure model in a modeling studio unless the person first obtains and continues in full force and effect a figure model permit (hereinafter “figure model permit”) and complies with all requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws.

     C.     The issuance of a business operations tax certificate pursuant to Chapter 3.08 of this code shall not authorize any person to perform any act for which an adult performer permit or figure model permit is required until the necessary permit has been lawfully approved. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.070 Application for adult performer permit or figure model permit.
     A.    An application for an adult performer permit or figure model permit shall be made to the chief of police on a form provided by the city clerk. Prior to submitting an application a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The department of finance shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that a permit application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police at the time of applying for a permit under this section.

     B.     The application to the chief of police shall set forth the following information:

     1.     Name, residence address and telephone number of the applicant, and two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address;

     2.     Driver’s license number, if any, of the applicant;

     3.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     4.     Five color portrait photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches;

     5.     Written evidence that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

     6.     The name and address of the adult-entertainment business(es) where the applicant is to be employed or is to perform, if known, and the name of the owner(s) of the business(es);

     7.     The names and address of any adult-entertainment businesses where the applicant previously engaged in or participated in live performances displaying specified anatomical areas or depicting or involving specified sexual activities or acted as a figure model;

     8.     Whether the applicant has been convicted of any offense specified in Section 5.06.100 within five years of the date of application; and

     9.     The adult performer or figure model permit or license history of the applicant; whether applicant has had a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the applicant’s business activity or occupation subsequent to the suspension or revocation.

     C.     The chief of police shall take fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant and shall confirm the information submitted. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.080 Verification of application.
     Every application for a permit under this chapter shall be verified as provided in Section 128.7 of the California Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.090 Investigation and recommendations—Temporary permit.
     A.    Upon receiving an application for an adult-entertainment business permit, the chief of police shall:

     1.     Stamp the application as received on the date of receipt, and determine whether the application is complete. If the chief of police determines that the application is incomplete or has been completed improperly, the chief of police shall promptly notify the applicant of that fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of ten days or less to complete the application properly. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time;

     2.     Within ten days of the date of filing of a complete application, refer the application to the building inspections division, the planning division and the fire department; and

     3.     Within a reasonable period, not exceeding forty-five days after the filing of a complete application, investigate the application and recommend approval or denial to the city manager. A failure to make a recommendation within the specified time period shall not be considered a recommendation for approval or denial.

     B.     Within ten days of the date of filing of a complete application, and if the chief of police determines that: (1) on the face of the application, there is no basis for denial of the permit under Section 5.06.100 due to prior criminal convictions, based solely upon the information provided by the applicant in the application; and (2) the location of the proposed adult-entertainment business conforms with all requirements of the Title 17, the city manager shall issue a temporary permit authorizing operation of the adult-entertainment business while the chief of police investigates the application and the city manager determines whether to issue or deny a regular permit.

     C.     The building inspections division, the planning division and the fire department shall inspect the premises and make separate recommendations to the city manager, within thirty days after the filing of the completed application. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.100 Issuance of permit for an adult-entertainment business.
     A.    The city manager shall act on the application for an adult-entertainment business permit within sixty days after the date of filing of a completed application, and shall issue a regular permit if all requirements for an adult-entertainment business described in this chapter are met, unless the city manager finds:

     1.     That the operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, will not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the Title 17 of this code and the locational requirements set forth therein, and the building, health, housing and fire codes of the city of American Canyon;

     2.     That the applicant or any operator has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314.1, 314.2, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) and (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may thereafter be amended or renumbered; provided, however, that the city manager shall issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if: (a) the person is otherwise qualified for a permit; and (b) the longer of the following time periods has passed:

     i.      Five years from date of the conviction, or

     ii.     Five years from release from confinement, or

     iii.    Five years from formal release from probation period, or

     iv.    Five years from formal release from parole;

     3.     That the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application;

     4.     That the applicant or any operator has had a permit for an adult-entertainment business or adult-related establishment denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last five years;

     5.     That the applicant or operator is not at least eighteen years of age;

     6.     That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the department of finance.

     B.     Notice of Decision. Not later than five days after the date of the decision of the city manager, notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant postage prepaid at the address shown in the application and shall state whether the decision of the city manager was to grant or deny the permit.

     C.     Upon issuance of a temporary permit or a regular permit, or if the city manager neither grants nor denies the regular permit within sixty days after the date a complete application is filed, the applicant may begin operating the adult-entertainment business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the locational requirements of Chapter 5.06.255 of this code and the development and operational standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. Notwithstanding that applicant begins operating the adult-entertainment business under this section prior to the city manager’s decision, the city manager may subsequently deny the application for a permit. In the event of a denial, the applicant shall cease operating the adult-entertainment business within ten days unless the applicant timely appeals the decision denying the permit pursuant to Section 5.06.120. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the applicant may continue operating the adult-entertainment business while the appeal is pending. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.110 Issuance of adult performer permit or figure model permit.
     A.    The chief of police shall act on the adult performer permit or figure model application within sixty days after the filing of a complete application. Pending the decision on the application, the applicant who has filed a complete application shall be entitled to perform as an adult performer or figure model, and the chief of police shall issue a temporary permit for this purpose; provided that no temporary permit shall be issued to a person who has applied for, and had denied within the past one year, an adult performer permit or figure model permit.

     B.     The chief of police shall issue the permit if all requirements for the permit are met, unless the chief of police finds:

     1.     That the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the state of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the state of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314.1, 314.2, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, or as those sections may hereafter be amended or renumbered; provided, however, that the chief of police shall issue a permit to any person convicted of any of the crimes described above if: (a) the person is otherwise qualified for a permit; and (b) the longer of the following time periods has passed:

     i.      Five years from date of the conviction, or

     ii.     Five years from release from confinement, or

     iii.    Five years from formal release from probation period, or

     iv.    Five years from formal release from parole;

     2.     That the applicant has knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application;

     3.     That the applicant has had an adult performer permit or figure model permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county within the last five years;

     4.     That the applicant is not at least eighteen years of age;

     5.     That the applicant has not paid the required fee to the department of finance.

     B.     Notice of Decision. The decision shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant postage prepaid, within five days after the chief of police’s decision. If the permit is denied, the applicant shall cease activities as an adult performer or figure model within ten days unless the applicant timely appeals the decision denying the permit pursuant to Section 5.06.120. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the applicant may continue acting as an adult performer or figure model while the appeal is pending. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.120 Administrative appeals—Issuance or denial of permit.
     A.    Adult-entertainment Business Permits. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the city manager relating to the issuance or denial of a permit for an adult-entertainment business may, within ten days after the date of mailing of the decision to the applicant, appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Pending a decision on the appeal, and if a temporary permit has been issued, the appellant may continue to operate the adult-entertainment business. If an appeal is not filed within ten days, the decision of the city manager shall be final.

     B.     Adult Performer Permits or Figure Model Permits. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police relating to the issuance or denial of any adult performer permit or figure model permit may, within ten days after the date of mailing of the decision to the applicant, appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. Pending a decision on the appeal, the appellant may continue to perform as an adult performer or figure model pursuant to the temporary permit. If an appeal is not filed within ten days, the decision of the chief of police shall be final.

     C.     Hearing on Appeal. An appeal pursuant to subsection (A) or (B) shall be set for hearing by the council at a date not later than thirty days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing. The council may continue its hearing on the appeal from time to time; provided, however, that the decision on the appeal shall issue no later than thirty days after the original date set for hearing. The council shall hear all relevant evidence from competent persons relating to the granting or denial of the permit. It may return the matter to the city manager or chief of police for further information or further investigation. The council may affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager or chief of police.

     D.    Appointment of Hearing Examiner. The city council may employ the procedure specified in this code for the appointment of a hearing officer to hear and decide the appeal. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.130 Term and renewal of adult-entertainment business permits.
     A.    An adult-entertainment business permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked.

     B.     A permit that has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for the period specified in subsection (A) of this section on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. Before submitting the renewal application a nonrefundable renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of reviewing the renewal application. The application shall be filed at least thirty days but not more than sixty days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued. When the application for renewal is filed less than thirty days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed.

     C.     An adult-entertainment business lawfully operating as a conforming use pursuant to an adult-entertainment business permit is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the adult-entertainment business permit, of a use or a zone not consistent with the locational requirements set forth in Chapter 5.06.255 of this code, and a renewal application shall not be denied on that ground. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.140 Term and renewal of adult performer permits and figure model permits.
     A.    An adult performer permit or figure model permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance of the permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked.

     B.     A permit that has not been suspended or revoked may be renewed for the period specified in subsection (A) of this section on written application to the chief of police. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided in this chapter for permit applications. Before submitting the renewal application a nonrefundable renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of reviewing the renewal application. The application shall be filed at least ten days but not more than sixty days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. When a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued. When the application for renewal is filed less than ten days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit shall not be stayed. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.150 Name and place of business—Change of location.
     No person granted a permit for an adult-entertainment business shall operate the adult-entertainment business under any name or at any location not specified in the permit. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.160 Suspension or revocation of adult-entertainment business permits, adult performer permits, and figure model permits.
     A.    An adult-entertainment business permit may be suspended or revoked by the city manager in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section. An adult performer permit or figure model permit may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police in accordance with the procedures and standards of this section.

     B.     The city manager or chief of police shall hold a hearing prior to the suspension or revocation of a permit. On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the city manager or chief of police shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. The notice shall set forth the time and place of a public hearing to be held prior to the suspension or revocation, the ground or grounds upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is based, the pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the permittee personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing.

     C.     Adult-Entertainment Business Permit. An adult-entertainment business permit required pursuant to Section 5.06.030 may be suspended or revoked or be subjected to other appropriate disciplinary action, if any of the following causes arises from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an operator of the adult-entertainment business:

     1.     The building, structure, equipment or location used by the adult-entertainment business fails to comply with all applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health and zoning requirements of the city of American Canyon all applicable state and federal requirements of a similar nature that are customarily enforced by the city, and all provisions of these regulations and this code relating to adult-entertainment businesses, including the adult-entertainment business development and operational standards;

     2.     The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city;

     3.     The permittee or operator of an adult-entertainment business has knowingly allowed or permitted, or has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-entertainment business:

     a.     Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation,

     b.     Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation occur,

     c.     Any conduct constituting a criminal offense that requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code,

     d.     The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316 or 318, or subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code,

     e.     Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Sections 311 through 313.4;

     4.     Failure to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed;

     5.     Failure to comply with any of the requirements for operation of adult-entertainment businesses set forth in this chapter.

     D.    Adult Performer and Figure Model Permits. The chief of police may suspend or revoke an adult performer permit or figure model permit for conviction of any of the crimes specified in Section 5.06.110 or for engaging in one of the activities described in Section 5.06.160(C)(3) while on the premises of an adult-entertainment business.

     E.     After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the city manager or chief of police finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation, the city manager or chief of police shall impose one of the following:

     1.     A warning;

     2.     Conditions upon the permit;

     3.     Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months;

     4.     Revocation of the permit. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.170 Administrative appeals—Suspension or revocation of permit.
     A.    Adult-Entertainment Business Permits. Any permittee aggrieved by the decision of the city manager relating to the suspension or revocation of an adult-entertainment business permit, or other discipline imposed, may within ten days after the date of mailing of the decision to the permittee, appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. If an appeal is not filed within ten days, the decision of the city manager shall be final. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the decision of the city manager shall be stayed until the decision on appeal is issued. No fee shall be charged for an appeal.

     B.     Adult Performer or Figure Model Permits. Any permittee aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police relating to the suspension or revocation of, or the imposition of a condition or restriction upon, any adult performer or figure model permit may, within ten days after the date of mailing of the decision to the permittee, appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk. If an appeal is not filed within ten days, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. If a timely notice of appeal is filed, the decision of the chief of police shall be stayed until the decision on appeal is issued. No fee shall be charged for an appeal.

     C.     Hearing on Appeal. An appeal pursuant to subsection (A) or (B) shall be set for hearing by the council at a date not later than thirty days after the filing of the notice of appeal. The notice of hearing shall be mailed to the applicant at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing: The council may continue its hearing on such appeal from time to time provided, however, that the decision on the appeal shall issue no later than thirty days after the original date set for hearing. The council shall hear all relevant evidence from competent persons relating to suspension or revocation of, or other discipline imposed upon, the permit. It may return the matter to the city manager or chief of police for further information or further investigation. The council may affirm, reject or modify the decision of the city manager or chief of police.

     D.    Appointment of Hearing Examiner. The city council may employ the procedure specified in this code for the appointment of a hearing officer to hear and decide the appeal. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.180 Judicial review—Stay pending trial court decision.
     A.    General. Judicial review of any final administrative decision after appeal under this chapter issuing, denying, suspending or revoking, or imposing other discipline upon, an adult-entertainment business permit, adult performer permit or figure model permit may be had pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. The city clerk shall provide written notice of the time limits referenced in Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 to the appellant when transmitting the decision.

     B.     Stay Pending Expiration of Period for Filing a Judicial Challenge. A final administrative decision issuing, denying, suspending or revoking, or imposing other discipline upon, an adult-entertainment business permit, adult performer permit or figure model permit, whether temporary or regular, shall be stayed for a period of twenty-one days after the decision becomes final, and the adult-entertainment business, adult performer or figure model shall be entitled to operate pursuant to the permit during the twenty-one day time period.

     C.     Stay Pending Court Decision on Judicial Challenge. Upon the timely filing of a request for judicial review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Sec. 1094.6 or 1094.8, the administrative decision issuing, denying, suspending or revoking, or imposing other discipline upon an adult-entertainment business permit, adult performer permit or figure model permit, whether temporary or regular, shall be stayed until the request for judicial review is dismissed or until a decision on the merits is issued by the trial court. The adult-entertainment business, adult performer or figure model shall be entitled to operate during the stay. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.190 Register of adult performers and figure models.
     A.    The operator of a modeling studio shall maintain on the premises a register of all persons employed as or acting as figure models and their permit numbers.

     B.     The operator of an adult-entertainment business that provides live entertainment depicting or displaying specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities shall maintain a register on the premises of all persons performing on the premises and their permit numbers.

     C.     The register required by subsections (A) and (B) shall include models and performers then modeling or performing on the premises as well as all models and performers who have modeled or performed on the premises during the previous six months. The register shall remain confidential, except that it shall be available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer immediately upon demand at all times during regular business hours. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.200 Adult performer and figure model identification card.
     The chief of police shall provide to each adult performer and figure model granted a temporary or regular permit an identification card containing the name, photograph and permit number of the adult performer or figure model. The identification card shall remain confidential, except that an adult performer or figure model shall deposit his or her identification card with the on-site manager of an adult-entertainment business while the adult performer or figure model is working on the premises. The on-site manager shall make the identification cards available for inspection by law enforcement personnel or the county health officer at all times while the adult-entertainment business is open for business. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.210 Employment of persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited.
     It is unlawful for the permittee or operator of an adult-entertainment business to employ, or permit to perform services or entertainment on the premises, any person who is under the age of eighteen years. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.220 Display of permit.
     Every adult-entertainment business granted a permit shall display the permit in a conspicuous place within the adult-entertainment business at all times during business hours. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.230 Business operations tax.
     Nothing in this title shall relieve the owner of any adult-entertainment business, or any adult performer or any figure model, from paying the applicable business operations tax pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code. The issuance of a business operations tax certificate shall not authorize conducting an adult-entertainment business, or performing as an adult performer in an adult-entertainment business, or acting as a figure model in a modeling studio, until the necessary temporary or regular permit required by Section 5.06.030 or 5.06.060 has been lawfully granted. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.240 Transfer of adult-entertainment business permit.
     A.    Upon sale, transfer or relocation of an adult-entertainment business, the permit therefor shall be void unless permission to transfer is first obtained pursuant to this section; provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of the permittee, the establishment may continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly transfer of the permit pursuant to this section. Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and upon such attempt the permit shall be deemed revoked.

     B.     No adult-entertainment business permit shall be transferable as to location or person, except with the written consent of the city manager. An application for transfer shall be in writing and contain the same information required for an initial permit application. Prior to submitting the application to the chief of police, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city council, to the department of finance. The department of finance shall issue a receipt to the applicant showing that the permit transfer application fee has been paid. The applicant shall provide the receipt or a copy thereof to the chief of police with the permit transfer application.

     C.     No adult-entertainment business permit may be transferred after the city manager has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

     D.    An application to transfer shall be approved if the city manager determines that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an adult-entertainment business permit under this chapter; provided, however, that an application for transfer at the same location shall not be denied if the only ground for denial is that the location of the business no longer meets the locational criteria set forth in the Chapter 5.06.255. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.250 Employment of adult performer and figure models.
     A.    No permittee or operator of a modeling studio shall allow or permit a person to act as a figure model for the studio unless the person possesses a valid figure model permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each person employed or acting as a figure model shall have first obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     No permittee or operator of an adult-entertainment business shall employ and/or allow any person to engage in or participate in any live performance displaying or depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities unless that person possesses a valid adult performer permit under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the operator to ensure that each person acting as an adult performer shall have first obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter and shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.

     C.     No permittee or operator of an adult-entertainment business shall employ at an adult-entertainment business, or permit to provide services or entertainment at an adult-entertainment business, any person who has been convicted of an offense specified in Section 5.06.110(B), where the offense occurred at any adult-related establishment. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.255 Locational standards.
     A.    No adult business shall be established or located in any area in the city other than the following zoning districts:

     CC—Community Commercial District;

     GI—General Industrial District.

     B.     An adult business shall not be established or located within:

     1.     Five hundred feet from any residence or residential zone, or religious institution (as defined in Section 9.08.010(E).

     2.     One thousand feet of any school, nursery, day care center, or public or private park.

     C.     Distance Between Adult Businesses. An adult business shall not be established or located within one thousand feet of an existing adult business. If two or more existing adult businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than one thousand feet, then in determining which of the businesses is or are nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous lawful uninterrupted operation of the businesses.

     D.    Measurement of Distance. For the purpose of measuring the distance requirements set forth in subsections (B) and (D) of this section, all distances shall be measured, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest property line of the property on which the adult business is or will be located to the nearest property line of any residentially zoned property, school, nursery, day care center, religious institution or public or private park as described in subsection (B) of this section, or between the nearest property lines of the properties occupied by or proposed to be occupied by adult businesses as described in subsection (D) of this section, along a straight line extended between the two points.

     E.     All adult businesses are required to procure and maintain an adult business license as mandated by Chapter 5.10 et seq., of the city’s Municipal Code.

     F.     No building permit or zoning clearance, business tax receipt, adult business license, or other permit or entitlement for use shall be legally valid if issued to any adult business proposed to operate or to be established in the city except if the zoning and locational requirements set forth in this section are satisfied.

     G.    An adult business or establishment operating as a legal conforming use with an approved adult business license from the city shall not be rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of residential zones, schools, nurseries, day care centers, religious institutions or public or private parks within the locational limitations set forth in this section. For purposes of this section, a use shall be deemed to be subsequently located if it commences following the date an application for an adult business license is filed pursuant to Section 5.10.014 of the Municipal Code.

     H.    Zone D of the Napa County Airport Land Use Environs Plan (AELUP) limits occupancy to one hundred persons per structure and one hundred fifty persons per net acre (both within a structure and outdoors on the site). All adult businesses within Zone D of the Napa County AELUP are required to comply with the applicable AELUP occupancy standards. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.260 Development standards.
     A.    Design Standards.

     1.     All building openings, entries and windows shall be located, covered or screened to prevent viewing the interior from any exterior area.

     2.     No partitions between subdivisions of a room, portion, or part of a building, structure or premises, including restrooms, may have an aperture, hole, slit, or other opening or gap which is designed or otherwise constructed to encourage, permit, or allow sexual activity between persons on either side of the partition.

     3.     Each adult-oriented business shall have a business entrance separate from any other nonadult business located in the same building.

     4.     The maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes, and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the regulations and standards of the American Canyon fire division and the city’s building division.

     5.     Any adult-oriented business in which live entertainment is performed, whether or not such performers are appropriately licensed as required by this code, shall have such performances only conducted on a stage or on a platform that is raised eighteen inches and which has a rail which does not allow patrons to be any closer to the performers than six feet. Said rail shall be at least forty-two inches in height and shall be installed around the perimeter of the stage or platform.

     6.     Any adult-oriented business shall be designed such that a manager’s station is provided for the purpose of supervising activities within the business and such that a manager in the manager’s station can view the entire interior of the business to which the public is allowed access, excepting restrooms.

     7.     Any viewing room or area shall be visible from the manager’s station and such view shall not be obscured or obstructed by any wall, curtain, door, any other structure, or by any display of merchandise.

     8.     No private viewing areas as defined herein shall be permitted or shown on any design for an adult-oriented business.

     9.     An adult business proposed in Zone D of the Napa County Airport Land Use Environs Plan (AELUP) shall demonstrate that the occupancy of the proposed business shall not exceed the AELUP occupancy standards of one hundred persons per structure and one hundred fifty persons per net acre (both within a structure and outdoors on the site).

     B.     Performance Standards. The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable site development standards—including parking—of the zone, district, or area in which the adult-oriented business is located, the building code, fire code, and the health and safety code of the city. An adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable city permit and inspection procedures. In addition, adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the following performance standards:

     1.     At all times, the maintenance and operation of an adult-oriented business shall be in accordance with the design standards set forth in subsection (A) of this section.

     2.     The building entrance to the adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises.

     3.     A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult-oriented business is open to the public.

     4.     Any viewing room shall be visible from the manager’s station of the adult-oriented business, and visibility of the entire viewing room from the manager’s station shall be neither obscured nor obstructed by any curtain, door, wall, or other structure.

     5.     All exterior areas of adult-oriented businesses, including buildings, landscaping, and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds and debris.

     6.     No special events, promotions, concerts, or similar activities which are likely to increase the parking demand at the location of the adult-oriented business shall occur unless the permit-holder has obtained a special events permit from the city as would be required by all other types of businesses within the city.

     7.     No adult-oriented business, excepting an adult motel, shall operate between the hours of eleven p.m. and ten a.m. No owner, operator, manager, employee, or independent contractor of an adult-oriented business, except an adult motel, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under the provisions of this code, shall allow such business to remain open for business, or no owner, operator, manager or employee of an adult-oriented business shall permit any employee or independent contractor to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service between the hours of eleven p.m. and ten a.m.

     8.     Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult-oriented business on-site and as specified for the zone, district or area in which the business is located in accordance with the parking provisions of this code and as follows:

     a.     Adult Theater, Adult Cabaret, Adult Motion Theater, or Adult Arcade. One parking space shall be provided for every two seats in a viewing room, or one parking space shall be provided for every two occupants per the allowable occupant load as established by the chief building official and/or the fire marshal, which ever standard is greater. In addition, one parking space shall be provided for each employee or independent contractor on the maximum shift.

     9.     Any person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business, other than an adult motel and regardless of whether or not an adult-oriented business license has been issued to said business under this code, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or viewing area of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:

     a.     Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of all overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be permitted. A manager’s station(s) shall not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area.

     b.     No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station shall be made without the prior written approval of the director of community development.

     c.     It is the duty of the permit holder to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

     d.     The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designed, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

     e.     It shall be the duty of the permit holder and any employees or independent contractors present on the premises to insure that the view area specified in subsection (B)(9)(d) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designed as an area in which patrons shall not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this chapter.

     10.   An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items:

     a.     All off-street parking areas and building entries serving the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall be shown on the required site or plot plan. The required lighting shall remain on for at least thirty minutes after the closing time of the adult-oriented business to promote safety for employees thereof.

     b.     All off-street parking areas shall have a security system provided that visually records and retains activities in the parking lot for at least a forty-eight hour period for the purposes of promoting safety and identifying violators.

     c.     All interior portions of the adult-oriented business, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two foot candles of light.

     d.     For adult-oriented businesses which exceed an occupant load of one hundred twenty-five persons, the provision of on-site security personnel shall be required during all business hours pursuant to a plan to be reviewed and approved for adequacy by the designated head of the law enforcement entity providing law enforcement services to the city. Security personnel shall be licensed in accordance with the California Business and Professions Code, to the satisfaction of the designated head of the entity providing law enforcement services to the city.

     11.   Adult Motion Picture Theater/Adult Arcade.

     a.     A manager’s station shall be located near the main entrance and the station shall be provided with an unobstructed view of all motion picture or arcade viewing areas.

     b.     No adult motion picture theater or adult arcade shall be maintained or operated unless the complete interior of the adult motion picture theater or adult arcade is visible upon entrance to such premises. No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths shall be maintained.

     c.     Maximum Number of Devices. No person shall operate an adult motion picture theater or adult arcade in which the number of image producing devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located.

     12.   Adult Hotel/Motel.

     a.     Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented or subrented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours within a twenty-four hour period on a recurring basis creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult hotel/motel as that term is defined in this title.

     b.     A person is in violation of the provisions of this title if such person rents or subrents a sleeping room at a location without an adult-oriented business license and an adult use planning permit to a person or persons and within ten hours thereafter rents or subrents the same room to an other person(s), or subrents the same room to the prior renter.

     13.   No advertising sign or structure, advertisement, display, or other promotional material depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities, shall be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from any exterior area.

     14.   No loudspeaker or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall be used in connection with an adult-oriented business, and the business shall be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.270 Adult-entertainment businesses providing live entertainment.
     The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-entertainment businesses providing live entertainment depicting or displaying or involving specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:

     A.    The adult-entertainment business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for adult performers that are exclusively dedicated to the adult performers’ use, and to which no patron shall be admitted.

     B.     The adult-entertainment business shall provide an entrance/exit for adult performers that are separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

     C.     No adult performer, either before, during or after performances, shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any adult performer either before, during or after performances by the adult performer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-entertainment business. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.280 Management and security requirements.
     A.    There shall be present on the premises of an adult-entertainment business at all times while the business is open a manager who shall be in charge of all of the activities on the premises and who shall be responsible to ensure compliance with all requirements set forth in this chapter.

     B.     An adult-entertainment business shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

     1.     An adult-entertainment business featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the number of persons on the premises exceeds fifty persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.

     2.     Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing patrons’ compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a manager, door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person or perform any duties other than surveillance of the premises, the adult performers, and the patrons to prevent violations of law and enforce compliance with the requirements of this chapter while acting as a security guard. Security guards shall report any violation of law immediately to the responsible manager on the premises at the time the violation or threatened violation occurs, and shall prepare a written report outlining the violation or threatened violation observed. Copies of all written reports required by this section shall be maintained on the premises along with the register of adult performers required by Section 5.06.190, and shall be available for inspection by law enforcement personnel at all times during regular business hours. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.290 Persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited on premises of adult-entertainment business.
     It is unlawful for the permittee or operator of an adult-entertainment business to permit to enter, or remain within, the adult-entertainment business, any person who is under the age of eighteen years. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.300 Violations.
     A.    In order to operate an adult business in American Canyon, the business must obtain an adult business license as provided for in Chapter 5.22 et seq.

     B.     Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business violating or permitting, counseling or assisting the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult businesses shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including license revocation. All remedies provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

     C.     In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (B) of this section, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation.

     D.    The restrictions imposed pursuant to this section do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the American Canyon Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter related to sexual conduct or activities. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.310 Regulations nonexclusive.
     The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of the city of American Canyon. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.320 Applicability to existing adult-entertainment businesses, adult performers and figure models.
     A.    General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all adult-entertainment businesses, and all owners or operators thereof, and all adult performers and figure models, whether such business or activity was in operation before or after the effective date of this chapter; provided, however, that all such businesses, and all owners or operators thereof, and persons shall have one hundred eighty days from the effective date of this chapter to comply with the provisions of this chapter and adult performers and figure models shall have sixty days from the effective date of this chapter to comply with provisions of this chapter. Any person who has filed a timely application for a permit within said time limit shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter relating to possession or display of a permit until a permit is issued or denied.

     Exception. Temporary exemption from permit requirements for lawfully existing adult-entertainment businesses with adult-related establishment permit: The owner(s) and operator(s) of lawfully existing adult-entertainment businesses providing live entertainment depicting or displaying specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities that were lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to obtain an adult-entertainment business permit pursuant to Section 5.06.030 of this chapter within one hundred eighty days, if the owner(s) and operator(s) have an adult-related establishment permit for the facility pursuant to Chapter 5.04 as it existed prior to the effective date of this chapter; and provided further that the owner(s) and operator(s) shall obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter prior to the date on which the adult-related establishment permit expires or would have expired.

     B.     Variance from Separate Entrance/Exit Requirements. The chief of police may authorize a variance from the separate entrance/exit requirements of Section 5.06.270(B) for an adult-entertainment business lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter if the chief finds that the alternative method of separation and/or entrance and exit provides adequate safety for adult performers entering or exiting the premises. The chief of police shall make a decision on the variance within thirty days after the owner or operator of the business submits a written request for variance describing in detail the variance requested.

     C.     Failure to Obtain Permits—Violation of Chapter. Failure to apply for and obtain a permit within the time period specified in subsection (A) and thereafter continuing to operate an adult-entertainment business for which a permit is re quired pursuant to Section 5.06.030 without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

 

5.06.330 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective.

     In particular, the city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the development and operational provisions of this chapter, even in the absence of the permit issuance provisions of this chapter. Further, the city council hereby declares that it would have adopted the permit issuance provisions relating to adult performers even in the absence of the permit issuance provisions for adult-entertainment businesses. In the event a court of competent jurisdiction renders a decision invalidating any permit issuance provisions contained herein, any adult-entertainment business that operates in the city shall be deemed to be operating under a de facto permit subject to all requirements of this chapter that have not been invalidated. (Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009)

Chapter 5.10 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS LICENSE
5.10.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the provisions of the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”) to accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons in need of and provide access to cannabis for medicinal purposes as recommended by their health care provider(s), and to provide access to adult-use cannabis for persons over the age of twenty-one as authorized by the Control, Tax and Regulate the Adult Use of Marijuana Act (“AUMA” or “Proposition 64” passed by California voters in 2016), while imposing sensible regulations on the use of land to protect the city ’s residents, neighborhoods, and businesses from disproportionately negative impacts. As such, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, processing, manufacturing testing, sale, delivery, distribution and transportation of cannabis and cannabis products in a responsible manner to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of American Canyon and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with state law. It is the further purpose of intent of this chapter to require all commercial cannabis operators to obtain and renew annually a permit to operate within the city of American Canyon. Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the possession, use, or provision of cannabis for purposes that violate state or federal law. The provisions of this chapter are in addition to any other permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct business in the city, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under state, city, or other law. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.020 Legal authority.
     Pursuant to Sections 5 and 7 of Article XI of the California Constitution, the provisions of the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (hereinafter “MAUCRSA”), any subsequent state legislation and/or regulations regarding same, the city of American Canyon is authorized to adopt ordinances that establish standards, requirements and regulations for the licensing and permitting of commercial cannabis activity. Any standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and safety, security, and worker protections established by the state of California, or any of its departments or divisions, shall be the minimum standards applicable in the city of American Canyon to all commercial cannabis activity. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.030 Cannabis cultivation and commercial cannabis activities prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter.
     Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, the commercial cultivation, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, sale, delivery, distribution or transportation (other than as provided under Business and Professions Code Section 26090(e)), of cannabis or cannabis product is expressly prohibited in the city of American Canyon. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.040 Compliance with state and local laws.
     It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that it always operates in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that violate federal, state law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state and local laws, including the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”), and any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that violate federal or state law regarding the operation of a commercial cannabis business. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.050 Definitions.
     When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth herein. Any reference to California statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder and is deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulatory provision.

     “A-license” means a state license issued by the Bureau of Cannabis Regulation for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults twenty-one years of age and over and who do not possess physician’s recommendations.

     “A-licensee” means any person holding a license under this chapter for cannabis or cannabis products that are intended for adults twenty-one years of age and over and who do not possess physician’s recommendations.

     “Applicant” means an owner applying for a city license pursuant to this chapter.

     “Batch” means a specific quantity of homogeneous cannabis or cannabis product that is one of the following types:

     1.     “Harvest batch” means a specifically identified quantity of dried flower or trim, leaves, and other cannabis plant matter that is uniform in strain, harvested at the same time, and, if applicable, cultivated using the same pesticides and other agricultural chemicals and harvested at the same time.

     2.     “Manufactured cannabis batch” means either of the following:

     a.     An amount of cannabis concentrates or extract that is produced in one production cycle using the same extraction methods and standard operating procedures.

     b.     An amount of a type of manufactured cannabis produced in one production cycle using the same formulation and standard operating procedures.

     “Building official” means the building official of the city of American Canyon community development department or designee.

     “Bureau” means the Bureau of Cannabis Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs, formerly named the Bureau of Marijuana Control, the Bureau of Medical Cannabis Regulation, and the Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulation.

     “Cannabis” means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Cannabis accessories” has the same meaning as in Section 11018.2 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Cannabis concentrate” means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product’s potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this chapter. A cannabis concentrate is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Cannabis innovation zone” is defined as a park or campus which is one contiguous commercial area of land which has many cannabis related businesses grouped together. Each individual business would be clearly defined, which has a unique entrance and immovable physical barriers between uniquely licensed premises.

     “Cannabis product” means a product containing cannabis or cannabis, including, but not limited to, manufactured cannabis, intended to be sold for use by cannabis patients in California pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the California Health and Safety Code (as the same may be amended from time to time) or pursuant to the Adult Use of Cannabis Act. For purposes of this chapter, “cannabis” does not include industrial hemp as defined by Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Cannabis products” has the same meaning as in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Canopy” means the designated area(s) at a licensed premises, except nurseries that will contain mature plants at any point in time. Canopy: (1) shall be calculated in square feet and measured using clearly identifiable boundaries of all area(s) that will contain mature plants at any point in time, including all of the space(s) within the boundaries; and (2) may be noncontiguous but each unique area included in the total canopy calculation shall be separated by an identifiable boundary which include, but are not limited to: interior walls, shelves, greenhouse walls, hoop house walls, garden benches, hedgerows, fencing, garden beds or garden plots; and if mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the surface area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation.

     “Caregiver” or “primary caregiver” has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Child resistant” means designed or constructed to be significantly difficult for children under five years of age to open, and not difficult for normal adults to use properly.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon, a general law city.

     “City manager” means city manager or designee.

     “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products as provided for in this chapter.

     “Commercial cannabis business” means a business which engages in medicinal or adult-use commercial cannabis activity as authorized by the city of American Canyon Municipal Code.

     “Commercial cannabis business permit” means a regulatory permit issued by the city of American Canyon pursuant to this chapter to a commercial cannabis business and is required before any commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the city. The initial permit and annual renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit is made expressly contingent upon the business’ ongoing compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter and any regulations adopted by the city governing the commercial cannabis activity at issue.

     “Community development director” means the community development director of the city of American Canyon community development department or designee.

     “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

     “Cultivation site” means a location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured, graded, or trimmed, or a location where any combination of those activities occurs.

     “Customer” means a natural person twenty-one years of age or over, or a natural person eighteen years of age or older who possesses a physician’s recommendation, or a medical marijuana identification card.

     “Day care center” has the same meaning as in Section 1596.76 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.

     “Director” means the Director of Consumer Affairs.

     “Dispensing” means any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis products from a retailer.

     “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between licensees.

     “Distributor” means a person holding a valid commercial cannabis business permit for distribution issued by the city of American Canyon, and, a valid state license for distribution, required by state law to engage in the business of purchasing cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or cannabis products from a license manufacturer, for sale to a licensed retailer.

     “Dried flower” means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried, cured, or otherwise processed, excluding leaves and stems.

     “Edible cannabis product” means cannabis product that is intended to be used, in whole or in part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set forth in Division 15 (commencing with Section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by Section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or a drug, as defined by Section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Fund” means the cannabis control fund established pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26210.15.

     “Greenhouse” means a fully enclosed permanent structure that is clad in transparent material with climate control, such as heating and ventilation capabilities and supplemental artificial lighting, and that uses a combination of natural and supplemental lighting for cultivation.

     “Keef,” also known as “kief” or “keif,” refers to the resinous trichomes of cannabis that may accumulate in containers or be sifted from loose, dry cannabis flower with a mesh screen or sieve.

     “Kind” means applicable type or designation regarding a particular cannabis variant or cannabis product type, including, but not limited to, strain name or other grower trademark, or growing area designation.

     “Labeling” means any label or other written, printed, or graphic matter upon a cannabis product, upon its container.

     “Labor peace agreement” means an agreement between a licensee and any bona fide labor organization that, at a minimum, protects the state’s proprietary interests by prohibiting labor organizations and members from engaging in picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, and any other economic interference with the applicant’s business. This agreement means that the applicant has agreed not to disrupt efforts by the bona fide labor organization to communicate with, and attempt to organize and represent, the applicant’s employees. The agreement shall provide a bona fide labor organization access at reasonable times to areas in which the applicant’s employees work, for the purpose of meeting with employees to discuss their right to representation, employment rights under state law, and terms and conditions of employment. This type of agreement shall not mandate a particular method of election or certification of the bona fide labor organization.

     “License” means a state license issued by the state and includes both an A-license and an M-license, as well as a testing laboratory license.

     “Licensee” means any person holding a license under this chapter, regardless of whether the license held is an A-license or an M-license, and includes the holder of a testing laboratory license.

     “Licensing authority” means the city of American Canyon and/or state agency responsible for the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of the license, or the city of American Canyon and/or state agency authorized to take disciplinary action against the licensee.

 

     “Limited-access area” means an area in which cannabis is stored or held and is only accessible to some licensee and authorized personnel.

     “Live plants” means living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature plants, and vegetative stage plants.

     “Local jurisdiction” means a city, county or city and county.

     “Lot” means a batch or a specifically identified portion of a batch.

     “M-license” means a state license issued by the state for commercial cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis.

     “M-licensee” means any person holding a license by the state for commercial cannabis activity involving medicinal cannabis.

     “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.

     “Manufactured cannabis” means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, extraction or other manufactured product intended for internal consumption through inhalation or oral ingestion or for topical application.

     “Manufacturer” means a licensee that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or container.

     “Manufacturing site” means a location that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and is owned and operated by a person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit for manufacturing from the city of American Canyon and, a valid state license as required for manufacturing of cannabis products.

     “Medicinal cannabis” or “medicinal cannabis product” means cannabis or a cannabis product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician’s recommendation.

     “Microbusiness” means the cultivation of cannabis on an area less than ten thousand square feet, by an entity authorized to act as a licensed distributor, Level 1 manufacturer, and retailer under state law, provided such licensee can demonstrate compliance with all requirements imposed by state law on licensed cultivators, distributors, Level 1 manufacturers, and retailers to the extent the licensee engages in such activities. Microbusiness licenses that authorize cultivation of cannabis shall include the license conditions described in subdivision (b) of Section 26060.1 of the Business and Professions Code.

     “Nonvolatile solvent” means any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile solvent. For purposes of this chapter, a nonvolatile solvent includes carbon dioxide (CO2) used for extraction and ethanol used for extraction or post-extraction processing.

     “Nursery” means a licensee that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically, for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis.

     “Operation” means any act for which licensure is required under the provisions of this chapter, or any commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products.

     “Owner” means any of the following:

     1.     A person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty percent or more in the person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance.

     2.     The manager of a nonprofit or other entity.

     3.     A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit.

 

     4.     An individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the business applying for a license, or who has a financial interest in the business other than a fixed lease of real property.

     “Package” means any container or receptacle used for holding cannabis or cannabis products.

     “Patient” or “qualified patient” shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq., as it may be amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the protections of California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5.10.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

     “Person with an identification card” shall have the meaning given that term by California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7.

     “Physician’s recommendation” means a recommendation by a physician and surgeon that a patient use cannabis provided in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Premises” means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be occupied by one licensee unless the operator is granted an M-license and A-license for the same type of activity and such operation is lawful under state and local laws, rules and regulations.

     “Processing” means a cultivation site that conducts only trimming, drying, curing, grading, packaging, or labeling of cannabis and nonmanufactured cannabis products.

     “Purchaser” means the customer who is engaged in a transaction with a licensee for purposes of obtaining cannabis or cannabis products.

     “Retailer” means a commercial cannabis business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, including an establishment (whether fixed or mobile) that delivers, pursuant to express authorization, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale, and where the operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the city of American Canyon authorizing the operation of a retailer, and a valid state license as required by state law to operate a retailer.

     “Sell,” “sale,” and “to sell” include any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis or cannabis products is transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from whom the cannabis or cannabis product was purchased.

     “State license” means a permit or license issued by the state of California, or one of its departments or divisions, under MAUCRSA and any subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same to engage in commercial cannabis activity.

     “Testing laboratory” means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the state that offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following:

     1.     Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in commercial cannabis activity in the state.

     2.     Licensed by the Bureau.

     “Topical cannabis” means a product intended for external application and/or absorption through the skin. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by Section 109925 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Transport” means the transfer of cannabis products from the permitted business location of one licensee to the permitted business location of another licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity authorized by MAUCRSA which may be amended or repealed by any subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same.

     “Unique identifier” means an alphanumeric code or designation used for reference to a specific plant on a licensed premises and any cannabis or cannabis product derived or manufactured from that plant.

     “Volatile solvent” means any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when present in air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. Examples of volatile solvents include, but are not limited to, butane, hexane, and propane.

     “Youth center” means any public or private facility that is primarily used to host recreation or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club facilities, video arcades where ten or more video games or game machines or devices are operated, and where minors are legally permitted to conduct business, or similar amusement park facilities. It shall also include a park, playground or recreational area specifically designed to be used by children which has play equipment installed, including public grounds designed for athletic activities such as baseball, softball, soccer, or basketball or any similar facility located on a public or private school grounds, or on city, county or state parks. This definition shall not include any private martial arts, yoga, ballet, music, art studio or similar studio of this nature nor shall it include any private gym, athletic training facility, pizza parlor, dentist office, doctor’s office primarily serving children or a location which is primarily utilized as an administrative office or facility for youth programs or organizations. (Ord. 2020-04 § 4, 2020; Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.060 Commercial cannabis business permit required to engage in commercial cannabis business.
     A.    A commercial cannabis business is limited to indoor commercial cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, retail non-storefront, testing labs, and microbusinesses that shall include only indoor cultivation, distribution, manufacturing, testing labs, and retail non-storefront, for cannabis and cannabis products.

     B.     No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in any commercial cannabis activity within the city of American Canyon unless the person: (1) has a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the city of American Canyon; (2) has a valid state of California seller’s permit; and (3) is currently in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations pertaining to the commercial cannabis business and the commercial cannabis activities, including the duty to obtain any required state licenses. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.070 Cannabis employee permit required.
     A.    Prior to offering employment to a cannabis employee candidate, the cannabis business shall conduct a pre-screening process of the successful candidate.

     B.     Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a commercial cannabis business must be legally authorized to do so under applicable state law.

     C.     Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a commercial cannabis business must obtain a commercial cannabis employee work permit from the city prior to performing any work at any commercial cannabis business.

     D.    Applications for a commercial cannabis employee work permit shall be developed, made available, and processed by the city manager and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

     1.     Name, address, and phone number of the applicant;

     2.     Age and verification of applicant. A copy of a birth certificate, driver’s license, government issued identification card, passport or other proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one years of age must be submitted with the application;

     3.     Name, address of the commercial cannabis business where the person will be employed, and the name of the primary manager of that business;

     4.     A list of any crimes enumerated in California Business and Professions Code Section 26057(b)(4) for which the applicant or employee has been convicted;

     5.     Name, address, and contact person for any previous employers from which the applicant was fired, resigned, or asked to leave and the reasons for such dismissal or firing;

     6.     The application shall be accompanied by fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant in a form and manner as required by the city manager;

     7.     A signed statement under penalty of perjury that the information provided is true and correct;

     8.     If applicable, verification that the applicant is a qualified patient or primary caregiver;

     9.     A fee paid in an amount set by resolution of the city council in an amount necessary to cover the costs of administering the employee work permit programs. The fee is non-refundable and shall not be returned in the event the work permit is denied or revoked.

     E.     The city manager shall review the application for completeness, shall conduct a background check to determine whether the applicant was convicted of a crime or left a previous employer for reasons that show the applicant:

     1.     Has committed any act involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, as defined in Section 480 of the Business and Professions Code; or

     2.     Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, embezzlement; or

     3.     Was convicted of a violent felony, a crime of moral turpitude; and/or

     4.     The illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, except for cannabis related offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996.

     Discovery of these facts showing that the applicant is dishonest or has been convicted of those types of crimes are grounds for denial of the permit. Where the applicant’s sentence (including any term of probation, incarceration, or supervised release) for possession of, possession for sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance is completed, such underlying conviction shall not be the sole ground for denial of a commercial cannabis work permit. Furthermore, an applicant shall not be denied a permit if the denial is based solely on any of the following:

     1.     A conviction for any crime listed in subsection (D)(4) of this section for which the applicant has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation pursuant to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 4852.01) of Title 6 of Part 3 of the California Penal Code; or

     2.     A conviction that was subsequently dismissed pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.41 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of state law allowing for dismissal of a conviction.

     F.     The city manager shall issue the commercial cannabis work permit or a written denial to the applicant within thirty days of the date the application was deemed complete. In the event the cannabis work permit cannot be issued within this time period, the city manager may issue a temporary work permit for an employee upon completing a preliminary background check and if the business can demonstrate to the city manager that the employee is necessary for the operation of the business. The temporary permit may be immediately revoked by the city manager upon determination that the applicant has failed the background check or upon the issuance of the permanent work permit.

     G.    A work permit shall be valid for a twelve-month period and must be renewed on an annual basis. Renewal applications shall contain all the information required in subsection B of this section, including the payment of a renewal application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council.

     H.    In the event a person changes employment from one commercial cannabis business in the city to another, the work permit holder shall notify the city manager in writing of the change within ten days, or the work permit shall be suspended or revoked, and such person shall not be permitted to work at any commercial cannabis business in the city.

     I.      The city may immediately revoke the commercial cannabis work permit should the permit holder be convicted of a crime listed in subsections C and D of this section or if facts become known to the city manager that the permit holder has engaged in dishonest activities.

     J.      The city manager is hereby authorized to enforce all regulations necessary to implement the work permit process and requirements.

     K.    The applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a commercial cannabis work permit by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the date the applicant received the notice of denial; which appeal shall be conducted as set forth in Section 5.10.140 of this chapter.

     L.     The city manager shall issue a permit in the form of a personal identification card that can be worn in a prominent and visible location. The identification card shall be maintained in good and readable condition at all times. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

5.10.080 Maximum number of authorized commercial cannabis businesses.
     The number of commercial cannabis businesses that may be permitted to operate in the city shall be established by resolution of the city council.

     A.    This section is intended to identify a maximum number of commercial cannabis businesses that may be authorized to operate in the city. Nothing in this chapter creates a mandate that the city council must authorize any or all of the commercial cannabis businesses if it is determined that the applicant(s) do not meet the application standards or will negatively impact public health, safety, or welfare.

     B.     Each year following the city council’s initial award of permits, if any, or at any time in the city council’s discretion, the city council may reassess the number of commercial cannabis businesses that may be authorized. The city council in its discretion, may determine by resolution whether to reduce, maintain or expand the number of commercial cannabis businesses. (Ord. 2020-02 § 4, 2020; Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.090 Initial application procedure.
     A.    The city manager shall adopt detailed objective review criteria such as a point system or equivalent quantitative evaluation scale tied to each set of review criteria (“review criteria”), to govern the commercial cannabis business permit(s) application process. The city manager shall be authorized to prepare the necessary forms, adopt any necessary rules to the application, regulations and processes, solicit applications, and conduct initial evaluations of the applicants.

     B.     At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee established by resolution of the city council, to reimburse the city for all costs incurred in the application process.

     C.     After the initial review, ranking, and scoring under the review criteria, the city manager will make a final determination in accordance with this section.

     D.    The City’s Reservation of Rights. The city reserves the right to reject any or all applications. Prior to permit issuance, the city may also modify, postpone, or cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this chapter, at any time without liability, obligation, or commitment to any party, firm, or organization, to the extent permitted under California state law. Persons submitting applications assume the risk that all or any part of the program, or any particular category of permit potentially authorized under this chapter, may be cancelled at any time prior to permit issuance. The city further reserves the right to request and obtain additional information from any candidate submitting an application. In addition to any other justification provided a failure to comply with other requirements in this chapter, an application risks being rejected for any of the following reasons:

     1.     Proposal received after designated time and date; or

     2.     Proposal not containing the required elements, exhibits, nor organized in the required format; or

     3.     Proposal considered not fully responsive to this request for permit application. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.100 Personnel prohibited from holding a license or employee work permit.
     A.    Any person, including, but not limited to, any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular in which any of the following actions or notices have been issued in noncompliance, shall be prohibited from holding a cannabis commercial license or employee work permit in the city of American Canyon. In addition, the following shall be grounds for denial of a local license or employee work permit:

     1.     The applicant has been denied a license or has had a license suspended or revoked by any city, county, city and county or any other state cannabis licensing authority;

     2.     The applicant was notified that they were conducting commercial cannabis activity in noncompliance with Title 19 or other city of American Canyon ordinances, codes and requirements in which they failed to discontinue operating in a timely manner;

     3.     Evidence that the applicant was in noncompliance of properly paying federal, state or local taxes and/or fees when notified by the appropriate agencies;

     4.     As of November 14, 2018, applicant was conducting commercial cannabis activity in the city of American Canyon in violation of local and state law.

     B.     No person shall be issued a commercial cannabis permit to operate who enters into an agreement to lease, sublease or any other agreement, regardless of whether it is verbally or in writing to any terms of use of the premises from a property owner, commercial broker or any third party, that is in violation of this section unless that property is leased at fair market value and such lease, sublease or agreement does not have any terms or conditions for the cannabis permit licensee to pay the property owner, commercial broker, or any third party a percentage of gross receipts, royalties, equity, or other unreasonable compensation as determined by the city. In addition, all leases, subleases, or other agreements must be based on a monthly rate. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.110 Expiration of commercial cannabis business permits.
     Each commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire twelve months after the date of its issuance. Commercial cannabis permits may be renewed as provided in Section 5.10.130. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.120 Revocation of permits.
     Commercial cannabis business permits may be revoked for any violation of any law and/or any rule, regulation and/or standard adopted pursuant to Section 5.10.140, or pursuant to any policy, procedure or regulation in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.130 Renewal applications.
     A.    An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit shall be filed at least sixty calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit.

 

     B.     The renewal application shall contain all the information required for new applications.

     C.     The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by the city council to cover the costs of processing the renewal permit application, together with any costs incurred by the city to administer the program created under this chapter.

     D.    An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit shall be rejected if any of the following exists:

     1.     The application is filed less than sixty days before its expiration.

     2.     The commercial cannabis business permit is suspended or revoked at the time of the application.

     3.     The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the four months prior to the renewal application.

     4.     The commercial cannabis business has failed to conform to the requirements of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     5.     The permittee fails or is unable to renew its state of California license.

     6.     If the city or state has determined, based on substantial evidence, that the permittee or applicant is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, of this code, or of the state rules and regulations, and the city or state has determined that the violation is grounds for termination or revocation of the commercial cannabis business permit.

     E.     The city manager is authorized to make all decisions concerning the issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision, the city manager is authorized to impose additional conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to ensure compliance with state or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public health, safety or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the city manager shall be handled pursuant to Sections 5.10.150 through 5.10.170.

     F.     If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new application pursuant to this chapter no sooner than one year from the date of the rejection. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.140 Effect of state license suspension, revocation, or termination.
     Suspension of a license issued by the state of California, or by any of its departments or divisions, shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the city, until the state of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the state license. Should the state of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license of a commercial cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also revoke or terminate the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the city of American Canyon. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.150 Appeals.
     Unless specifically provided elsewhere to the contrary, whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter from a decision of the city manager, the appeal shall be conducted as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.160 Written request for appeal.
     A.    Within ten calendar days after the date of a decision of the city manager to revoke, suspend or deny a permit, or to add conditions to a permit, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing a written appeal with the city clerk setting forth the reasons why the decision was not proper.

     B.     At the time of filing the appellant shall pay the designated appeal fee, established by resolution of the city council from time to time. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.170 Appeal hearing.
     A.    Upon receipt of the written appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for a hearing before the city manager. The city manager shall hear the matter de novo and shall conduct the hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth by the city.

     B.     The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing the appeal, but in no event later than ninety days from the date of such filing. The city shall notify the appellant of the time and location at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

     C.     At the hearing, the appellant may present any information they deem relevant to the decision appealed. The formal rules of evidence and procedure applicable in a court of law shall not apply to the hearing.

     D.    The decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.180 Permittee selection process.
     A.    The city council shall adopt a procedure guideline and review criteria by which the top applicants in each category of each commercial cannabis business shall be evaluated in a final determination by the city manager.

     B.     At least ten days prior to the public hearing, notice of the public hearing shall be sent to all property owners located within six hundred feet of the proposed business locations of each of the finalists to be considered by the city manager.

     C.     The city manager shall either deny or approve the final candidates and shall select the top candidates in each category of the commercial cannabis businesses. The city manager’s decision as to the selection of the prevailing candidates may be appealed to the city council.

     D.    Issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not create a land use entitlement. The commercial cannabis business permit shall only be for a term of twelve months and shall expire at the end of the twelve month period unless it is renewed as provided herein. Furthermore, no permittee may begin operations, notwithstanding the issuance of a permit, unless all of the state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the requirements of this chapter and of the permit, have been complied with. Until a state license is available and obtained by the permitted operator as set forth in Section 5.10.160.

     E.     If an application is denied, a new application may not be filed for one year from the date of the denial.

     F.     Each person granted a commercial cannabis business permit shall be required to pay the permit fee established by resolution of the city council, to cover the costs of administering the commercial cannabis business permit program created in this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.190 Change in location—Updated registration form.
     A.    Any time the commercial cannabis location specified in the regulatory permit is changed, the applicant shall re-register with the city manager. The process and the fees for re-registration shall be the same as the process and fees set forth for registration in Sections 5.10.130(C) and 5.10.200(A).

     B.     Within fifteen calendar days of any other change in the information provided in the registration form or any change in status of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including any change in the commercial cannabis business ownership or management members, the applicant shall file an updated registration form with the city manager for review along with a registration amendment fee, as set forth in Sections 5.10.130(C) and 5.10.200(A). (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.200 Transfer of cannabis business permit.
     A.    The owner of a cannabis business permit shall not transfer ownership or control of the permit to another person or entity unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the city manager stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the city manager in accordance with all provisions of this chapter (as though the transferee were applying for an original cannabis business permit) accompanied by a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council (or if not set, shall be the same amount as the application fee), and the city manager determines, after hearing, in accordance with this section that the transferee passed the background check required for permittees and meets all other requirements of this chapter.

     B.     Commercial cannabis business permits issued through the grant of a transfer by the city manager shall be valid for a period of one year beginning on the day the city manager approves the transfer of the permit. Before the transferee’s permit expires, the transferee shall apply for a renewal permit in the manner required by this chapter.

     C.     Changes in ownership of a permittee’s business structure or a substantial change in the ownership of a permittee business entity (changes of more than fifty-one percent of the original ownership), must be approved by the city manager through the transfer process contained in subsection A of this section. Failure to comply with this provision is grounds for permit revocation.

     D.    A permittee may change the form of business entity without applying to the city manager for a transfer of permit, provided that either:

     1.     The membership of the new business entity is substantially similar to original permit holder business entity (at least fifty-one percent of the membership is identical); or

     2.     If the original permittee is an unincorporated association, mutual or public benefit corporation, agricultural or consumer cooperative corporation and subsequently transitions to or forms a new business entity as allowed under the MAUCRSA and to comply with Section 5.10.060(B), provided that the board of directors (or in the case of an unincorporated association, the individual(s) listed on the city permit application) of the original permittee entity are the same as the new business entity.

     Although a transfer is not required in these two circumstances, the permit holder is required to notify the city manager in writing of the change within ten days of the change. Failure to comply with this provision is grounds for permit revocation.

     E.     No commercial cannabis business permit may be transferred when the city manager has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

     F.     Any attempt to transfer a commercial cannabis business permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and such a purported transfer shall be deemed a ground for revocation of the permit. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.210 City business license.
     Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall obtain a city of American Canyon business license. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.220 Building permits and inspection.
     Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall be subject to a building inspection and must obtain all required permits and approvals which would otherwise be required for any business of the same size and intensity operating in that zoning district. This includes, but is not limited to, obtaining any required building permit(s), American Canyon fire protection district approvals, Napa County health department approvals and other applicable zoning and land use permit(s) and approvals. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.230 Certification from the community development director.
     Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business must obtain a certification from the community development director certifying that the business is located on a site that meets all of the requirements of Title 19 of this code. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.240 Right to occupy and to use property.
     As a condition precedent to the city’s issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter, any person intending to open and to operate a commercial cannabis business shall provide sufficient evidence of the legal right to occupy and to use the proposed location. In the event the proposed location will be leased from the property owner, the applicant shall be required to provide a signed and notarized statement from the owner of the property, acknowledging that the property owner has read this chapter and consents to the operation of the commercial cannabis business on the owner’s property. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.250 Location and design of cannabis businesses.
     Cannabis businesses permitted to engage in testing labs or microbusinesses that include only indoor cultivation, distribution, manufacturing, and retail non-storefront, for cannabis and cannabis products are subject to the following zoning and locational requirements:

     A.    All cannabis non-store front retail businesses must be located on property zoned GI (general industrial) and must meet all of the requirements for development in this zone; and

     B.     Allowable cannabis businesses shall be located in the GI (general industrial) zoning district and must meet all of the requirements for development in this zoning district. The cannabis businesses must also meet all of the following distance requirements:

     1.     Cannabis businesses shall be no closer than six hundred feet of any residentially zoned parcel in the city. The distance between the cannabis business and the residential parcel shall be measured from the outer boundaries of the residential parcel to the first structure on the property seeking the commercial cannabis permit.

     2.     Cannabis businesses shall be no closer than six hundred feet from any parcel containing any of the following:

     a.     A school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12, (whether public, private, or charter, including pre-school, transitional kindergarten, and K-12);

     b.     A commercial daycare center licensed by the city, county, or state that is in existence at the time the license is issued, unless the state licensing authority or the city specifies a different radius; or

     c.     A youth center that is in existence at the time the license is issued, unless the state licensing authority or the city specifies a different radius.

     3.     In addition to the separation standards described in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, cannabis businesses in the general industrial zoning district may not locate within the “Southern Buffer Zone” as depicted in Figure 5.10.250.

 

Figure 5.10.250



 

     C.     Each proposed cannabis business project shall:

     1.     Conform with the city’s general plan, any applicable specific plans, master plans, and design requirements.

     2.     Comply with all applicable zoning and related development standards.

     3.     Be constructed in a manner that minimizes odors to surrounding uses, and promotes quality design and construction, and consistency with the surrounding properties.

     4.     Be adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and all items required for the development.

     5.     Be served by highways adequate in width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use will generate.

     6.     Be provided with adequate electricity, sewerage, disposal, water, fire protection and storm drainage facilities for the intended purpose. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.260 Limitations on city’s liability.
     To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city of American Canyon shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having issued a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter or otherwise approving the operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the approval of any commercial cannabis business permit, the applicant shall be required to meet all of the following conditions before they can receive the commercial cannabis business permit:

     A.    Applicant shall execute an agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at applicant’s sole cost and expense), and hold the city of American Canyon, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents, harmless, from any and all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to, the city’s issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit, the city’s decision to approve the operation of the commercial cannabis business or activity, the process used by the city in making its decision, or the alleged violation of any federal, state or local laws by the commercial cannabis business or any of its officers, employees or agents.

     B.     Applicant shall maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon determined necessary and appropriate from time to time by the city manager.

     C.     Applicant shall reimburse the city of American Canyon for all costs and expenses, including, but not limited to, legal fees and costs and court costs, which the city of American Canyon may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the city’s approval of the applicant’s commercial cannabis business permit, or related to the city’s approval of a commercial cannabis activity. The city of American Canyon may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.270 Records and recordkeeping.
     A.    Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a current register of the names and the contact information (including the name, address, and telephone number) of anyone owning or holding an interest in the commercial cannabis business, and separately of all the officers, managers, employees, agents and volunteers currently employed or otherwise engaged by the commercial cannabis business. The register required by this paragraph shall be provided to the city manager upon a reasonable request.

     B.     Each commercial cannabis business shall allow the city of American Canyon officials to have access to the business’s books, records, accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its permitted commercial cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination. Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data or documents will be produced no later than twenty-four hours after receipt of the city’s request, unless otherwise stipulated by the city. The city may require the materials to be submitted in an electronic format that is compatible with the city’s software and hardware. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.280 Security measures.
     A.    A permitted commercial cannabis business shall implement sufficient security measures to deter and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products, and to deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis products at the commercial cannabis business. Except as may otherwise be determined by the city manager, these security measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:

     1.     Alarm system (perimeter, fire, and panic buttons).

     2.     Remote monitoring of alarm systems by licensed security professionals.

     3.     Perimeter lighting systems (including motion sensors) for after-hours security.

     4.     Perimeter security and lighting as approved by the police chief and director of community development.

     5.     Prevent individuals from remaining on the premises of the commercial cannabis business if they are not engaging in an activity directly related to the permitted operations of the commercial cannabis business.

     6.     Establish limited access areas accessible only to authorized commercial cannabis business personnel.

     7.     Except for live growing plants which are being cultivated at a cultivation facility, all cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a secured and locked vault or vault equivalent. All safes and vaults shall be compliant with Underwriter Laboratories burglary-resistant and fire-resistant standards. All cannabis and cannabis products, including live plants that are being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner as to prevent diversion, theft, and loss.

     8.     Install twenty-four-hour security surveillance cameras of at least HD-quality to monitor all entrances and exits to and from the premises, all interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business which are open and accessible to the public, all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency, is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis and all interior spaces where diversion of cannabis could reasonably occur. All cameras shall record in color. All exterior cameras shall be in weather-proof enclosures, shall be located so as to minimize the possibility of vandalism, and shall have the capability to automatically switch to black and white in low light conditions.

     Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of ninety days and shall be made available to the city manager upon request. Video shall be of sufficient quality for effective prosecution of any crime found to have occurred on the site of the commercial cannabis business, and shall be capable of enlargement via projection or other means. Internet protocol address information shall be provided to the American Canyon police department by the commercial cannabis business, to facilitate remote monitoring of security cameras by the department or its designee.

     9.     Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure areas, and shall be monitored in real time by a security company licensed by the state of California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services.

     10.   Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis businesses with direct notification to American Canyon police department dispatch, and shall be configured to immediately alert dispatch for the American Canyon police department.

     11.   A professionally installed, maintained, and monitored real-time alarm system by a security company licensed by the state of California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services.

     12.   Security personnel shall be on-site twenty-four hours a day or alternative security as authorized by the city manager, and must have a verified response security patrol when closed. Security personnel shall be licensed by the state of California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services personnel and shall be subject to the prior review and approval of the city manager, with such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Firearms may be carried by security personnel while they are on duty if authorized by the chief of police.

     13.   Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability to remain secure during a power outage and shall ensure that all access doors are not solely controlled by an electronic access panel to ensure that locks are not released during a power outage.

     14.   Entrance areas are to be locked at all times and under the control of a designated responsible party that is either: (a) an employee of the commercial cannabis business; or (b) a licensed security professional.

     15.   Each commercial cannabis business shall have an accounting software system in place to provide point of sale data as well as audit trails or both product and cash, where applicable.

     16.   Each commercial cannabis business shall demonstrate to the chief of police, city manager, compliance with the state’s track and trace system for cannabis and cannabis products, as soon as it is operational.

     17.   Each commercial cannabis business shall have state of the art network security protocols in place to protect computer information and all digital data.

     18.   Exterior vegetation shall be planted, altered and maintained in a fashion that precludes its use as a hiding place for persons on the premises.

     B.     Each commercial cannabis business shall identify a designated security representative/liaison to the city of American Canyon, who shall be reasonably available to meet with the city manager regarding any security related measures or and operational issues. The designated security representative/liaison shall, on behalf of the commercial cannabis business, annually maintain a copy of the current security plan on the premises of the business, to present to the city manager upon request that meets the following requirements:

     1.     Confirm that a designated manager will be on duty during business hours and will be responsible for monitoring the behavior of employees.

     2.     Identify all managers of the commercial cannabis business and their contact phone numbers.

     3.     Confirm that first aid supplies and operational fire extinguishers are located in the service areas and the manager’s office.

     4.     Confirm that burglar, fire, and panic alarms are operational and monitored by a licensed security company twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, and provides contact information for each licensed security company.

     5.     Identify a sufficient number of licensed, interior and exterior security personnel who will monitor individuals inside and outside the commercial cannabis business, the parking lot, and any adjacent property under the business’s control.

     6.     Confirm that the licensed security personnel shall regularly monitor the parking lot and any adjacent property to ensure that these areas are: (a) free of individuals loitering or causing a disturbance; (b) are cleared of employees and their vehicles one-half hour after closing.

     C.     As part of the application and permitting process each commercial cannabis business shall have a storage and transportation plan, which describes in detail the procedures for safely and securely storing and transporting all cannabis, cannabis products, and any currency.

     D.    The commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the city whenever the city manager makes a request, without prior notice, to inspect or audit the effectiveness of any security plan or of any other requirement of this chapter.

     E.     A commercial cannabis business shall notify the city manager within twenty-four hours after discovering any of the following:

     1.     Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of significance shall be determined by the regulations adopted by the city manager.

     2.     Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the commercial cannabis business or any agent or employee of the commercial cannabis business.

     3.     The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis, customers or employees or agents of the commercial cannabis business.

     4.     Any other breach of security.

     F.     Compliance with the foregoing requirements shall be verified by the city manager prior to commencing business operations. The city manager may supplement these security requirements once operations begin, subject to review by the city manager if requested by the business owner. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.290 Restriction on alcohol and tobacco sales.
     A.    No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business.

     B.     No person shall cause or permit the sale or tobacco products on or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.300 Compliance with laws.
     It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that it operates at all times in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that violate state law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial cannabis business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable state and local laws, the Medical and Adult Use Cannabis and Regulation Act (MAUCRSA) any subsequently enacted state law or regulatory, licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business permit. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions which violate state law with regard to the operation of a commercial cannabis business. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.310 Fees and charges.
     A.    No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in the city, without timely paying in full all fees and charges required for the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. Fees and charges associated with the operation of a commercial cannabis activity shall be established by resolution of the city council which may be amended from time to time.

     B.     All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this chapter shall pay all sales, use, business and other applicable taxes, and all license, registration, and other fees required under federal, state and local law. Each commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the city with respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis business’s books and records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section, including, but not limited to, a verification of the amount of taxes required to be paid during any period. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.320 Miscellaneous operating requirements.
     A.    All cannabis and cannabis products sold, distributed or manufactured shall be cultivated, manufactured, and transported by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with the State and local regulations.

     B.     Commercial cannabis businesses may operate only during the hours specified in the commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city.

     C.     Restriction on Consumption. cannabis shall not be consumed by any employee on the premises of any commercial cannabis business.

     D.    No cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of any property issued a commercial cannabis business permit, or on any of the vehicles owned or used as part of the commercial cannabis business. No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any time.

     E.     Emergency Contact. Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the city manager with the name, telephone number (both land line and mobile, if available) of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided at any hour of the day.

     F.     Signage and Notices.

     1.     Business identification signage for a commercial cannabis business shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 19.23 of this code, including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a city sign permit.

     2.     No signs placed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business shall obstruct any entrance or exit to the building or any window.

     3.     Each entrance to a commercial cannabis business shall be visibly posted with a clear and legible notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises or in the areas adjacent to the commercial cannabis business is prohibited.

     G.    Minors.

     1.     Persons under the age of twenty-one years shall not be allowed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business and shall not be allowed to serve as a driver for a mobile delivery service. It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to employ any person at a commercial cannabis business who is not at least twenty-one years of age.

     2.     The entrance to the commercial cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice that no person under the age of twenty-one years of age is permitted to enter upon the premises of the commercial cannabis business.

     H.    Odor Control. Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all commercial cannabis businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable off-site in accordance with Section 19.14.040(D)(2) of this code.

     I.      Display of Permit and City Business License. The original copy of the commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and the city-issued business license shall be posted inside the commercial cannabis business in a location readily-visible to the public.

     J.      Business Owner, Manager, and Supervisor Background Check. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorizes the city authorities to access state and local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or certification purposes; and authorizes access to federal level criminal history information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, every person listed as an owner, manager, and supervisor must submit fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the chief of police for a background check by the city of American Canyon police department. Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which requires that there be a requirement or exclusion from employment, licensing or certification based on specific criminal conduct on the part of the subject of the record. No person shall be issued a permit to operate a commercial cannabis business or a related work permit unless they have first cleared the background check, as determined by the chief of police, as required by this section. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual cost to the city of American Canyon to conduct the background investigation as it deems necessary and appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for a commercial cannabis business permit is submitted.

     K.    Employee and Contract Employee Background Check. Pursuant to city council resolution, employee and contract employee background checks will be provided by the city of American Canyon police department or a background check service under contract to the city.

     L.     Loitering. The owner and/or operator of a commercial cannabis business shall prohibit loitering by persons outside the facility both on the premises and within fifty feet of the premises.

     M.    Permits and Other Approvals. Prior to the establishment of any commercial cannabis business or the operation of any such business, the person intending to establish a commercial cannabis business must first obtain all applicable planning, zoning, building, and other applicable permits from the relevant governmental agency which may be applicable to the zoning district in which such commercial cannabis business intends to establish and to operate. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.330 Other operational requirements.
     Prior to operating in the city and as a condition of issuance of a regulatory permit, the operator of each cannabis facility shall enter into an operational agreement with the city setting forth the terms and conditions under which the cannabis facility will operate that are in addition to the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, public outreach and education, community service, payment of fees and other charges as mutually agreed, and such other terms and conditions that will protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.340 Operating requirements for non-store front retailer.
     A.    Non-store front retailer license owners and operators are required to verify the age and the necessary documentation of each medical customer to ensure the customer is not under the age of eighteen years, and to verify that the potential customer has a valid doctor’s recommendation. Doctor recommendations are not to be obtained or provided at the retail location.

     B.     Operating hours of the non-store front retailer shall be limited to between the hours of six a.m. through ten p.m., seven days a week.

     C.     The commercial non-store front retailer shall only sell cannabis or cannabis products to a natural person twenty-one years of age or older, or a natural person eighteen years of age or older who possesses a physician’s recommendation for cannabis medical use only.

     D.    The commercial cannabis non-store front retailer may only have a quantity of cannabis and cannabis products on-site that is reasonably anticipated to meet the weekly sales demand. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.350 Non-store front retailer vehicle requirements.
     Prior to commencing operations, a cannabis non-store front retailer shall provide the following information to the city as described in Section 19.37.040(A) of this code. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.360 Permissible delivery locations and customers.
     Non-store front businesses permitted to engage in delivery of cannabis and cannabis products are subject to the following requirements:

     A.    A cannabis business must be authorized by the city of American Canyon to deliver cannabis goods to a residential address in the city of American Canyon and/or to other jurisdictions in which it is permitted to deliver cannabis goods.

     B.     A licensed cannabis business shall not deliver cannabis goods to an address located on publicly owned land or any address on land or in a building leased by a public agency.

     C.     A licensed cannabis business shall comply with all requirements of state and local law pertaining to the cannabis permit and all subsequent policies, procedures and regulations which may be amended by the city manager from time to time in order to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.370 Retailer store front services shall not be permitted.
     It is unlawful for any person, limited liability company, corporation, collective, cooperative or any other entity to manage or operate a store front facility in which customers are permitted on the premises for which it will sell, exchange, barter, transfer, and/or promote, any cannabis or cannabis products in the city for commercial purpose unless they have been issued a commercial cannabis permit pursuant to this chapter and authorized to conduct such activities. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.380 Operating requirements for cultivation facilities.
     A.    Outdoor Cultivation Prohibited. The cultivation of all cannabis shall occur indoors. All outdoor cultivation is prohibited.

     B.     In no case, shall cannabis plants or any cannabis parts be visible from a public or private road, sidewalk, park or any common public viewing area.

     C.     Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests, rodents or other wildlife. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.390 Operating requirements for testing labs.
     A.    Testing labs shall be required to conduct all testing in a manner pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26100 and shall be subject to state and local law. Each testing lab shall be subject to additional regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are developed under this chapter and any subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same.

     B.     Testing labs shall conduct all testing in a manner consistent with general requirements for the competence of testing and calibrations activities, including sampling using verified methods.

     C.     All cannabis testing laboratories performing testing shall obtain and maintain ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation as required by the Bureau of Cannabis Control.

     D.    Testing labs shall destroy any harvest batch whose testing sample indicates noncompliance with health and safety standards required by the bureau unless remedial measures can bring the cannabis or cannabis products into compliance with quality standards as specified by law and implemented by the bureau.

     E.     Each operator shall ensure that a testing laboratory employee takes the sample of cannabis or cannabis products from the distributor’s premises for testing required by state law and that the testing laboratory employee transports the sample to the testing laboratory.

     F.     Except as provided by state law, a testing laboratory shall not acquire or receive cannabis or cannabis products except from a licensee in accordance with state law, and shall not distribute, sell, or dispense cannabis, or cannabis products, from the licensed premises from which the cannabis or cannabis products were acquired or received. All transfer or transportation shall be performed pursuant to a specified chain of custody protocol.

     G.    A testing laboratory may receive and test samples of cannabis or cannabis products from a qualified patient or primary caregiver only if the qualified patient or primary caregiver presents the qualified patient’s valid physician’s recommendation for cannabis for medicinal purpose. A testing lab shall not certify samples from a qualified patient or primary caregiver for resale or transfer to another party or licensee. All tests performed by a testing laboratory for a qualified patient or primary caregiver shall be recorded with the name of the qualified patient or primary caregiver and the amount of the cannabis or cannabis products received. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.400 Cannabis manufacturing—Edibles and other cannabis products—Sale or distribution of edible and other cannabis products.
     A.    Cannabis manufacturing facilities requiring a Type-6, Type-7, Type S, or any subsequent created manufacturing state license (using non-volatile and volatile solvents) as defined in MAUCRSA, may be permitted to operate within those zoning districts as defined in Title 19 of this code.

     B.     Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be stored on any property within the city of American Canyon in containers that exceeds the amount, which is approved by the American Canyon fire protection district and authorized by the regulatory permit. Each site or parcel subject to a commercial cannabis business permit shall be limited to a total number of tanks as authorized by the American Canyon fire protection district on the property at any time.

     C.     Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use the hydrocarbons N-butane, isobutane, ethanol, propane, or heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to minimal potential human-related toxicity approved by the community development department. These solvents must be of at least ninety-nine percent purity and any extraction process must use them in a professional grade closed loop extraction system designed to recover the solvents and work in an environment with proper ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable atmosphere is or may be present.

     D.    If an extraction process uses a professional grade closed loop CO2 gas extraction system, every vessel must be certified by the manufacturer for its safe use as referenced in Section 5.10.360. The CO2 must be of at least ninety-nine percent purity.

     E.     Closed loop systems for compressed gas extraction systems must be commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial number.

     F.     Certification from an engineer licensed by the state of California must be provided to the community development department for a professional grade closed loop system used by any commercial cannabis manufacturing manufacturer to certify that the system was commercially manufactured, is safe for its intended use, and was built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices, including, but not limited to:

     1.     The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME);

     2.     American National Standards Institute (ANSI);

     3.     Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or

     4.     The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).

     G.    The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of the professional engineer and serial number of the certified extraction unit.

     H.    Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction operation, and facilities must be approved for their use by the building official and the American Canyon fire protection district and meet any required fire, safety, and building code requirements specified in the California Building Reference Codes.

     I.      Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice water, and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create keef, hashish, bubble hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from natural sources, and other extracts.

     J.      Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol, and propylene glycol solvents to create or refine extracts. Ethanol should be removed from the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not vented into the atmosphere.

     K.    Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating cannabis extracts must develop standard operating procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a training plan prior to producing extracts for the marketplace.

     L.     Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create cannabis extracts must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct access to applicable material safety data sheets, and handle and store the solvents and gases safely.

     M.    Parts per million for one gram of finished extract cannot exceed state standards for any residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.410 Promulgation of regulations, standards and other legal duties.
     A.    In addition to any regulations adopted by the city council, the city manager is authorized to establish any additional rules, regulations and standards governing the issuance, denial or renewal of commercial cannabis business permits, the ongoing operation of commercial cannabis businesses and the city’s oversight, or concerning any other subject determined to be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.

     B.     Regulations shall be published on the city’s website.

     C.     Regulations adopted by the city manager shall become effective upon date of publication. Commercial cannabis businesses shall be required to comply with all state and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the city manager.

     D.    Testing labs, distribution facilities and special events shall be subject to state law and shall be subject to additional regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are developed under subsection A of this section and any subsequent state of California legislation regarding the same. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.420 Community relations.
     A.    Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone number, and email address of a community relations contact to all businesses and residences located within one hundred feet of the commercial cannabis business.

     B.     During the first year of operation pursuant to this chapter, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from each commercial cannabis business holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall attend meetings with the city manager, and other interested parties as deemed appropriate by the city manager, to discuss costs, benefits, and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of this chapter. After the first year of operation, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from each such commercial cannabis business shall meet with the city manager when and as requested by the city manager.

     C.     Commercial cannabis businesses to which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall develop a city approved public outreach and educational program for youth organizations and educational institutions that outlines the risks of youth addiction to cannabis, and that identifies resources available to youth related to drugs and drug addiction. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.430 Fees deemed debt to the city of American Canyon.
     The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city of American Canyon that is recoverable via an authorized administrative process as set forth in the American Canyon Municipal Code, or in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.440 Permit holder responsible for violations.
     The person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for all violations of the laws of the state of California or of the regulations and/or the ordinances of the city of American Canyon, whether committed by the permittee or any employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur in or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business whether or not said violations occur within the permit holder’s presence. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.450 Inspection and enforcement.
     The city manager, charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and without notice to obtain samples of the cannabis to test for public safety purposes. Any samples obtained by the city of American Canyon shall be logged, recorded, and maintained in accordance with established procedures by the city of American Canyon city manager or these regulations. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.460 Compliance with state regulation.
     It is the stated intent of this chapter to regulate commercial cannabis activity in the city of American Canyon in compliance with all provisions MAUCRSA and any subsequent state legislation. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.470 Violations declared a public nuisance.
     Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby deemed unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.480 Each violation a separate offense.
     Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures authorized by the city of American Canyon. Additionally, as a nuisance per se, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit issued pursuant to this chapter being deemed null and void, disgorgement and payment to the city for any monies unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or remedy available at law or in equity. The city of American Canyon may also pursue any and all remedies and actions available and applicable under state and local laws for any violations committed by the commercial cannabis business or persons related to, or associated with, the commercial cannabis activity. Additionally, when there is determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety or welfare, the city manager, may take immediate action to temporarily suspend a commercial cannabis business permit issued by the city, pending a hearing before the city manager. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.490 Criminal penalties.
     Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter may in the discretion of the district attorney or city attorney be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than twelve months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

 

5.10.500 Remedies cumulative and not exclusive.
     The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies. The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law. (Ord. 2018-06 § 4, 2018)

Chapter 5.12 CARDROOMS
5.12.010 Concurrent regulation with the state.
     It is the stated intent of the ordinance codified in this chapter to regulate cardrooms and tables within the city, concurrently with the state of California, to the extent authorized by and as required by, Business and Professions Code Section 19800, (popularly referred to as the “Gambling Control Act” and, together with the regulations of the state of California Department of Justice Division of Gambling Control promulgated thereunder, hereinafter collectively referred to in this chapter as the “Act”). (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.020 Cardroom permit required.
     It is unlawful for the operator, or any person having charge, control or management of any establishment, social club, or place of business open to the public, or to which an admission fee is charged, to conduct, operate, or participate in any card game, or to permit or suffer upon or in such premises the conduct or operation of any card game regulated by the Act, or participation therein by others, unless such operator or other person having charge, control, or management of such establishment, club or place of business shall have first obtained from the state of California a cardroom permit to conduct such card game. (Ord. 2001-06 § 1, 2001; Ord. 9917 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.030 Cardroom permit—Original application—Renewal.
     A.    An application for a cardroom permit, or for the renewal of a cardroom permit, shall submit an application to the chief of police of the city (“chief”), which application shall be under oath, and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business and the plan for patron security and safety required by Section 5.12.170. The term “persons financially interested” means and shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis of gross or net revenue. The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business shall be shown on the application. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and recent photographs of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business, and an amount equal to any fingerprint processing fee required by the city.

     B.     An application for renewal of a cardroom permit need not be accompanied by fingerprints or a recent photo or such fee if the application for renewal contains no additional names to the original cardroom permit application.

     C.     An application for renewal of a cardroom permit shall be completed and filed within thirty days prior to expiration of the existing permit. If an application for renewal is not filed, or the application fee is not paid within the thirty day time limit, the cardroom permit shall expire one year after the date of its issuance or last renewal.

     D.    A cardroom permit may be issued only to citizens or legal residents of the United States. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.040 Cardroom permit—Conditions of denial—Appeal.
     A.    The chief shall deny an original or renewal of a cardroom permit application to any applicant who is disqualified for any of the following reasons:

     1.     Failure of the applicant to clearly establish eligibility and qualification in accordance with this chapter;

     2.     Failure of the applicant to provide the information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or requested by the chief, or failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to qualifications, or the supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria;

     3.     Conviction of the applicant of any felony, including a conviction by a federal court or a court in another state for a crime that would constitute a felony if committed in California;

     4.     Conviction of the applicant of any misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude within the ten-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application;

     5.     Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Penal Code Section 186.2;

     6.     Contumacious defiance by the applicant of any legislative investigatory body, or other official investigatory body of any state or of the United States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to gambling, official corruption related to gambling activities, or criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by Penal Code Section 186.2;

     7.     The applicant is less than twenty-one years of age.

     B.     The action of the chief denying a cardroom permit on the basis of this section shall be subject to appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after notice of denial of the permit. Upon failure to file notice of appeal within the ten day period, the action of the chief denying the permit shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.050 Cardroom permit—Fee.
     Every person conducting, carrying on or managing a cardroom, or permitting the conduct or operation of any card game in premises open to the public, or to which an admission fee is charged, as provided in Section 5.12.020 of this chapter, whether separately or in conjunction with any other business, shall pay to the city the sum of five hundred dollars annually, payable in advance, plus an additional permit fee of two hundred dollars annually, payable in advance, for each table in such cardroom or cardrooms. The city council may change such fees by resolution adopted from time to time. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.060 Cardroom permit—Display.
     Cardroom permits shall be prominently displayed in the cardroom area. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.070 Cardroom permit—Restrictions and nonassignability.
     A.    No person shall be granted a permit to operate more than one cardroom.

     B.     No cardroom permit shall be sold, transferred or assigned by the permittee or by operation of law. Any sale, transfer or assignment, or attempt to sell, transfer or assign the permit shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the permit, which shall thereafter be deemed terminated and void. This section does not restrict the right of any cardroom owner to sell, transfer or assign ownership interest in the cardroom itself. Anytime a cardroom changes ownership, the new owner must apply and qualify for a cardroom permit as provided by this chapter.

     C.     The city council may, by resolution, in the best interest of the public welfare, limit the number of cardroom permits issued within the city. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.080 Cardroom work permit—Application and denial.
     A.    Cardroom employees must obtain a cardroom work permit from the chief. For the purpose of this chapter, “cardroom employees” are defined to include dealers, overseers and others directly connected with the operation and supervision of card tables, and excludes waiters, waitresses, bartenders, culinary workers and others not connected with such operation and supervision. Applications for cardroom work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant, and such information as may be deemed necessary by the chief to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a cardroom work permit. The application also shall be accompanied by fingerprints, a recent photograph of the applicant and an amount equal to any fingerprint processing fee required by the city.

     B.     A cardroom work permit shall not be issued to any person who would be disqualified from holding a state gambling license for the reasons specified in subsections (a) through (g) of Section 19859 of the Act, or regarding whom the Division of Gambling Control of the state of California has filed an objection with the city.

     C.     The chief may deny issuance of a cardroom work permit for any further cause deemed reasonable by the chief. The action of the chief denying a cardroom work permit on the basis of this section shall be subject to appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after notice of denial of the permit. Upon failure to file notice of appeal within the ten day period, the action of the chief denying the permit shall be final and conclusive.

     D.    Cardroom work permits shall be prominently displayed in the cardrooms when the holder of the permit is working.

     E.     Each application for a cardroom work permit shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred dollars. The fee shall not be returned in the event that the permit is refused, revoked or suspended, as provided in this chapter. The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issue; however, it may be prorated quarterly. The date of expiration shall be prominently displayed on the face of the permit.

     F.     The holder of a cardroom work permit shall not be restricted as to place of employment. (Ord. 2007-04 § 2, 2007; Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.090 Permit revocation or suspension.
     The chief may revoke or suspend, and take possession of any cardroom permit or cardroom work permit issued under this chapter, upon any violation of the provisions of this chapter. The action of the chief shall be subject to appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after notice of revocation or suspension action. Upon failure to file notice of appeal within the ten day period, the revocation or suspension of the permit shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.100 Hours of operation.
     Before any cardroom shall be allowed to operate, each cardroom and each owner, manager and operator of a cardroom, shall adopt a schedule of hours of operation, which such schedule shall first be approved by the police chief. Each cardroom shall conspicuously post schedules of its hours of operations at all entrances and exits of the premises in which the cardroom is operating in order to give law enforcement officials and patrons adequate notice of the hours during which the cardroom will be open for business. Cardrooms which comply with all requirements of this chapter shall be authorized to operate twenty-four hours each day. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.110 Playing fees—Posting required.
     Each establishment having a cardroom open to the public shall prominently post signs, in English and Spanish languages, stating the fees charged for playing cards in such cardrooms. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.120 Number of card tables permitted in each cardroom.
     The total number of card tables allowed in each establishment issued a cardroom permit shall not exceed twelve. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.130 Number of card tables permitted within the city.
     The total number of card tables permitted within the city shall not exceed twelve. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.140 Wagering limits.
     There shall be no wagering limits at cardrooms within the city.

     Such rules for wagering limits shall be conspicuously posted at or near each card table within a cardroom in order to give patrons adequate notice of the applicable wagering limits. (Ord. 2007-04 § 1, 2007)

 

5.12.150 Operation restrictions.
     A.    No tables other than a table for which a permit has been issued shall be kept or maintained in the same room in which there is a kept or maintained or operated a card game or a card table permitted under the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     No premises shall be licensed for a card game or card table without approval, both as to location and the number of tables for the location, by both the city building department and the subsidiary fire protection district of the city.

     C.     A card game or card table permit does not authorize the permittee to engage in any other business, and in the event that the permittee conducts another business or businesses, the permittee must secure any additional city licenses or permits otherwise required for such other business or businesses. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.160 Location of cardroom establishments.
     A.    A cardroom permit is valid only for the location provided for in the permit.

     B.     In the interest of promoting the public peace, safety and general welfare, as may be authorized by applicable law, any new cardrooms shall be prohibited in any of the following locations:

     1.     On a parcel with any type of residential zoning;

     2.     Within one thousand feet of the following areas:

     a.     Public or private pre-school or K-12 school,

     b.     A licensed hospital, medical clinic, alcohol or other drug abuse recovery or treatment center, or community care residential facility providing mental and/or social rehabilitation services,

     c.     A public park or playground,

     d.     A public library,

     e.     A church;

     3.     Licensed cardrooms existing within the city of American Canyon as of the passage date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from subsections (B) and (C) of this section.

     C.     The footage distance shall be measured from the closest point on the exterior property lines of the cardroom establishment to the closest point on the exterior property lines of the other property. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.170 Patron security and safety in and around a cardroom establishment.
     A.    Each applicant for a cardroom permit, at the time of application, and each holder of a cardroom permit annually thereafter, at the time of permit renewal, shall present a plan for security and safety of patrons of the cardroom in and around the cardroom establishment. The plan shall set forth such provisions as are necessary to ensure the safety and security of patrons, including measures taken or instituted to avoid follow home robberies. The holder of a cardroom permit shall be liable for the safety and security of patrons to the fullest extent under the law. Any effort on the part of a cardroom permittee to limit such liability shall be clearly posted in such a manner as to give adequate notice to patrons. The plan shall include a detailed summary of all known incidents involving or affecting patron security and safety in and around the cardroom establishment for the preceding year.

     B.     The chief may require, in his or her discretion, all cardroom permittees to implement reasonable security measures to insure the safety of patrons including, but not limited to, hiring private uniformed security guards. If security guards are required, the chief shall determine the number and hours of coverage.

     C.     During all hours of operation, doors to the cardroom establishment shall be unlocked and accessible to the general public and open to police inspection. Cardrooms shall be located and so arranged that card tables and the players at the tables are plainly visible from the door opening of the cardroom when the door is opened. No wall, partition, screen or similar structure between the front door opening and any card table located in the cardroom shall be permitted if it interferes with such visibility. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.180 Minors prohibited.
     No persons under the age of twenty-one shall be permitted in or about any cardroom establishment. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.190 Loitering prohibited.
     No cardroom owner, operator or employee shall permit any person to loiter within the cardroom while card games are in progress. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.200 Persons under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or drugs prohibited.
     No cardroom owner, operator or employee shall permit any person to enter or remain on the premises of a cardroom, or to play any card game while such person is under the influence of any intoxicating beverage, narcotic, or drug. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.210 New cardrooms prohibited.
     A.    The issuance of any new cardroom permits or the commencement or operation of any new cardrooms or card games is prohibited.

     B.     The cardrooms presently operating within the city are specifically exempt from this prohibition as long as the required permits are obtained and annually renewed. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.220 Violations and penalties.
     Any person guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or performing any act declared by this chapter to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine and/or imprisonment, in accordance with the general penalty provision then in effect in the city. (Ord. 99-17 § 1, 1999)

 

5.12.230 Purpose and Intent.
     This chapter, Sections 5.12.230 through 5.12.380 (hereinafter referred to as “Cardroom Tax Provisions”), are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.240 Definitions.
     The words and phrases used in the cardroom tax provisions shall have the meaning prescribed to them in this section unless they are specifically defined in these cardroom tax provisions or unless the context clearly requires to the contrary:

     “Cardroom establishment” means and includes any building, structure, place or location wherein cardroom activities take place pursuant to this chapter of the American Canyon Municipal Code.

     “Cardroom event” means any card games, cardroom activities or cardroom tournaments permitted by this chapter and/or the California Business and Professions Code Section 19800 et seq., and the State of California Department of Justice Division of Gambling Control.

     “Gross receipts tax” or “tax” means a tax on a cardroom’s gross revenues for each quarter, beginning January 1, 2013.

     “Gross revenues” means the definition of “gross table gaming revenue” as reported to the California Gambling Control Commission and the California Department of Justice Bureau of Gaming Control.

     “Permittee” means a person who has been issued a cardroom permit under this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.250 Payment of tax.
     A.    Effective January 1, 2013, each cardroom establishment shall pay to the city, on a quarterly basis, a gross receipts tax of two and one-half percent of its quarterly gross revenues.

     B.     The gross receipts tax shall increase to three percent, effective upon the earlier of either of the following dates:

     1.     March 27, 2017; or

     2.     One year after the city authorizes cardroom operators in the city to operate sixteen tables.

     C.     The tax imposed by the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter is in addition to any other tax, license or permit fee that may be required of any person by the American Canyon Municipal Code or any other ordinance of the city.

     D.    All taxes, interest and penalties received pursuant to the gross receipts tax provisions shall be deposited in the general fund. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.255 Statement of revenues.
     Before the thirtieth day following the end of each quarter, the licensee shall file with the city finance department, a statement, under oath, showing the true and correct amount of gross revenues for the preceding quarter. A signed declaration shall be attached to the statement included therein, which shall be in substantially the same form as: “I hereby declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct.” Pursuant to Section 5.12.260 of this chapter, the city shall have the right to audit matters reported in the statement to determine the accuracy of the figures contained therein. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013)

 

5.12.260 Audit of reports.
     A.    The books, records, statements and accounts of any permittee may be inspected and audited by the city.

     B.     Such an inspection and audit may be performed by the director of finance, city auditor or a qualified accountant or city official who shall be selected by the director of finance.

     C.     Any failure or refusal of any permittee to pay such sums by way of taxes when the same are due and payable in accordance with the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter, or to permit such inspection of such books, records and accounts of such permittee shall be and constitute full and sufficient grounds for suspension or revocation of any cardroom permit issued to the permittee pursuant to Section 5.12.090. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.265 Gross receipts tax exemption.
     Provided that the permittee has entered into a development agreement pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq., with the city, for any related expansion of the permittee’s cardroom premises, or any increase in the number of cardroom tables allowed, or any intensification of use of the premises, the payment schedule of the development agreement shall apply and the city shall not impose the gross receipts tax. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.270 Payment—Time limits.
     A.    All taxes imposed by the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable within thirty days of the end of each quarter.

     B.     In the case of a cardroom which is discontinued, dissolved or otherwise terminated before the expiration of a tax period, the due date for any taxes accrued and owing to the city under the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter shall be the date of termination of the cardroom business. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.280 Payments and communications made by mail.
     A.    Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication received by the director of finance is received after the time prescribed by the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter for the receipt thereof, but is in an envelope bearing a postmark showing that it was mailed prior to the time prescribed in this chapter for the receipt thereof, the director of finance may regard such payment, statement, report, request or other communication as having been timely received.

     B.     If the due day falls on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the due day shall be the next regular business day on which City Hall is open to the public. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.290 When taxes deemed delinquent.
     Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter, all taxes required to be paid pursuant to the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not paid on or before the due date specified in Section 5.12.270. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.300 Notice not required by city.
     The director of finance is not required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any permittee subject to the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter, and failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax, interest or penalty due under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.310 Penalty and interest for delinquency.
     In addition to any other penalties or fines, civil or criminal, any permittee who fails or refuses to pay any tax required to be paid pursuant to the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter on or before the due date shall pay, in addition to the tax, penalties and interest as follows:

     A penalty equal to ten percent of the amount of the unpaid tax in addition to the amount of the tax, plus interest of one and one-half percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of tax, exclusive of penalties, on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax until the date of payment. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.320 Rules and regulations—Apportionment.
     For purposes of apportionment of the tax as may be required by law and for purposes of administration and enforcement of the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter generally, the director of finance may from time to time promulgate administrative rules and regulations. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.330 Tax deemed debt to city.
     The amount of any tax, penalties and interest imposed by the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any permittee carrying on any business without having paid the tax under the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter to the city shall be liable to an action in the name of the city and in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the tax, and penalties and interest imposed on such business. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.340 Deficiency determinations.
     A.    If the director of finance is not satisfied that the amount of tax is correctly computed, the director may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in the director’s possession or that may come into the director’s possession.

     B.     One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for period or periods may be made.

     C.     When a permittee discontinues engaging in a cardroom business, a deficiency determination may be made at any time within three years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise be due.

     D.    Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the permittee concerned in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under Section 5.12.360. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.350 Tax assessment—Nonpayment—Fraud.
     A.    Under any of the following circumstances, the director of finance may make and give notice of an assessment of the amount of tax owed by a permittee under the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter:

     1.     If the permittee has not paid any tax due under the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter;

     2.     If the permittee has not, after demand by the director of finance, paid any additional amount of tax due under the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter;

     3.     If the director of finance determines that the nonpayment of any tax due under the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto from the date the tax is due in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in the gross receipts tax provisions of this chapter.

     B.     The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known or estimated by the director of finance to be due, after full consideration of all information within his or her knowledge concerning the cardroom business and activities of the permittee assessed and shall include the amount of any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.360 Tax assessment—Notice requirements.
     The notice of assessment shall be served upon the permittee either by handing it to the permittee personally, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the permittee at the address of the location of the business appearing on the face of the permit issued under this chapter to the permittee or to such other address as he or she shall register with the director of finance for the purpose of receiving notices provided under this chapter. For the purposes of this section, a service by mail is complete at the time of deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.370 Tax assessment—Hearing.
     A.    Within ten days after the date of service, the permittee may apply in writing to the director of finance for a hearing on the assessment.

     B.     If application for a hearing before the director of finance is not made within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the director of finance shall become final and conclusive.

     C.     Within thirty days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the director of finance shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her not later than thirty days after the date of application, unless a later date is agreed to by the director of finance and the permittee requesting the hearing.

     D.    Notice of such hearing shall be given by the director of finance to the permittee requesting such hearing not later than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing said permittee may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made by the director of finance should not be confirmed and fixed as a tax.

     E.     After such hearing the director of finance shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice thereof to the permittee in the manner prescribed in Section 5.12.350 for giving notice of assessment. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

 

5.12.380 Conviction for chapter violation—Taxes not waived.
     A.    The conviction and punishment of any permittee for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or exempt such permittee from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction.

     B.     No civil action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any state law requiring the payment of all taxes. (Ord. 2013-05 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2010-11 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 5.16 VEHICLES FOR HIRE/TAXI SERVICES
5.16.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Driver” means every person in charge or control of any vehicle for hire as the driver thereof.

     “Owner” means every person owning or controlling any vehicle for hire.

     “Taximeter” means an instrument or device attached to a public passenger vehicle for hire by means of which instrument or device the charge authorized for hire of such vehicle is mechanically calculated either on a basis of distance traveled or for waiting time, or a combination thereof, which charge shall be indicated upon such taximeter by means of figures in dollars and cents; and every taximeter shall be installed in such a manner as to permit the passenger to see the amount of the fare as the same is registered.

     “Vehicle for hire” means a motor vehicle operated for hire in the transportation of a person or persons over the public streets of the city at a rate per mile or for waiting time, or a combination thereof, operating not over a defined route but as to route and destination in accordance with and under the direction of the person or persons hiring such vehicle, irrespective of whether such operation extends beyond the corporate limits of the city; such definition, however, shall not include ambulances. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.020 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any owner or driver to operate and for any owner to permit the operation of any vehicle for hire in the city unless both the owner and driver of such vehicle shall have obtained a written permit to do so as herein provided and have paid any license fee required by Section 5.04.410 of this code. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.030 Permit—Application required—Contents.
     Application for a vehicle for hire permit shall be made to the city and shall contain the following information with respect to the applicant:

     A.    A statement of whether applicant is the owner or driver, or both of a vehicle(s) for hire;

     B.     Applicant’s name, address, age and whether he or she is a citizen;

     C.     Applicant’s past experience in operating motor vehicles and names and addresses of his or her employers during the preceding three years;

     D.    The number and type of existing driving licenses issued to applicant by the state Department of Motor Vehicles;

     E.     Whether or not a license, issued up to applicant by such department, or any other governmental agency, has ever been revoked;

     F.     A list of all crimes of which applicant has been convicted including misdemeanor traffic violations;

     G.    If applicant is a driver, the name and address of the owner or the owners by whom he or she will be employed; and if the applicant is an owner, then the name and address of all drives whom he or she employs within the city;

     H.    Number, kind, type and condition of vehicles to be operated;

     I.      Location of off-street parking stands;

     J.      The financial responsibility of the applicant and likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory;

     K.    Any additional information which may be required. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.040 Application under oath—False statements.
     It is unlawful for an owner or driver to make any false or misleading statement in such application. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.050 Application fee.
     Applicable application and fingerprinting fees shall be paid by each applicant at the time of submitting an application for a permit under this chapter. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.060 Business license application fees and taxes.
     Applicable business license application fees and business license taxes shall be paid by owner applicants at the time of submitting an application for a permit under this chapter. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.070 Fingerprinting and photographing applicant.
     All applicants shall be fingerprinted and shall furnish with their application two recent photographs, size one and one-half inches by one and one-half inches, one to be filed with the application and one to be securely attached to the permit if applicant qualifies for the issuance thereof. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.080 Consideration, action on application/vehicle for hire by police chief.
     A.    The police chief shall set a hearing for the vehicle for hire “owner” application, and shall give five days written notice of the hearing to all existing licensed vehicle for hire businesses in this city. The police chief shall hear such application and all interested parties, and, if in his or her determination, granting the permit to such applicant would be for the public convenience and in the best interests of this city and its inhabitants, then the police chief may grant such permit. Upon the granting of such permit applicant shall pay all license fees required by the city, and conform to all the regulations of this code and laws relative to the operations of vehicles for hire in this city. If a permit is granted the applicant, the police chief shall issue a nontransferable permit upon such form as he or she may prescribe. The permit will also enable the “owner” to be a “driver” of such vehicles.

     B.     The police chief shall consider each vehicle for hire “driver” application. If the police chief finds that there are no grounds to deny such application, the police chief shall issue a permit to drive on such form as he or she may prescribe. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.090 Grounds for permit denial.
     A permit may be denied any “driver” applicant or “owner” applicant on the following grounds:

     A.    If the applicant is under the age of twenty-one years;

     B.     If the applicant has been convicted of a felony;

     C.     If the applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving lewd conduct; or an offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another, or a crime requiring regulation under Section 290 of the state Penal Code, or of any violation of Sections 311 through 311.7, 314, 315, 316, 318 or 647(a), (b) or (d) of the state Penal Code;

     D.    If the applicant has been convicted of either driving a vehicle upon the highway while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs, or reckless driving, or is otherwise unfit to operate a vehicle for hire, either as an owner or as a driver;

     E.     If the applicant has knowingly and with intent to deceive made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of facts in the permit application or in any other document required by the city in conjunction therewith;

     F.     If the owner applicant is unable to prove that they are covered by an appropriate and required insurance policy;

     G.    Applicant’s character and reputation are such as to class him/her in the sound discretion of the police chief as morally unfit to operate a vehicle for hire, as an owner or a driver;

     H.    If the required findings cannot be made;

     I.      For any other reason which the police chief, in the exercise of sound discretion, considers sufficient grounds for denial of a permit. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.100 Appeal to council.
     A.    Any interested person may appeal the decision of the police chief under this chapter to the council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city clerk a written statement of the grounds for appeal no later than fourteen days after notice of the decision of permit denial, suspension, alteration, or revocation has been given.

     B.     The city clerk shall set the appeal for hearing before the council and shall give five days written notice of the hearing to the applicant. In the event that the appeal is relative to an “owner” application, notice shall also be given to all existing licensed vehicle for hire businesses in the city. The council shall hear all interested parties and, if in its determination, public convenience requires the granting of the permit and that the granting of the permit to the applicant would be in the best interests of this city and its inhabitants, the council shall grant such permit. The council may deny a permit to any applicant on the grounds set forth in Section 5.16.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.110 Permit duration.
     During the month of January each year, drivers shall submit a current California Department of Motor Vehicles driving record report for review. A permit issued under this chapter shall continue in effect until suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.120 Driver to carry permit.
     When a driver has obtained a permit, the driver must carry it upon his or her person at all times while he or she is driving a vehicle for hire in the city. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.130 Permit suspension, alteration, revocation.
     The police chief may at any time after a hearing, suspend, alter, amend or revoke any permit or license upon any of the grounds on which he or she might have denied a permit in the first instance. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.140 Notice of changes in conditions.
     If the holder of a permit is an owner, he or she shall notify the police chief in writing of all changes in the personnel of his or her drivers; and if such holder is a driver, he or she shall notify the police chief in writing, of any changes of the owner for whom he or she is driving. Failure to comply with this requirement within two days of such change shall constitute an additional ground for revocation of a permit. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.150 Financial responsibility.
     A.    Every owner of a vehicle used in the transportation of passengers for hire, including vehicles for hire, shall maintain a public carrier liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized/admitted to do business in California with minimum limits of one million dollars single limit for bodily injury and property damage naming the city of American Canyon as an additional insured. Every such policy of insurance shall continue to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon, and the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured.

     B.     The insurance policy required hereunder shall extend for the period to be covered by the license applied for and the insurer shall be obliged to give not less than thirty days written notice, to the finance department and to the assured, before any cancellation or termination thereof earlier than its expiration date. The expiration, cancellation or other termination of any such policy shall automatically revoke and terminate the vehicle for hire permit covered by such policy, unless another insurance policy complying with the provisions of this section is provided and in effect at the time of such expiration, cancellation or termination. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

 

5.16.160 Taximeter required for certain rentals.
     Every vehicle for hire with a rate based on mileage and time of less than a one-hour increment shall be equipped with a taximeter. (Ord. 2004-11 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 5.20 CABLE SYSTEMS AND OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
5.20.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     Establish a local policy concerning cable systems, open video systems, and private communication systems that use the public rights-of-way;

     Promote the availability of diverse, multimedia information resources to the community; enhance educational opportunities throughout the community and build a stronger community;

     Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive cable or open video system services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and residents of the city;

     Encourage economic development while preserving aesthetic and other community values and prevent proliferation of above-ground facilities; and

     Encourage universal access to video programming services for all residents and businesses. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

Article I. General
5.20.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given in this chapter. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory, and “may” is permissive. Words not defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to in this chapter are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.

     “Access,” “PEG access,” or “PEG use” refers to the availability of a cable system or open video system for public, education or government use (including institutional network use) by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city of American Canyon and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a franchisee’s editorial control, including, but not limited to:

     1.     “Public access” or “public use” means access where organizations, groups, or individual members of the general public, on a nondiscriminatory basis, are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications;

     2.     “Education access” or “education use” means access where accredited educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications;

     3.     “Government access” or “government use” means access where government institutions or their designees are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications.

     “Affiliate” means a person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, another person.

     “Basic service” means any service tier regularly provided to all subscribers which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

     “Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as further amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as further amended from time to time.

     “Cable communications system” refers to open video systems (OVS) and cable systems.

     “Cable service” means:

     1.     The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video programming, or (ii) other programming service; and

     2.     Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

     “Cable system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves subscribers without using, or connecting to a facility that uses, any public right-of-way within the city of American Canyon; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II (Common Carriers) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (D) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems; or (E) an OVS that is certified by the FCC. Any reference to a cable system includes the cable system as a whole, or any part thereof, including all facilities, pedestals, equipment cabinets, electronic equipment and devices appurtenant to the system.

     “Channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system or OV S and which is capable of delivering a television signal whether in an analog or digital format. The definition does not restrict the use of any channel to the transmission of analog television signals or one-way transmission.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon in its present incorporated form and all departments, divisions, and agencies thereof, or any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

     “City manager” means the city manager or the city manager’s designee.

     “Construction, operation or repair” and similar formulations of that term means the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready and excavation.

     “Downstream channel” means a channel designed and activated to carry a transmission from the headend to other points on a cable communications system, including interconnections.

     “FCC” means the federal communications commission.

     “Franchise” refers to an authorization granted by the city to the operator of a cable communications system giving the operator the nonexclusive right to occupy the space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over public rights-of-way in the city, to provide specified services within a franchise area.

     “Franchise area” means the area of the city that a franchisee is authorized to serve by the terms of its franchise or by operation of law.

     “Franchise fee” means:

     1.     In consideration of the grant and exercise of a franchise to construct, install, operate, or provide services using facilities in the public rights-of-way, a grantee shall pay to the city a franchise fee expressed as a percentage of gross revenues. The franchise shall specify the fee to be paid, and the gross revenues to be included in the fee calculation. If a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter specifies a franchise fee established as the result of limiting applicable law, the city shall have the option to renegotiate the amount of the franchise fee upon a change in applicable law. Nothing in this chapter requires a person to pay amounts in excess of any limits that may be established by state or federal law;

     2.     UVPP Fees. A UVPP that provides services using a cable system for which charges are assessed to subscribers, but are not received by the franchisee, shall pay a fee in lieu of a franchise fee on such service pursuant to the franchise fee calculation contained in the cable system franchise.

     “Franchisee or grantee” refers to a person holding a cable communications system franchise granted by the city.

     “Gross revenues” means all cash, credits, property, or other consideration of any kind or nature received directly or indirectly by a grantee or its affiliates, from any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from a grantee’s operation of a cable system within the franchise area. Gross revenues include, but are not limited to, fees charged to subscribers for basic service; fees charged to subscribers for any optional, premium, per-channel, or per-program service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments, or other payment received as consideration from programmers for carriage of programming on the cable system; converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production equipment, and personnel fees; advertising revenues, including a per capita share of advertising revenues for advertising carried on more than one cable system; revenues from home shopping channel; sales of programming guides; and such other revenue sources as may now exist or hereafter develop. The definition shall be interpreted in a manner which manner that permits the city to collect the maximum franchise fee permitted by law, irrespective of the source of revenue. Gross revenues, however, shall not include any bad debt (defined as unpaid subscriber or advertiser accounts), any taxes on services furnished to a grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, city, or other governmental unit and collected by a grantee on behalf of the governmental unit. The amount paid as a franchise fee shall not be deducted from gross revenues unless required to be deducted under federal law.

     “Operator” when used with reference to a system, refers to a person (a) who, directly or through one or more affiliates, provides service over a cable communications system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such facility; or (b) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a facility.

     “OVS” means an open video system. A reference to an OVS includes pedestals, equipment enclosures (such as equipment cabinets), amplifiers, power guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and other equipment necessary to operate the OVS, or installed in conjunction with the OVS.

     “Person” means and includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or any other legal entity, but not the city.

     “Public property” means any property that is owned or under the control of the city that is not a public right-of-way, including, for purposes of this chapter, but not limited to, buildings, parks, poles, structures in the public rights-of-way such as utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities or property owned by or leased to the city.

     “Public rights-of-way” means the surface of and the space above and below any street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, or right-of-way or easement primarily dedicated to travel, whether on property owned by the city, containing easements benefiting the city, or on private roads or streets on private property, now or hereafter existing within the city which may be properly used for the purpose of installing, maintaining, and operating a cable communications system; and any other property that a franchisee is entitled by state or federal law to use by virtue of the grant of a franchise.

     “Revocation” means the city’s affirmative act of terminating a franchise.

     “School” means any accredited primary school, secondary school, college and university.

     “Subscriber” means the city or any person who is lawfully receiving, for any purpose or reason, any cable service via a cable communications system with franchisee’s express permission, whether or not a fee is paid for such service.

     “Termination” means the conclusion of a franchise by any means, including, but not limited to, by expiration of its term, abandonment or revocation.

     “Transfer” means any transaction in which: (1) all or a portion of any facilities or any rights to use or operate facilities located in the public rights-of-way are sold, conveyed, transferred, assigned, encumbered (except as provided in Section 5.20.120(B)) or leased, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by one or more transactions to another person, whether voluntarily or by operation of law or otherwise; or (2) there is any change, acquisition, or transfer in the identity of the person in control of the grantee, or any person that controls grantee, including, without limitation, forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or receivership; or (3) the rights or obligations under the franchise are sold, conveyed, transferred, assigned, encumbered (except as set forth in this chapter) or leased, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by one or more transactions to another person, whether voluntarily or by operation of law or otherwise. It will be presumed, for purposes of clause (2) above, that any transfer or cumulative transfer of a voting interest by a person or group of persons acting in concert of ten percent or more of grantee, or person that controls grantee, or any change in the managing general partners of a grantee is a change of control. “Transfer” does not include: (1) a lease to a UVPP pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532 or 573; (2) the transmission of a commodity or electronic signal using facilities on a common carrier basis; or (3) a lease or other right to use facilities mandated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 224. “Transferring” and “transferee” shall have correlative meanings.

     “Upstream channel” means a channel designed and activated to carry transmissions from a point on the cable communications system, other than the headend, to the headend or another point on the cable communications system.

     “User” means a person or the city utilizing a channel, capacity or equipment and facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.030 Franchise required.
     No person may construct or operate a cable communications system in the city without first obtaining a grant of a franchise from the city. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.040 Exceptions to franchise requirement.
     The following persons or entities shall not be required to obtain a franchise under this title:

     A UVPP (unaffiliated video program provider) that is only delivering cable service or other communications service (as that term is used in 47 U.S.C. § 542(h)) to subscribers. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.050 Failure to obtain a franchise.
     A person’s failure to obtain a franchise as required by this chapter may, in the city’s discretion, result in:

     A.    Forfeiture, by operation of law, of the person’s cable communication system located in the public rights-of-way that are not authorized by an existing franchise; and/or

     B.     A requirement that the cable communication system be removed, and that penalties and damages be paid. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.060 Existing franchises.
     Franchises existing as of the effective date of this chapter shall, in addition to all the obligations and duties prescribed by the terms of their existing franchises, be subject to the substantive and procedural requirements in this chapter, except as prohibited by applicable law and to the extent such requirements conflict with a specific provision of the pre-existing franchise. Nothing in this chapter is intended to invalidate a lawful, existing franchise or to waive any obligations imposed by such a franchise. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.070 Form of franchise.
     A franchise shall be issued in the form of written agreement, approved by resolution of the city council, and must be accepted by the franchisee to become effective. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.080 Filing an application.
     A person seeking to (1) obtain a franchise; (2) transfer a franchise; (3) extend the term of an existing franchise; (4) renew a franchise; or (5) modify an existing franchise, shall submit a signed original of its application and six copies to the city clerk. The city clerk shall make an application available for public inspection. The application must conform to all of the requirements of this chapter. Requests for other types of franchise modifications may be processed by the city without an application, and submitted for approval. However, nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from requiring an application in the event the city determines, based on the nature of the requested modification, that the public interest would best be served by the submission of an application pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.090 Application fee.
     A.    Reasonable Costs. An applicant shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city related to the processing of any application. Processing costs shall include, but not be limited to, the costs of services rendered by any city employee, agent or representative, including consultants and attorneys.

     B.     The initial deposit of the application fee for the consideration of an application for issuance, renewal, transfer, or modification of a franchise shall be in the amount of five thousand dollars, which deposit shall be submitted with the application. The city may, as costs are incurred, draw upon the deposit to recover its processing costs, including, but not limited to, the reasonable cost of outside consultants retained by the city related to the city’s consideration and processing of a franchise. The city manager, at any time, may require the applicant to deposit additional sums if it appears that the initial deposit or subsequent deposits will be exhausted prior to the final action by the city relating to the consideration by the city of an application for issuance, renewal, transfer, or modification of a franchise. The applicant will not be entitled to further consideration by the city of its requested action until such time as the additional deposit required by the city manager has been deposited with the city. In the event the amount of the deposit of an applicant is in excess of the amount of the processing costs of the city related to the action requested, then the applicant shall be entitled to a return of any such excess amount. In addition, an applicant that is awarded a franchise shall pay the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise. Such payment shall be made to the finance director of the city within thirty days after the city furnishes the franchisee with a statement of such expenses. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.100 Nature of franchise.
     A.    Scope. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall authorize and permit a franchisee to construct, operate, maintain and repair a cable system, or an OVS (as applicable) to provide cable service in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain facilities appurtenant to such system in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public rights-of-way, and along such other public property that the city may authorize a franchisee to use.

     B.     Nothing Passes by Implication. A franchise shall not convey rights other than as specified in this chapter, or in a franchise agreement; no rights shall pass by implication.

     C.     Franchise Not in Lieu of Other Authorizations. A franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:

     1.     Compliance with requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to, complying with the conditions the city may establish before constructing facilities for, or providing, noncable services;

     2.     Any permit, agreement or authorization of general applicability required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including by way of example and not limitation, encroachment permits for street construction;

     3.     Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the city or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the franchise.

     D.    Franchisee Must Comply with Other Laws. A franchise does not relieve a franchisee of its duty to comply with all the city ordinances and regulations of general applicability, and every franchisee must comply with the same. Likewise, the rights granted under a franchise are subject to the exercise of police and other powers the city now has or may later obtain, including but not limited to the power of eminent domain.

     E.     Franchise Not a Grant of Property Rights. A franchise does not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public rights-of-way. Rights granted may not be subdivided or subleased.

     F.     Possessory Interest of Public Property. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall notify the franchisee of potential tax liability for property taxes pursuant to Cal. Rev. and Tax Code § 107.6.

     G.    Franchise Nonexclusive. No franchise shall be exclusive, or prevent the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations, or prevent the city from itself constructing, operating, or repairing its own cable communications system with a franchise.

     H.    Franchise Term. Every franchise shall be for a term of years, which term shall be specified in the franchise.

     I.      Costs Borne by Franchisee. Unless otherwise specifically stated in a franchise, or required by law, all acts which a franchisee is required to perform under the franchise or applicable law must be performed at the franchisee’s expense.

     J.      Failures to Perform. If a cable communications system operator fails to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for performance, the city may perform the work and bill the operator therefor. The operator shall pay the amounts billed within thirty days. Nothing in this section shall preclude the city from exercising any other remedies available at law or in equity if the cable communications system operator fails to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for performance. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.110 Administration of ordinance; adoption of regulations.
     A.    Adoption of Regulations. The city may from time to time adopt regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. This chapter, and any regulations adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter, are not contracts with any franchisee, and may be amended at any time. In the event of any conflict between the terms and provisions of a franchise or franchises and this chapter, the terms and provisions of this chapter shall prevail.

     B.     Delegation. The city manager or his or her designees are authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter and any franchise issued pursuant thereto, and to provide any notices (including noncompliance notices) and to take any action on the city’s behalf that may be required hereunder or under applicable law.

     C.     No Waiver. The failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under a franchise or any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been specifically waived in writing.

     D.    Administration of Public, Educational and Government Access. The city may designate one or more entities, including itself, to control and manage the use of public, educational and governmental access channels, facilities and equipment. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.120 Transfers.
     A.    Prior Approval Required. Every franchise shall be deemed to be held in trust, and to be personal to the franchisee. Any transfer that is made without the prior approval of the city shall be deemed invalid. A transfer is defined in Section 5.20.020 (“Upstream Channel”).

     B.     Exception for Mortgages. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, pledges in trust, mortgages, or encumbrances against the facilities or any portion thereof of a cable communications system operator given to a bona fide institutional lender in connection with a loan or other financing required to secure the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities (“loan”) may be made without application and without the city’s prior consent. However, a loan shall require the city’s prior consent unless it does each of the following: (1) requires the cable communication system operator or any successor to comply with the franchise or applicable law; or (2) requires the bona fide institutional lender to require the entity operating the cable system on its behalf to comply with each of the terms of the franchise; or (3) prohibits a third party to succeed to the interest of the operator, or to own or control the system, without the prior consent of the city. Any mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject to and subordinate to the rights of the city under any franchise, this chapter or other applicable law. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.130 General conditions upon construction, operation and repair.
     A.    Franchisee Must Follow Local Rules. The construction, operation, and repair of cable communications systems shall be performed in compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules, regulations, and practices of general applicability affecting such system. By way of example, and not limitation, this includes zoning and safety codes, construction standards, regulations for providing notice to persons that may be affected by system construction, and directives governing the time, place and manner in which facilities may be installed in the public rights-of-way. Persons engaged in the construction, operation, or repair of communications facilities shall exercise reasonable care in the performance of all their activities and shall use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property.

     B.     No Permit Without Franchise. A franchise is required before a permit may be issued for work associated with the construction of a cable communications system. Any permit issued for such work to a person that does not hold a franchise shall vest no rights in the permittee; the permit may be revoked at will, and the permittee shall remove all facilities installed under the permit upon the city’s demand.

     C.     Permits Must Be Obtained. Construction, operation, or repair of a cable communications system shall not commence until all required permits have been obtained from the proper city officials and all required fees have been paid. All work performed will be performed in strict accordance with the conditions of the permit. Upon order of the city, any work and/or construction undertaken that is not completed in compliance with the city’s requirements, or which is installed without obtaining necessary permits and approvals shall be removed or worked halted until such permits are obtained.

     D.    No Interference. Interference with the use of the public rights-of-way by others, including others that may be installing cable communications systems, must be minimized. The city may require a person using the public rights-of-way to cooperate with others through joint trenching and other arrangements to minimize adverse impacts on the public rights-of-way.

     E.     Plans for and Publicizing Work. Work shall be publicized as the city may direct from time to time. The publication of work may be used to notify the public and operators of other communications systems, of the impending work, in order to minimize inconvenience and disruption to the public. The city shall approve or disapprove any work or work plan submitted.

     1.     Each cable communications system operator shall provide the city a plan for any initial system construction, or for any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its facility, which shall show its timetable for construction of each phase of the project, and the areas of the city that will be affected.

     2.     The city may from time to time, when the city receives an application for a permit to use a particular route, or upon the city’s own initiative, designate by published order a route or proposed route for installation of communications facilities and may (a) require all persons who wish to emplace underground facilities along that route or any part thereof to install them during a specified period and (b) otherwise prohibit emplacement of such facilities along the route or any part thereof for twenty-four months or after such other, longer period as is necessary to protect the public interest.

     F.     Existing Poles To Be Used. To the extent possible, operators of cable communications systems shall use existing poles and conduit. Additional poles may not be installed in the right-of-way without the permission of the city, nor may pole capacity be increased by vertical or horizontal extenders.

     1.     To minimize disruption of public passage or infrastructure, to forestall or relieve exhaustion of public rights-of-way capacity, or to protect environmentally sensitive areas, the city may require as a condition of issuing any public rights-of-way permit for erection of new poles or construction of underground conduit, the installation of which requires excavation of or along any traveled way, that the franchisee, licensee, or holder of the rights-of-way permit provide pole space or empty conduits in excess of its own present and reasonably foreseeable requirements for the purpose of accommodating the city and/or other franchisees.

     G.    Undergrounding.

     1.     Whenever all existing utilities are located underground in an area in the city, every cable communications system operator in the same area must locate its cable communications system underground except where the city agrees to permit the cable communication system operator to do otherwise.

     2.     Whenever the owner of a pole locates or relocates underground within an area of the city, every cable communications system operator in the same area shall concurrently relocate its facilities underground.

     3.     The city manager may, for good cause shown, exempt a particular system or facility or group of facilities from the obligation to locate or relocate facilities underground, where relocation is impracticable, where ordinary engineering practices make undergrounding impractical, or where the city and the subscriber’s interest can be protected in another manner. Nothing in this subsection prevents the city from ordering communications facilities to be located or relocated underground under other provisions of the city code.

     H.    Prompt Repairs. Any and all public rights-of-way, other public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, maintenance or repair of a cable communications system shall be promptly repaired by the operator. Public property and public rights-of-way must be restored to the satisfaction of the city and to a condition as good or better than before the disturbance or damage occurred. No tree trimming shall be performed without the permission of the city and other affected authorities, and any tree trimming must be performed in strict accordance with the city code.

     I.      Movement of Facilities for Government.

     1.     A cable communications system operator shall, by a time specified by the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public rights-of-way construction and repair (including regrading, resurfacing or widening); public right-of-way vacation; construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of government owned system or utility, public work, public facility, or improvement; or for any other purpose where the work involved would be aided by the removal or relocation of the cable communications system. Collectively, such matters are referred to below as the “public work.”

     2.     Except in the case of emergency, the city shall provide written notice describing where the public work is to be performed at least one week prior to the deadline by which a cable communications system operator must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities. Such action on the part of the franchisee shall be undertaken at no cost to the city. Provided that, in an emergency, or where a cable communications system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property, the city may protect, support, temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate any or all parts of the cable communications system without further notice, and charge the cable communications system operator for costs reasonably incurred.

     J.      Movement for Others.

     1.     To accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of another person authorized to use the public rights-of-way or public property, a franchisee shall, by a time specified by such person, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, temporarily relocate or remove its facilities. The franchisee must be given written notice describing where the construction, operation or repair is to be performed at least fifteen days prior to the time by which its work must be completed. The costs to accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the facilities of another person as provided in this chapter shall be the responsibility of the person requesting such accommodation.

     2.     A cable communications system operator shall, on the request of any person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily raise or lower its wires by a time specified to permit the moving of buildings or other objects. A cable communications system operator shall be given not less than seven days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. The expense of such temporary removal, relaying, relocation, or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same.

     K.    Abandonment in Place.

     1.     A cable communications system operator may abandon any property in place in the public rights-of-way upon written notice to the city. However, if, within ninety days of the receipt of written notice of abandonment, the city determines, that the safety, appearance, functioning or use of the public rights-of-way and facilities in the public rights-of-way will be adversely affected, the property must be removed by a date specified by the city.

     2.     A cable communications system operator that abandons its property must, upon request, transfer ownership of the properties to the city at no cost, and execute necessary quitclaim deeds and indemnify the city against future costs associated with mitigating or eliminating any environmental hazards associated with the abandoned property.

     L.     System Subject to Inspection. Every cable communications system shall be subject to inspection and testing by the city. Each operator must respond to requests for information regarding its system and plans for the system as the city may from time to time issue, including requests for information regarding its plans for construction, operation and repair and the purposes for which the plant is being constructed, operated or repaired.

     M.    Underground Services Alert. Each operator of a cable communications system that places facilities underground shall be a member of the regional notification center for subsurface installations (underground services alert) and shall field mark the locations of its underground communications facilities upon request. The operator shall identify the location of its cable communication system for the city at no charge.

     N.    Plan for Construction. Every franchise shall specify for the city a construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable communications system. The schedule shall provide for the prompt completion of the project, and shall show its timetable for construction of each phase of the project, with benchmarks for deliverables and the areas of the city that will be affected. The city shall have the right to impose penalties on the operator for a failure to meet the accepted timetable and benchmarks.

     O.    Use of Facilities by the City. The city shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge, upon any poles or in any conduit owned by a franchisee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable service operations of the franchisee. The city shall pay costs associated with attaching or affixing the city’s wire or fixture to the franchisee’s infrastructure. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.140 Protection of the city and residents.
     A.    Indemnity Required. No franchise shall be valid or effective until and unless the city obtains an adequate indemnity from the franchisee. The indemnity must:

     1.     Release the city from and against any and all loss, damage, expense, cost (without limitation the cost of litigation) liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or maintenance of the cable communications system. Each cable communications system operator must further agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in connection with the above-mentioned matters;

     2.     Indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its elected and appointed officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all liability, loss, damage, cost, claims, demands, or causes of action of any kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys’ fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees sustained by the city or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of the acts, errors, or omissions of the cable communications system operator, or its agents, independent contractors or employees related to or in any way arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the system;

     3.     Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the release, indemnification, and hold harmless provision shall survive the term of the franchise or other authorization and continue in full force and effect as to the party’s responsibility to indemnify.

     B.     Insurance Required. A franchisee (or those acting on its behalf) shall not commence construction or operation of the system without obtaining insurance in amounts and of a type satisfactory to the city. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the franchisee has facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the franchisee, its contractors, or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the city may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and approved.

     C.     Proof. Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required insurance and naming the city as an additional insured, and other proofs as the city may find necessary, shall be filed with the city. For persons issued franchises after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, certificates and other required proofs shall be filed within thirty days of the issuance of a franchise, prior to the commencement of construction, once a year thereafter, and whenever there is any change in coverage. For entities that have facilities in the public rights-of-way as of the effective date of this chapter, the certificate shall be filed within sixty days of the effective date of this chapter, annually thereafter, and whenever there is any change in coverage, unless a pre-existing franchise provides for filing of certificates in a different manner. In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the term of the franchise, then in that event, the cable communications system operator shall furnish, at least thirty days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage has been obtained.

     D.    Certificate Contents. All certificates shall contain a provision that coverages afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least thirty days’ prior written notice has been given to the city. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the state of California. Financial ratings of the insurer shall be no less than “A” VII or better in the latest edition of “Bests Key Rating Guide,” published by A.M. Best Guide.

     E.     Insurance Amounts. A cable communications system operator (and those acting on its behalf to construct or operate the system) shall maintain the following minimum insurance. The city shall be named as an additional insured by endorsement on the general liability and automotive policies; those insurance policies shall be primary and contain a cross-liability clause.

     1.     Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily injury and property damage. Exposures to be covered are: premises, operations, products/completed operations and certain contracts. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability:

 

 

Each Occurrence

Annual Aggregate

Bodily injury

$1,000,000.00

$3,000,000.00

Property damage

1,000,000.00

3,000,000.00

Personal injury

 

3,000,000.00

 

     Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained for two years after the termination of the franchise (in the case of the cable communications system owner or operator) or completion of the work for the cable communications system owner or operator (in the case of a contractor or subcontractor).

     Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for the following hazards: X - explosion, C - collapse, U - underground.

     2.     Workers’ compensation insurance shall be maintained during the life of this contract to comply with statutory limits for all employees, and in the case any work is sublet, each cable communications system operator shall require the subcontractors similarly to provide workers’ compensation insurance for all the latter’s employees unless such employees are covered by the protection afforded by each cable communications system operator. Each cable communications system operator and its contractors and subcontractors shall maintain during the life of this policy employers liability insurance. Workers’ compensation insurance shall include a waiver of subrogation clause in favor of the city. The following minimum limits must be maintained:

 

Workers’ compensation

Statutory

Employer’s liability

$500,000.00 per occurrence

     3.     Comprehensive Auto Liability.

 

 

Each Occurrence

Annual Aggregate

Bodily injury

$1,000,000.00

$3,000,000.00

Property damage

1,000,000.00

3,000,000.00

Personal injury

1,000,000.00

3,000,000.00

 

     Coverage shall include owned, hired, and nonowned vehicles. In every franchise agreement the city shall reserve the right to require any other insurance coverage it deems necessary depending upon exposures.

     F.     Construction Bond. Every operator of a cable communications system shall obtain and maintain a construction bond to ensure the faithful performance of its responsibilities under this chapter and any franchise. The amount of the bond shall be set in the city franchise, but shall not be less than ten percent of the estimated cost of constructing or (in the case of existing systems) upgrading the system, and shall include a sufficient amount to cover the removal of facilities and/or restoration of city facilities within the right-of-way. The bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required through the permitting process. The bond shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney. Bonds must be obtained prior to the effective date of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise specifically provides otherwise.

     G.    Security Fund. Every cable communications system operator shall establish and maintain a cash security fund or provide the city an irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars to secure the payment of fees owed, to secure any other performance promised in a franchise, and to pay any taxes, fees, penalties or liens owed to the city. The letter of credit shall be in a form and with an institution acceptable to the city. Should the city draw upon the cash security fund or letter of credit, the cable communications system operator shall, within fourteen days, restore the fund or the letter of credit to the full required amount. This security fund/letter of credit may be waived or reduced by the city for a franchisee where the city determines in its discretion that a particular franchisee’s operations are sufficiently limited that a security fund/letter of credit is not necessary to secure the required performance. The city may from time to time require a franchisee to change the amount of the required security fund/letter of credit to reflect changed risks to the city and to the public, including delinquencies in taxes or other payments to the city. The cash security fund or letter of credit must be obtained prior to the effective date of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise specifically provides otherwise. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.150 Enforcement and remedies.
     A.    Franchise Violation-Notice and Procedures. Before revoking a franchise or issuing an order to assess liquidated damages, the city shall follow the procedures set forth below:

     1.     The city shall notify a cable communications system operator in writing of any alleged violation (“violation notice”) of a franchise or this chapter. The violation notice shall: (a) identify the violation; (b) direct the cable communications system operator to cure the violation or show cause why the violation cannot or should not be cured; and (c) state the time for the cable communications system operator’s response, which shall be at minimum thirty days from the date of issuance of the violation notice, except for violations that present a danger to public health, safety or welfare, in which case the time for response may be shortened;

     2.     Within the time period designated for response in the violation notice issue pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section, the cable communications system operator shall respond in writing to the city indicating that: (a) the cable communications system operator intends to contest the violation notice and describing all facts relevant to its claim; or (b) the cable communications system operator has completely cured the violation, in which case the cable communications system operator shall provide documentation demonstrating that the violation has been completely cured; or (c) the cable communications system operator has begun to correct the violation, however, the violation cannot be corrected immediately despite the cable communications system operator’s continued due diligence, in which case the operator shall describe in detail the steps already taken and operator’s proposed plan and time schedule for completely curing the violation. The city may accept, modify, or reject the cable communications system operator’s proposed plan and time schedule for curing the violation. Correction of the violation is not complete until all damages and penalties owed are paid in full;

     3.     If the cable communications system operator contests the violation notice or the city determines that the cable communications system operator has failed to completely cure the violation, to submit an acceptable plan to cure the violation, or to work diligently to cure the violation, the city shall schedule a hearing before the city manager or the city manager’s designee (“violation hearing”). The city shall provide cable communications system operator written notice of the violation hearing at least twenty days prior to the hearing (“hearing notice”);

     4.     The hearing notice shall indicate: (a) the time and place of the violation hearing; (b) the nature of the violation; and (c) the cable communications system operator’s right to present oral and written testimony at an open and public meeting;

     5.     At the violation hearing, the city manager or the city manager’s designee shall hear and consider evidence from the cable communications system operator, city staff and members of the public regarding the alleged violation. The cable communications system operator shall be given an opportunity to present any and all evidence relating to the alleged violation;

     6.     If, based upon the evidence presented at the violation hearing, the city manager or the city manager’s designee finds that cable communications system operator has violated its franchise, this chapter or any applicable state or federal law, the city manager or the city manager’s designee may issue an order assessing liquidated damages if provided for by the cable communications system operator’s franchise, or, subject to subsection (B) of this section and the terms of the cable communications system operator’s franchise, revoke or shorten the franchise. The cable communication system operator may appeal the decision to the city council;

     7.     If the cable communications system operator files a written appeal to the city council pursuant to subsection (A)(6) of this section, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the cable communications system operator at least twenty days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall include the information described in subsection (A)(4) of this section. If, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, the city council find that the cable communications system operator has violated its franchise, this chapter, or any applicable state or federal laws, the city council may issue an order assessing liquidated damages if provided for by the cable communications system operators’ franchise, or, subject to subsection (B) of this section and the terms of the cable communications system operators’ franchise, revoke or shorten the term of the franchise.

     B.     Revocation and Termination. The city council may revoke a franchise or reduce the term of a franchise if it finds, after complying with procedures set forth in subsection (A) of this section, that a cable communications system operator has violated this chapter or its franchise or license; has defrauded or attempted to defraud the city or subscribers; or has attempted to evade the requirements of this chapter or its franchise or license. Except as to violations that are impossible to cure, and as provided in subsections (C) and (D) of this section, the franchise may only be revoked if the franchisee (1) was given notice of the default; and (2) thirty days to cure the default; and (3) the franchisee failed to cure the default, or to propose a schedule for curing the default acceptable to the city where it is impossible to cure the default in thirty days. Any revocation proceeding must conducted in accordance with applicable federal and state laws.

     C.     Exception for Certain Acts. No opportunity to cure is required for repeated violations (provided that notice was provided pursuant to subsection (A) of this section), and fraud and attempted fraud shall be deemed incurable. Further, the city may declare a franchise forfeited without opportunity to cure where a franchisee (1) voluntarily stops providing service it is required to provide; or (2) transfers the franchise without the prior consent of the city.

     D.    Effect of Termination or Forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of a franchise, whether by action of the city as provided in subsection (C) of this section, or by passage of time, the franchisee must stop using the cable communications system for the purposes authorized by the franchise. The city may take possession of some or all of franchisee’s facilities, consistent with provisions of applicable law, or require the franchisee or its bonding company to remove some or all of the franchisee’s facilities from the city, and restore affected property to its same or better condition. This provision does not permit the city to remove facilities that are used to provide another service for which the franchisee holds a valid franchise issued by the city.

     E.     Remedies Cumulative. Remedies provided for under this chapter or under a franchise shall be cumulative. Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond, the security fund or letter of credit, does not limit a franchisee’s duty to indemnify the city; or relieve a franchisee of its franchise obligations or limit the amounts owed to the city.

     F.     Liquidated Damages Required in Franchise. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall require liquidated damages, in an amount to be specified in the franchise, for specified breaches of the franchise including but not limited to, failure to commence construction, failure to meet construction plan benchmarks, failure to comply with rebuild plan benchmarks, failure to commence service, and material breach of franchise obligation(s). The franchise shall also provide that the city may withdraw liquidated damages owed from the grantee’s security deposit, after complying with the procedures set forth in subsection (A) of this section. Liquidated damages shall commence on that date that performance was due and/or failed, and continue until the grantee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that the grantee has fully performed its obligations giving rise to the payment of liquidated damages. Any obligation to pay liquidated damages does not in any way affect the grantee’s obligation to pay franchise fees or perform other franchise obligations and such liquidated damages do not constitute franchise fees and are not subject to any limitations on franchise fees contained in 47 U.S.C. § 542(b). Any obligation to pay liquidated damages are not costs of satisfying franchise requirements as provided in 47 C.F.R. § 76.925. A grantee may not pass the cost of any liquidated damages to subscribers through subscriber rates or itemize or otherwise identify on subscriber bills any obligation grantee may have to pay liquidated damages.

     G.    Penalties, Fines and Other Monetary Sanctions.

     1.     Penalties. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter or otherwise available by law, the city shall have the power to impose civil penalties in the event a grantee violates any provision of this chapter, a franchise, or any regulation lawfully adopted thereunder. The amounts of such penalties shall be based on the following principles:

     a.     Penalties shall exceed the financial benefits to a grantee delaying or failing to comply with the applicable requirement;

     b.     Even where such benefits are not easily discernible, the penalties shall be high enough to have a significant deterrent effect on a grantee; and

     c.     Penalties shall be sufficient to protect the city and other affected parties against loss of revenues resulting from violations.

     2.     Other Monetary Sanctions. A franchise shall also provide for liquidated damages and other monetary sanctions, the amounts of which shall also reflect the foregoing principals.

     3.     Private Suit Against Grantee.

     a.     Any person or organization adversely affected by a violation, or by a pattern and practice of violations, shall have the right to sue a grantee in a court of competent jurisdiction for damages and for injunctive and other relief to require enforcement of the franchise. Organizations shall be entitled to sue on behalf of themselves or their members.

     b.     The remedy provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any remedies provided by law.

     c.     Except in emergency situations in which immediate relief is required, private litigants shall notify the city attorney not fewer than ten days prior to filing suit. However, suit by the city shall not preempt the private litigant’s right to proceed.

     4.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a monetary penalty in an amount determined pursuant to the principles in subsection (G)(l) of this section. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.160 Books and records.
     A.    Generally. Each cable communications system operator shall provide the city access to books and records related in whole or in part to the construction, operation, or repair of the cable communications system, or a group of systems of which the system is a part, so that the city may inspect and copy these books and records. The records shall include, but are not limited to, revenue records and other records related to compliance with any provision of this chapter or a franchise. A franchisee is responsible for obtaining or maintaining the necessary possession or control of all such books and records, so that it can produce the documents upon request. Books and records must be maintained for a period of five years, except that a franchise may specify a shorter period for certain categories of voluminous books and records where the information contained therein can be derived simply from other materials. The phrase “books and records” shall be read expansively to include information in whatever format stored.

     B.     Production. Books and records requested shall be produced to the city by a time and at a location in the city designated by the city manager. However, if the requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security reasons cannot be copied and moved, then the franchisee may request that the inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city and the franchisee, provided that (1) the franchisee must make necessary arrangements for copying documents selected by the city after its review; and (2) the franchisee must pay all travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the city (above those that would have been incurred had the documents been produced in the city) in inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected by its designee. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.170 Reports.
     A.    Obligation to Submit. The city manager may from time to time direct a franchisee to prepare reports and to submit those reports by a date certain, in a format prescribed by the city manager, in addition to those required by this chapter.

     B.     Quarterly Reports. Unless an exemption is granted by the city manager, within forty-five days of the end of each calendar quarter, a franchisee shall submit a report to the city containing the following information:

     1.     The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received during the prior quarter and the percentage of service calls compared to the subscriber base; and

     2.     The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of total hours of operation. An outage is a loss of sound or video on any signal, or a significant deterioration of any signal affecting two or more subscribers.

     C.     Annual Reports. Unless an exemption is granted by the city manager, no later than ninety days after the end of the operator’s fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit the following information:

     1.     A fully audited or self-certified revenue report signed by an officer of the cable communications system operator from the previous calendar year for the cable communications system, and a certified statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year and a detailed explanation of the method of computation showing (i) gross revenues by category (e.g., basic service, pay, pay-per-view, advertising, installation, equipment, late charges, miscellaneous, other); and (ii) what, if any, deductions were made from gross revenues in calculating the franchise fee (e.g., bad debt, credits and refunds), and the amount of each deduction;

     2.     A report showing, for each applicable customer service standard, the franchisee’s performance with respect to that standard for each quarter of the preceding year. In each case where the franchisee concludes it did not comply fully, the franchisee will describe the corrective actions it is taking to assure future compliance. In addition, the report should identify the number and nature of all the customer service complaints received and an explanation of their dispositions;

     3.     An ownership report, indicating all persons who at the time of filing control or own an interest in the franchisee of ten percent or more.

     D.    Contemporaneous Reports. Within ten days of their receipt or (in the case of documents created by the operator or its affiliate) filing, a franchisee shall provide the city:

     1.     Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the system; and

     2.     Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the franchisee or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the franchisee directly or indirectly. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.180 Maps required.
     Each franchisee shall maintain accurate maps and improvement plans which show the location, size, and a general description of all facilities installed in the public rights-of-way and any power supply sources (including voltages and connections). Maps shall be based upon post-construction inspection to verify location. Each franchisee shall provide a map to the city showing the location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as may be directed by the city public works director and update the map at least annually, and whenever the facility expands or is relocated. Copies of maps shall be provided in hard copy and on disk, in a commercially available electronic format specified by the city public works director. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.190 Other records required.
     Unless the city manager waives the requirement, a franchisee shall at all times maintain:

     A.    Complaint Records. Records of all complaints received, their nature and resolution. The term “complaints” refers to complaints about any aspect of the franchisee’s operations or customer service;

     B.     Outage Records. Records of outages known to the franchisee, their cause and duration;

     C.     Complaint Response. Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating the date and time service was requested, the date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and time the problem was solved;

     D.    Installation Records. Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service extension, indicating date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended;

     E.     Customer Service. Records sufficient to show whether the franchisee has complied with each customer service standard that applies to it. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.200 Exemptions.
     The city manager may temporarily exempt any franchisee from its obligations under Sections 5.20.160 through 5.20.190 if the city manager determines that the requirement would be unduly burdensome or unnecessary, and that the city and subscriber interests may be adequately protected in some other manner. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.210 Privacy.
     A franchisee shall take all reasonable steps required so that it is able to provide reports, books and records to the city, including by providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each franchisee shall be responsible for redacting data that applicable law prevents it from providing to the city. Nothing in this section shall be read to require a franchisee to violate state or federal subscriber privacy laws. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.220 Procedures for paying franchise fees and fees in lieu of franchise fees.
     A.    Fees Paid Quarterly. The franchise fee paid pursuant to Article 2 of this chapter, or fee in lieu of franchise fee paid pursuant to Article 3 of this chapter shall be paid quarterly unless otherwise specified in a franchise. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter.

     B.     Quarterly Statement. Unless a franchise provides otherwise, a franchisee or other entity subject to a fee under Article 2 or 3 of this chapter shall file with the city within forty-five days of the end of each calendar quarter a statement showing gross revenues during the preceding quarter and the number of subscribers served.

     C.     Acceptance of Payment Not a Release. No acceptance by the city of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable.

     D.    Fee Not in Lieu of Taxes. Neither the franchise fee under Article 2 of this chapter, nor the fee paid in lieu of the franchise fee under Article 3 of this chapter, is a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee, or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against operators or cable subscriber(s)).

     E.     Failure to Pay Franchise Fee. In the event that a fee payment is not received by the city on or before the due date set forth in this section or in a franchise, or the fee owed is not fully paid, the person subject to the fee will be charged interest from the due date at an interest rate equal to three percent above the rate for three-month federal treasury bills at the most recent United States Treasury Department sale of such treasury bills occurring prior to the due date of the franchise fee payment.

     F.     Final Statement of Gross Revenues. Within ninety days of the date a franchisee ceases operations under a franchise (whether because of franchise termination, transfer, bankruptcy or for any other reason), the franchisee shall file a final statement of gross revenues covering the period from the beginning of the calendar year in which the operations ceased to the date operations ceased. The statement shall contain the information and be certified as required by Section 5.20.170(C)(1) of this code. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

Article 2. Special Rules Applicable to Cable Systems
5.20.230 Applications—Generally.
     A.    Application Required. An application must be filed for an initial and renewal cable system franchise, or for approval of a transfer. A request for renewal filed under 47 U.S.C. § 546(h) need not contain the information required by subsection (B)(l) of this section.

     B.     Application Contents.

     1.     The city manager may specify the information that must be provided in connection with an application, and the form in which the information is to be provided. At a minimum each application must identify the applicant including any affiliates, show that the applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to construct, maintain and operate the cable system, contain a pro forma showing capital expenditures and expected income and expenses for the first five years the applicant is to hold the franchise, and show that the applicant is willing to comply unconditionally with its franchise obligations. In addition, any application for an initial or renewal franchise or rebuild of the operators system and/or facilities, must describe in detail the cable system that the applicant proposes to build, show where it will be located, set out the system construction schedule, and show that the applicant will provide adequate channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and government use (including institutional network use) of the cable system. The detailed description of the physical facilities proposed shall include at least the following:

     a.     A description of the channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, access (and institutional network, if required) facilities and equipment;

     b.     The location of proposed facility and facility design, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the operation of the same; provided, however, that, if some of the descriptive data is not available at the time of application, the franchise may issue subject to conditions that the data be filed and approved by the city before construction begins and that the franchise will be deemed to be forfeited if the data is not supplied and approved; provided, further, that the foregoing proviso does not authorize the grant of a franchise where there is not sufficient information to appraise the impact of the applicant’s proposal;

     c.     A map of the general route the facility will follow; a designation of the portions of the system that will be placed aboveground and the portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques that the operator proposes to use in installing the system aboveground and underground; a schedule for construction of the facility, describing when and where construction will begin, how it will proceed, benchmarks indicating the schedule completion of portions of the system and when construction will be completed; and the expected effect on right-of-way usage, including information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities;

     d.     A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing facilities;

     e.     A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including descriptions of the capacity, facilities and support for public, educational, and governmental use of the system (including institutional networks) applicant proposes to provide and why applicant believes that the proposal is adequate to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community;

     f.      A demonstration of the financial qualifications of the applicant, including at least the following:

     i.      The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and all other proposed equipment or services,

     ii.     A statement regarding the applicant’s financial ability to complete the construction to meet the timeframe proposed and to operate the cable system proposed certified by the applicant’s chief financial officer;

     g.     A demonstration of the applicant’s technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system;

     h.     A demonstration that the applicant is legally qualified, which proof must include a demonstration that the applicant:

     i. Has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities,

     ii.     Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering, violation of antitrust laws, consumer protection laws or similar laws) that allows the city to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with requirements of franchise or provisions of this title,

     iii.    Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those relating to the construction, operation or repair of its facilities;

and has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing so, and

     iv.    The applicant must not have submitted an application for an initial or renewal franchise to the city, which was denied, or as to which any challenges to such franchising decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application;

     i.      An applicant may show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise by virtue of: (1) the particular circumstances surrounding the acts or omissions at issue; (2) the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and to prevent their recurrence; and the lack of involvement of the applicant’s principals; or (3) the remoteness of the acts or omissions from the operation of communications systems;

     j.      The extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the financial or technical resources of another person, including another affiliate, proofs should be provided for that person;

     k.     A description of the applicant’s prior experience in cable system ownership, construction, and operation, and identification of cities and counties in California in which the applicant or any of its principals have a cable franchise or any interest therein, provided that an applicant that holds a franchise for the city and is seeking renewal of that franchise need only provide this information for other cities and counties in California where its franchise is scheduled to expire during the twelvemonth period prior to the date its application is submitted to the city and for other cities and counties in California where its franchise had been scheduled to expire during the twelve-month period after the date its application is submitted to the city. If an applicant has no other franchise in California, it shall provide the information for its operations in other states;

     1.     An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law.

     2.     To be accepted for filing, an original and six copies of a complete application must be submitted. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application.

     3.     An applicant (and the transferor and transferee, in the case of a transfer) shall respond to any request for information from the city, by the time specified by the city.

     C.     Incomplete Applications. An application may be rejected if it is incomplete, or if the response to requests for information is not timely and complete. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.240 Application for an initial franchise or renewal franchise.
     A.    Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to an application for an initial franchise, or a renewal franchise application that is not governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)—(h).

     B.     Process. Any person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise by submitting an application therefore on that person’s own initiative, or in response to a request for proposals issued by the city. If the city receives an unsolicited application, it may choose to issue a request for additional proposals, and require the applicant to amend its proposal to respond thereto. The city shall promptly conduct such investigations as are necessary to act on an application.

     C.     Consideration of Application. In determining whether to grant a franchise, the city may consider:

     1.     The extent to which an applicant for renewal has substantially complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable franchise;

     2.     Whether an applicant’s quality of service under its existing franchise, including signal quality, response to customer complaints, billing practices, and the like has been reasonable in light of the needs of the community;

     3.     Where the applicant has not previously held a cable system franchise in the city, whether the applicant’s record in other communities indicates that it can be relied upon to provide high-quality service throughout any franchise term;

     4.     Whether the applicant has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in an application, and to satisfy any minimum requirements established by the city;

     5.     Whether the applicant’s application is reasonable to meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the city, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests;

     6.     Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on streets, public property, and private property that will be used by the applicant’s cable system;

     7.     Whether issuance of the franchise would reduce competition in the provision of cable service in the city;

     8.     Such other matters as the city is authorized or required to consider.

     D.    Issuance of Franchise. If the city determines that issuance of a franchise would be in the public interest considering the factors described in subsection (C) of this section, it may offer a franchise agreement to the applicant. No franchise shall become effective until the franchise is unconditionally accepted by the applicant, approved by the city council, and the franchise agreement is signed by both parties. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.250 Application for renewal franchise filed pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546.
     A.    Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to applications for renewal governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)—(g).

     B.     Process. A franchisee that intends to exercise rights under 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)—(g) shall submit a notice in writing to the city in a timely manner clearly stating that it is activating the procedures set forth in those sections. The city shall thereafter commence any proceedings that may be required under federal law, and upon completion of those proceedings, the city may issue a request for proposals and an application may be submitted for renewal. The city may preliminarily deny the application by resolution, and if the application is preliminarily denied, the city may conduct such proceedings and by resolution establish such procedures and appoint such individuals as may be necessary to conduct any proceedings to review the application. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.260 Application for transfer.
     A.    Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to applications for transfer approval.

     B.     Information. An application for transfer must contain all the information required by the city manager, by Section 5.20.230 of this code, and all information required by any FCC transfer form.

     C.     Consideration of Application. In determining whether a transfer application should be granted, denied, or granted subject to conditions, the city may consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the cable system; any potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates or services; whether the incumbent operator is in compliance with its franchise; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the city, whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would otherwise adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the city’s interest under this chapter, the franchise or other applicable law. The proposed transferee shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating the applications. The city may consider a resolution either approving or denying a transfer application within a reasonable period of time, or within the timeframes provided by federal law, whichever is longer. The city and the parties to the transfer may agree in writing to extend any federal timeframe.

     D.    Minimum Conditions. In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an applicant must show, at a minimum, that: the transferee is financially, legally, and technically qualified; the transfer will not adversely affect the interests of subscribers, the public, or the city; and that noncompliance issues have been resolved to the satisfaction of the city. No application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee for all purposes. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.270 Legal qualifications.
     A.    Standards.

     1.     The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable laws; and to comply with such requirements of a franchise as the city may lawfully require.

     2.     The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise validly revoked, (including any appeals) by the city within three years preceding the submission of the application.

     3.     The applicant must not have had an application to the city for an initial or renewal cable system franchise denied within three years preceding the submission of the application; and must not have had an application for an initial or renewal OVS franchise denied on any ground within three years of the application.

     4.     The applicant or its principals shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during the ten years preceding the submission of the application, applicant was convicted or found to have committed fraud, racketeering, securities fraud, anticompetitive actions, unfair trade practices or other conduct of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers, or to substantially comply with its obligations.

     5.     Applicant must have the necessary authority under California and federal law to operate a cable system, or show that it is in a position to obtain that authority.

     6.     The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.

     7.     For purposes of subsections (A)(2) through (4) of this section, the term applicant includes any affiliate of applicant.

     B.     Exception. Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, an applicant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show that a franchise should issue even if the requirements of subsections (C) and (D) of this section are not satisfied, by virtue of the circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant’s principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of a cable system. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.280 Franchise fee.
     A cable communications system operator shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent of gross revenues, or such other amount as may be specified in the franchise; provided, however, that if the franchise specifies an amount, that amount shall be subject to increase should federal limits on fee payments be eliminated or changed and other operators are subject to a higher fee.

     A.    Bundled Services. In the event that the franchisee shall, during the term of the franchise, offer bundled, tied, or combined cable services (which are subject to the franchise fee) with noncable services (which may not be subject to the franchise fee) to individual subscribers, the combined revenues from such bundled services shall be allocated consistent with the rates or prices advertised by the franchisee through its marketing materials or on its published rate card. In the event the franchisee does not advertise or publish separate prices for the combined services, the percentage that the price for the combined services is discounted from the regular retail rates of the individual services shall be prorated across all the services in the bundled package; provided, however, that the net revenues derived from services subject to mandatory tariff rates imposed by the California Public Utilities Commission (or other governmental entity having such authority) shall be deducted from the combined revenue to determine the revenue subject to the franchise fee. As an example, franchisee may offer a “bundle” of video, voice and data services for a flat fee of seventy-five dollars where the retail rate for the services purchased on an individual basis would equal one hundred dollars. Assuming that there is no service subject to the mandated tariff rate, grantee would apply a twenty-five percent discount to each service. Thus, if the retail rate for the cable service in the bundle were fifty dollars, grantee would recognize cable service revenue in the amount of thirty-seven dollars and fifty cents and pay a franchise fee on that revenue.

     B.     The definition of gross revenue is to be as inclusive as possible consistent with existing applicable law. If a change in federal law occurs subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, such change shall not impact the gross revenues definition in such a way to reduce gross revenues unless the change specifically preempts the affected portion of the definition in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.290 No exclusivity.
     A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing service. However, nothing in this chapter prevents a franchisee from entering into an otherwise lawful, mutually desired exclusive arrangement with a building owner or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial subscriber. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.300 Minimum franchise conditions.
     In addition to satisfying such additional or stricter conditions as the city finds necessary based on its investigations, the following elements shall be required in every franchise.

     A.    System Design. Each franchisee shall provide a cable system that uses at least seven hundred fifty Megahertz equipment of high quality and reliability. Each franchisee shall install and activate the return portion of the cable system.

     B.     Public, Educational and Government Use of the System.

     1.     A franchisee shall provide a minimum of three channels for PEG access to each subscriber.

     2.     Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace as necessary, a dedicated, bi-directional fiber optic link (or link with equivalent or superior functionality, capacity and reliability) between its headend and a location designated by the city as the primary access center.

     3.     Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace activated two-way cable plant and all headend, cable plant, and node equipment required to make it operable so that the city, schools, and all designated PEG access centers and access facilities located within the franchise area will be able to send and receive signals (video, audio and data) using the activated two-way cable plant.

     4.     Each franchisee shall ensure that technically adequate signal quality, routing systems, and switching and/or processing equipment are initially and continuously provided for all access interconnections both within franchisee’s cable system and with other cable systems throughout the duration of its franchise.

     5.     In the event a franchisee makes any change in the cable system and related equipment and facilities or in the franchisee’s signal delivery technology which directly or indirectly substantially affects the signal quality or transmission of access programming, the franchisee shall at its expense take necessary steps or provide necessary technical assistance, including the acquisition of all necessary equipment, to ensure that the capabilities of access programmers are not diminished or adversely affected by such change.

     6.     A franchisee shall maintain all access channels (both upstream channels and downstream channels) and all interconnections of access channels at the same level of technical quality and reliability as the best commercial channels carried on the grantee’s system.

     C.     Service to Franchise Area. It is the policy of the city to ensure that every cable system provide service in its franchise area upon request to any person or any government building. Each franchisee shall extend service upon request within its franchise area, provided that, a franchise may permit a franchisee to require a potential subscriber to contribute a fair share of the capital costs of installation or extension as a condition of extension or installation in cases where such extension or installation may be unduly expensive. Service must be provided within time limits specified in subsection (D) of this section.

     D.    Time for Extension. Except as a franchise otherwise provides, service must be extended upon request to any person or to any government building in a franchisee’s franchise area (i) within seven days of the request, where service can be provided by activating or installing a drop; (ii) within ninety days of the request where an extension of one-half mile or less is required; or (iii) within six months where an extension of one-half mile or more is required.

     E.     Technical Standards. A cable system within the city shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601 and any other applicable technical standards.

     F.     Testing. Each operator shall perform at its expense such tests as may be necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with its obligations under applicable FCC standards, this chapter or a franchise.

     G.    Interconnection. Upon request of the city, every cable system shall be required to interconnect with every other cable system within the city, or adjacent to the city, on fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing PEG and I-Net services.

     H.    Continuity of Service. Each franchisee shall, during the term of the franchise, ensure that subscribers are able to receive continuous service. In the event the franchise is revoked or terminated, the franchisee may be required to continue to provide service for a reasonable period to assure an orderly transition of service from the franchisee to another entity. A franchise may establish more particular requirements under which these obligations will be satisfied. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.310 Rate regulation and consumer protection.
     A.    All Rates Subject to Regulation. The city may regulate any of the operator’s rates and charges, except to the extent it is prohibited from doing so by law. The city will regulate rates in accordance with FCC rules and regulations, where applicable. Except to the extent FCC rules provide otherwise, all rates and charges that are subject to regulation, and changes in those rates or charges must be approved in advance. The city manager may take any required steps to file complaints, toll rates, issue accounting orders or take any other steps required to comply with FCC regulations. The city council shall be responsible for issuing rate orders that establish rates or order refunds.

     B.     No Rate Discrimination. Except to the extent the city may not enforce such a requirement, an operator is prohibited from discriminating in its rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a nondiscriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers throughout the franchise area; and a franchisee may offer discounts for the elderly, the disabled, or the economically disadvantaged; and such other discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner.

     C.     Redlining Prohibited. An operator shall not deny access or charge different rates to any group of subscribers or potential subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.

     D.    Customer Service.

     1.     Each operator must satisfy FCC, state and the city cable customer service standards and consumer protection standards. The city cable customer service standards may be adopted by resolution. In the case of a conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall apply.

     2.     For violation of cable customer service standards, penalties will be imposed as follows:

     a.     Two hundred dollars for each day of each material breach, not to exceed six hundred dollars for each occurrence of material breach;

     b.     If there is a subsequent material breach of the same provision within twelve months, four hundred dollars for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand two hundred dollars for each occurrence of the material breach;

     c.     If there is a third or additional material breach of the same provision within twelve months of the first, one thousand dollars for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each occurrence of the material breach.

     3.     Any penalty assessed under this section will be reduced dollar for dollar to the extent any liquidated damage provision of a franchise imposes a monetary obligation on a franchisee for the same customer service failures, and no other monetary damages may be assessed. The city will provide notice, and impose penalties, under this section pursuant to the procedures established by California Government Code § 53088.2(r). (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

Article 3. Open Video Systems
5.20.320 Additional definitions.
     “OVS agreement” means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the city and an OVS franchisee setting forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.330 Applications for grant or renewal of franchises.
     A.    Initial and Renewal Franchise. Application.

     1.     A written application shall be filed with the city for grant of an initial or renewal franchise.

     2.     To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with six copies. The application must conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all information required under subsection (B) of this section. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application.

     B.     Contents of Applications. The city manager may specify the information that must be provided in connection with a request for proposals or an application for an initial or renewal franchise. At a minimum, each application must: identify the applicant, where it plans to construct its system, and the system construction schedule; show that the applicant will provide adequate channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and government use (including institutional network use) of the OVS; and show that the applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to construct and operate the OVS. The application must contain the following information:

     1.     Identity of the applicant; the persons who exercise working control over the applicant; and the persons who control those persons, to the ultimate parent;

     2.     A proposal for construction of the open video system that includes at least the following:

     a.     A description of the services that are to be provided over the facility,

     b.     Identification of the area of the city to be served by the proposed system, including a description of the proposed franchise area’s boundaries,

     c.     The location of proposed facility and facility design, including a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the operation of the same,

     d.     A map of the route the facility will follow a designation of the portions of the system that will be placed aboveground and the portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques that the operator proposes to use in installing the system aboveground and underground; a schedule for construction of the facility, describing when and where construction will begin, how it will proceed, benchmarks for completion of phases, and when it will be completed; expected effect on rights-of-way usage, including information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities,

     e.     A description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done with existing facilities;

     3.     Evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant has the financial resources to complete the proposed project, and to construct, operate and repair the proposed facility over the franchise term. It is not the intent of the city to require an applicant to prove that the services it proposes to offer will succeed in the marketplace;

     4.     Evidence satisfactory to the city that applicant is technically qualified to construct, operate and repair the proposed facility. At a minimum, the applicant must show that it has experience or resources to ensure that work is to be performed adequately, and can respond to emergencies during and after construction is complete;

     5.     Evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant is legally qualified, which proof must include a demonstration that the applicant:

     a.     Has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary authorizations from state and federal authorities,

     b.     Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering, violation of antitrust laws, consumer protection laws, or similar laws) that allows city to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with requirements of franchise, or provisions of this chapter,

     c.     Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those relating to the construction, operation or maintenance of its facilities, and has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing so;

     6.     An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law;

     7.     An applicant may show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a franchise by virtue of: the particular circumstances surrounding the acts or omissions at issue; the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and to prevent their recurrence; and the lack of involvement of the applicant’s principals, or the remoteness of the acts or omissions from the operation of open video system facilities;

     8.     To the extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the financial or technical resources of another person, including another affiliate, the proofs should be provided for that person. An applicant will be presumed to have the requisite financial, or technical or legal qualifications to the extent such qualifications have been reviewed and approved by a state agency of competent jurisdiction; or if applicant is a holder of a franchise in the city for a cable system or open video system, and conduct under such other franchise provides no basis for additional investigation.

     C.     Procedure for Applying for Grant of a Franchise.

     1.     A person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise on its own initiative or in response to a request for proposals. Upon receipt of an application, the city shall promptly proffer the applicant a proposed OVS agreement, which shall be mailed to the person requesting its issuance and made available to any other interested party. The city may request such additional information, as it deems appropriate.

     2.     An applicant shall respond to requests for information completely, and within the time directed by the city, and must strictly comply with procedures, instructions, and requirements the city may establish.

     3.     An application may be rejected if it is incomplete or the applicant fails to follow procedures or respond fully to information requests.

     D.    Evaluation. In evaluating a franchise application, the city may consider the following:

     1.     The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing city OVS franchise;

     2.     Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal qualifications to hold an OVS franchise;

     3.     Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements established by the city for, or will otherwise provide adequate public, educational, and governmental use capacity, facilities, or financial support (including with respect to institutional networks);

     4.     Whether issuance of a franchise would require replacement of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rights-of-way;

     5.     Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city.

     E.     Issuance. If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue a franchise considering the factors above, and such other matters as it is required or entitled to consider, and subject to the applicant’s entry into an appropriate OVS agreement, it shall issue a franchise. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise, the city may hold one or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an application may be received.

     F.     Legal Qualifications. In order to be legally qualified:

     1.     The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this chapter and applicable laws, and to comply with such requirements of an OVS agreement as the city may lawfully require;

     2.     The applicant must not hold a cable system franchise, or have pending an application for a cable system franchise with the city;

     3.     The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise validly revoked, (including any appeals) by the city within three years preceding the submission of the application;

     4.     The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or renewal cable system franchise to the city denied within three years preceding the submission of the application;

     5.     The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or renewal OVS franchise denied on any grounds within three years of the applications;

     6.     The applicant or its principals shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during the ten years preceding the submission of the application, applicant was convicted or found to have committed fraud, racketeering, securities fraud, anticompetitive actions, unfair trade practices or other conduct of such character that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers or to substantially comply with its obligations;

     7.     Applicant must have the necessary authority under California and federal law to operate an OVS, and must be certified by the FCC under Section 653 of the Cable Act.

     8.     The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide; and

     9.     For purposes of subsection (F)(2) through (5) of this section, the term applicant includes any affiliate of applicant.

     G.    Exception. Notwithstanding subsection (F) of this section, an applicant shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show that a franchise should issue even if the requirements of subsection (F)(4) and (5) of this section are not satisfied, by virtue of the circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of the applicant’s principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the operation of a cable system. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.340 Transfers.
     A.    City Approval Required. No transfer shall occur without prior written notice to and approval of the city.

     B.     Application.

     1.     A franchisee shall notify the city within ten days of any proposed transfer, and submit an application for its approval.

     2.     The city manager may specify information that must be provided in connection with a transfer application. At a minimum, an application must: describe the entities involved in the transaction and the entity that will hold the franchise; describe the chain of ownership before and after the proposed transaction; show that the entity that will hold the franchise will be legally, financially, and technically qualified to do so; attach complete information on the proposed transaction, including the contracts or other documents that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to therein; and attach any shareholder reports or filings with the securities and exchange commission (“SEC”) that discuss the transaction.

     3.     For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the prospective transferee and such other matters as the city may deem necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be approved, denied or conditioned. If the transferee or franchisee refuses to provide information, or provide incomplete information, the request for transfer may be denied.

     C.     Determination by the City.

     1.     In deciding whether a transfer application should be granted, denied or granted subject to conditions, the city council may consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the OVS; whether the incumbent OVS operator is in compliance with its OVS agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee’s commitment to cure such noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other OVS or cable system in the city; and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the city’s interest under this title, the OVS agreement or other applicable law.

     2.     In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an applicant must show, at a minimum, that: the transferee is qualified; the transfer will not adversely affect the interests of subscribers, the public, or the city; and that noncompliance issues have been resolved. No application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous franchisee for all purposes. The proposed transferee shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating the applications. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.350 Minimum requirements.
     A.    PEG Access. No OVS operator shall be issued a franchise, or may commence construction of an OVS system, until (1) it agrees to match in all respects the highest PEG obligations borne by any operator in the city; or (2) it agrees to PEG obligations acceptable to the city.

     B.     Institutional Network. Any OVS operator that constructs an I-Net must match in all respects the highest I-Net obligations borne by any operator in the city, unless it agrees to alternative I-Net obligations acceptable to the city.

     C.     Construction Provisions. Every OVS agreement shall specify the construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the OVS. The schedule shall provide for prompt completion of the project, considering the amount and type of construction required.

     D.    Testing. Each OVS operator shall perform at its expense such tests as may be necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with its obligations under this chapter or a franchise.

     E.     Consumer Protection Provisions. Every franchisee must satisfy customer service consumer protection requirements established from time to time under state or local law and applicable to OVS. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.360 Special termination rules.
     If a franchisee’s FCC certification is revoked or otherwise terminates as a result of the passage of time or as a matter of law, the city may revoke the OVS franchise after a hearing. The OVS franchise may also be revoked if federal regulations or statutory provisions governing OVS are declared invalid or unenforceable or are repealed. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.370 Rate regulation.
     The city may regulate a franchisee’s rates and charges except as prohibited by law, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, separate ordinance, by amendment to an OVS agreement, or in any other lawful manner. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.380 Fee in lieu of franchise fee.
     A.    OVS Operators. In lieu of the franchise fee required by Article II of this chapter, an OVS franchisee shall pay a fee of five percent of the gross revenues of the franchisee, its affiliates or any OV S operator of the OV S.

     B.     Persons Leasing OVS Capacity.

     1.     A person leasing capacity from an OV S operator, other than a person whose revenues are included in the payment made under subsection (A) of this section, shall pay the city a fee in lieu of the franchise fee required by Article 2 of this chapter of five percent of the gross revenues of such person.

     2.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, where franchisee charges a person, other than an affiliate, to use its OVS (the “use payments”); and that person recovers those use payments through charges to its subscribers that are included in that person’s gross revenues; and that person fully recovers the use payments through the charges to its subscribers and pays a fee on those charges pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, then franchisee may deduct from its gross revenues the use payments it receives from that person. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.390 Exclusive contracts.
     A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing service, nor may a franchisee enter into any arrangement that would effectively prevent other persons from using the OVS to compete in the delivery of cable services with a franchisee or its affiliates. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

Article 4. Miscellaneous
5.20.400 Captions.
     The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this chapter. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.410 Calculation of time.
     Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty, matter, or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise, and a period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed in this chapter, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.420 Severability.
     If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable by a valid order of any court or regulatory agency, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, such provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the city and shall thereafter be binding on the franchisee and the city. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.430 Connections to cable system; use of antennae.
     A.    Subscriber Right to Attach. To the extent consistent with federal law, subscribers shall have the right to attach VCR’s, receivers, and other terminal equipment to a franchisee’s cable system. Subscribers also shall have the right to use their own remote control devices and converters and other similar equipment.

     B.     Removal of Existing Antennae. A franchisee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna, or disconnect an antenna except at the express direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber, or prohibit installation of a new antenna, provided that such antenna is connected with an appropriate device and complies with applicable law. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.440 Discrimination prohibited.
     A.    No Retaliatory Actions. A cable communications system operator shall not discriminate among persons or the city or take any retaliatory action against a person or the city because of that entity’s exercise of any right it may have under federal, state, or local law, nor may the operator require a person or the city to waive such rights as a condition of taking service.

     B.     Employment and Hiring Practices. A cable communications system operator shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, ethnic background or marital status. A cable communications system operator shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, and hiring practices, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

5.20.450 Transitional provisions.
     A.    Persons Operating Without a Franchise. The operator of any facility installed as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, for which a franchise is required under this chapter, shall have three months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to file one or more applications for a franchise. Any operator timely filing such an application under this subsection shall not be subject to a penalty for failure to have such a franchise so long as the application remains pending; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall relieve any cable communications system operator of any liability for its failure to obtain any permit or other authorization required under other provisions of the city code, and nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from requiring removal of any facilities installed in violation of the city code.

     B.     Persons Holding Franchises. Any person holding an existing franchise for a cable communications system may continue to operate under the existing ordinance to the conclusion of its present term (but not any renewal or extension thereof) with respect to those activities expressly authorized by the franchise; and provided further that, such person shall be subject to the other provisions of this chapter to the extent permitted by law.

     C.     Persons with Pending Applications. Pending applications shall be subject to this chapter. A person with a pending application shall have thirty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to submit additional information to comply with the requirements of this chapter governing applications. (Ord. 2005-03, 2005)

 

CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS

 

The Franchisee shall comply with the customer service and reporting requirements in this section, or as amended. These requirements include but are not limited to the requirements set forth in FCC regulations, including 47 C.F.R. § 75.309 and other applicable law. To the extent the provisions of this section differ from applicable FCC regulations or any applicable law, the provision or provisions that impose the highest standard or greatest legal duties or obligations upon the Franchisee shall take precedence, unless a different order of precedence is expressly set herein.

 

1.   Office Availability.

 

1.1   Each Franchisee will maintain at least one or more convenient locations in the City open for walk-in traffic at least ten (10) hours per day (except legal holidays) Monday through Friday, with some evening hours, and at least five (5) hours on Saturday to allow Subscribers to pay bills. The Franchisee shall provide to Subscribers a convenient means to drop off equipment and to pick up equipment by providing a location within the City for pick-up and drop off of equipment or by providing for pick up and delivery of equipment at no cost to the customer (i.e. truck roll, postage paid mailer).

 

1.2.  Each Franchisee will perform service calls, installations, and disconnects at least ten (10) hours per day Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, provided that a Franchisee will respond to outages twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week.

 

2.   Telephones. All Call Response statistics shall be measured on the basis of call response statistics in all call centers that serve Subscribers. If the call centers serve Subscribers located in other communities, the Franchisee shall ensure that call center representatives do not give priority or preferential treatment to Subscribers located in other communities.

 

(A).  Definition of Call Response terms:

 

(i)       Answer time is the interval between when the Franchisee receives a call and when an interactive voice response (IVR) or agent answers.

 

(ii)      Speed of Answer is the amount of time between when the customer is transferred into the agent queue from either an IVR or an agent and the time an agent answers.

 

(iii)     Calls Abandoned is the percentage of calls in any agent queue that are abandoned.

 

(iv)     Trunks Busy represents the percentage of time customers receive a busy signal when they call customer service during normal business hours.

 

2.1.  Each Franchisee will establish a publicly listed local toll-free telephone number. Customer service representatives must answer the phone at least ten (10) hours per day, Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, for the purpose of receiving requests for service, inquiries, and complaints from Subscribers. After such business hours the phone will be answered so that customers can register complaints and report service problems on a twenty-four (24) hour per day, seven (7) day per week basis, and so that the Franchisee can respond to service outages as required herein.

 

2.2.  Standards for Call Response.

 

2.2.1.  Answer Time will not exceed thirty (30) seconds or four (4) rings. Under normal operating conditions the Franchisee shall meet this requirement at least ninety (90) percent of the time.

 

2.2.2.  The average Speed of Answer shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds. Under normal operating conditions the Franchisee shall meet this requirement at least ninety (90) percent of the time.

 

2.2.3.  The percentage of Calls Abandoned shall not exceed three (3) percent under normal operating conditions.

 

2.2.4.  Subscribers shall receive a Trunks Busy signal less than three (3) percent of the time under normal operating conditions.

 

2.3.  Call Response Reports.

 

2.3.1.  Franchisee shall submit reports on Call Response statistics every calendar quarter, except as otherwise provided in this section.

 

2.3.2.  If any of a Franchisee’s quarterly Call Response statistics fail to demonstrate compliance with any applicable requirement, the Franchisee must thereafter submit monthly reports on all Call Response times until the Franchisee requests and the City approves resuming quarterly reporting.

 

2.3.3.  Information in the reports about Call Response times shall be determined on the basis of the simple average of results during business hours under normal operating conditions for the entire reporting period, and any report submitted at the end of a calendar quarter shall report the total number of calls during the proceeding quarter and the average Call Response times during that quarter.

 

2.4.  Other Reports.

 

2.4.1.  A Franchisee shall submit reports on all customer service standards identified in this Section during each successive calendar quarter for the term of the Franchise except as otherwise might be provided herein. If a Franchisee’s reports for two (2) quarters within a calendar year fail to demonstrate that the Franchisee has complied with any customer service standard in this section, the Franchisee shall thereafter submit monthly reports about performance of each such requirement until it reports three (3) consecutive months with less than five (5) percent deviation from any minimum required standard unless the Franchisee demonstrates to the City’s satisfaction that the deviation occurred when it was not operating under normal operating conditions as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 76.309 and reports on the nature and duration of such non-normal operating conditions.

 

2.4.2.  Timing. A Franchisee shall submit reports within thirty (30) days after the close of the applicable reporting period. Each report shall include data from the applicable reporting period.

 

2.4.3.  Each of the reporting requirements in this Section is self-executing and the Franchisee agrees that the City does not need to provide additional notice or an opportunity to cure in order to establish that the Franchisee has committed a breach of these requirements for the purposes of the Franchisee’s obligation to pay liquidated damages as described in this Section.

 

2.4.4.  Compliance. If a monthly or quarterly report indicated that a Franchisee has failed to meet any of the minimum required standards, the Franchisee shall provide a written explanation of the deviation within ten (10) business days of the report, including steps being taken to cure the deviation, and the time expected to implement the cure. A Franchisee must cure within thirty (30) days unless a longer period is agreed to in writing by the City, which agreement shall not be unreasonably withheld.

 

3.   Scheduling Work.

 

3.1.  All appointments for service, installation, or disconnection will be specified by date. Each Franchisee will set a specific time at which the work will be done, or offer a choice of time blocks, which will not exceed four (4) hours in length. A Franchisee my also, upon request, schedule service installation calls outside normal business hours, for the express convenience of the customer.

 

3.2.  If at any time an installer or technician is late for an appointment and/or believes a scheduled appointment time will be missed, an attempt to contact the customer will be made before the time of appointment and the appointment rescheduled at a time convenient to the customer. If rescheduling is necessary, it is the Franchisee’s burden to prove it met the appointment.

 

3.3.  The Franchisee will offer and fully describe to Subscribers who have experienced a missed appointment (where the missed appointment was not the Subscriber’s fault) that the Subscriber may choose between the following options:

 

3.3.1.  Installation or service call free of charge, if the appointment was for an installation or service call for which a fee was to be charged;

 

3.3.2.  One (1) month of the most widely subscribed to service tier free of charge for other appointments; and

 

3.3.3.  An opportunity to elect remedies under California Civil Code 1722, if applicable.

 

3.4.  If the Franchisee makes reasonable and no less than three (3) attempts to confirm an appointment during the scheduled appointment time or appointment window and is unsuccessful in obtaining such confirmation, the Franchisee may assume that the customer has cancelled the appointment.

 

4.   Service Standards.

 

4.1.  Under normal operating conditions, requests for service, repair, and maintenance must be acknowledged by a trained customer service representative within twenty-four (24) hours, or before the end of the next business day, whichever is earlier.

 

4.2.  A Franchisee will respond to all other inquiries (including billing inquiries) within five (5) business days of the inquiry or complaint.

 

4.3.  Under normal operating conditions, repairs and maintenance for outages or service interruptions must be completed within twenty-four (24) hours after the outage or interruption becomes known to Franchisee where the Franchisee has adequate access to facilities to which it must have access in order to remedy the problem.

 

4.4.  Under normal operating conditions, work to correct all other service problems must be begun by the next business day after notification of the service problem, and must be completed within five (5) business days from the date of the initial request.

 

4.5.  When normal operating conditions do not exist, a Franchisee will complete the work in the shortest time possible.

 

4.6.  A Franchisee will not cancel a service or installation appointment with a customer within 24 hours of the appointment or after the close of business on the business day preceding the scheduled appointment, whichever is earlier.

 

4.7.  Requests for additional outlets, service upgrades or other connections (e.g., DMX, VCR, A/B switch) separate from the initial installation will be performed within seven (7) business days after an order has been placed.

 

4.8.  Under normal operating conditions, the service standards set out in Sections 4.14.7 will be met at least ninety-five (95) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.

 

4.9.  The failure of the Franchisee to hire sufficient staff or to properly train its staff will not justify a Franchisee’s failure to comply with this provision.

 

5.   Disabled Services. With regard to Subscribers with disabilities, upon Subscriber request, each Franchisee will arrange for pickup and/or replacement of converters or other Franchisee equipment at the Subscriber’s address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as the provision of a postage-prepaid mailer).

 

6.   Notice to Subscribers Regarding Service. A Franchisee will provide each Subscriber at the time service is installed, and annually thereafter, clear and accurate written information:

 

6.1.  On placing a service call, filing a complaint, or requesting an adjustment (including when a Subscriber is entitled to refunds for outages and how to obtain them);

 

6.2.  Showing the telephone number of the City office responsible for administering the Cable Television Franchise;

 

6.3.  Detailing current rates and charges (which must include any senior, disabled or other discounts offered and the least expensive tier of service available), Channel positions, services provided, delinquent Subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures; information regarding the availability of parental control devices, the conditions under which they will be provided and the cost (if any) charged;

 

6.4.  Describing conditions that must be met to qualify for discounts;

 

6.5.  Describing any other of the Franchisee’s policies in connection with its Subscribers; and

 

6.6.  Describing any discounts, services, or specialized equipment available to Subscribers who are Seniors or with disabilities; explaining how to obtain them; and explaining how to use any accessibility features.

 

7.   Notices to the City. Franchisee will provide the City with copies of all notices provided to its Subscribers pursuant to this article.

 

8.   Changes in Noticed Information. Franchisee will provide the City Manager (or designee) at least sixty (60) days, and all Subscribers at least thirty (30) days, written notice of any material changes in the information required to be provided under this article, except that, if federal law establishes a shorter notice period and preempts this requirement, the federal requirement will apply.

 

9.   Truth in Advertising. Each Franchisee will take appropriate steps to ensure that all written Franchisee promotional materials, announcements, and advertising of residential Cable service to Subscribers and the general public, where price information is listed in any manner, clearly and accurately discloses price terms. In the case of telephone orders, a Franchisee will take appropriate steps to ensure that price terms are clearly and accurately disclosed to potential customers in advance of taking the order.

 

9.1.  Each Franchisee will maintain a file open for public inspection containing all notices provided to Subscribers under these customer service standards, as well as all promotional offers made to Subscribers. The notices and offers will be kept in the file for at least one (1) year from the date of such notice or promotional offer.

 

10. Interruptions of Service. A Franchisee shall inform Subscribers and the City, three (3) days prior to any scheduled or planned interruption of service for planned maintenance or construction; provided, however, that planned maintenance that does not require more than one (1) hour interruption of service and/or that occurs between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. will not require such notice to Subscribers. Notice to the City must be given no less than twenty-four (24) hours before the anticipated service interruption.

 

11. Prorated Billing. A Franchisee’s first billing statement after a new installation or service change will be prorated as appropriate and will reflect any security deposit.

 

12. Billing Statement.

 

12.1. A Franchisee’s billing statement must be clear, concise, and understandable; must itemize each category of service and equipment provided to the Subscriber; and must state clearly the charges therefor.

 

12.2. A Franchisee’s billing statement must show a specific payment due date not earlier than the later of:

 

12.2.1. Fifteen (15) days after the date the statement is mailed; or

 

12.2.2. The tenth (10th) day of the service period for which the bill is rendered.

 

12.3. A late fee or administrative fee (collectively referred to below as a “late fee”) may not be imposed for payments earlier than twenty-seven (27) days after the due date specified in the bill.

 

12.4. A late fee may not be imposed unless the Subscriber is provided written notice at least ten (10) days prior to the date the fee is imposed that a fee will be imposed, the date the fee will be imposed and the amount of the fee that will be imposed if the delinquency is not paid. A late fee may not be imposed unless the outstanding balance exceeds $10.00 and may not exceed $5.00.

 

12.5. Subscribers will not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by a Franchisee, including failure to timely or correctly bill the Subscriber, or failure to properly credit the Subscriber for a payment timely made. Payments will be considered timely if postmarked on the due date.

 

12.6. A Franchisee’s bill must permit a Subscriber to remit payment by mail or in Person at the Franchisee’s local office or payment facility.

 

13. Credit for Service Impairment.

 

13.1. A Subscriber’s account will be credited a prorated share of the monthly charge for the service upon Subscriber request if a Subscriber is without service or if service is substantially impaired for any reason for a period exceeding four (4) hours during any twenty-four (24) hour period, or automatically if the loss of service or impairment is for twenty-four (24) hours or longer.

 

13.2. A Franchisee need not credit Subscriber where it establishes that a Subscriber will obtain a refund for a loss of service or impairment caused by the Subscriber or by Subscriber-owned equipment (not including, for purposes of this Section, in-home wiring installed by the Franchisee).

 

14. Billing Complaints. Franchisee will respond to all written billing complaints from Subscribers within thirty (30) days.

 

15. Billing Refunds. Refunds to Subscribers will be issued no later than:

 

15.1. The earlier of the Subscriber’s next billing cycle following resolution of the refund request, or thirty (30) days; or

 

15.2. The date of return of all equipment to Franchisee, if Cable service has been terminated.

 

16. Credits for Cable Service. Credits for Cable service will be issued no later than the Subscriber’s next billing cycle after the determination that the credit is warranted.

 

17. Disconnection/Downgrades.

 

17.1. A Subscriber may terminate service at any time.

 

17.2. A Franchisee will promptly disconnect from the Franchisee’s Cable system or downgrade any Subscriber who so requests. No charges for service may be made after the Subscriber requests disconnection. No period of notice before voluntary termination or downgrade of Cable service may be required of Subscribers by any Franchisee. There will be no charge for disconnection, except for the collection fee authorized by state law, and any downgrade charges will conform to applicable law.

 

18. Security Deposit. Any security deposit and/or other funds due a Subscriber that disconnects or downgrades service will be returned to the Subscriber within thirty (30) days or in the next billing cycle, whichever is later, from the date disconnection or downgrade was requested except in cases where the Subscriber does not permit the Franchisee to recover its equipment, in which case the amounts owed will be paid to Subscribers within thirty (30) days of the date the equipment was recovered, or in the next billing cycle, whichever is later.

 

19. Disconnection due to Nonpayment.

 

19.1. A Franchisee may not disconnect a Subscriber’s Cable service for nonpayment unless:

 

19.1.1. The Subscriber is delinquent in payment for Cable service;

 

19.1.2. A separate, written notice of impending disconnection, postage prepaid, has been sent to the Subscriber at least twenty (20) days before the date on which service may be disconnected, at the premises where the Subscriber requests billing, which notice must identify the names and address of the Subscriber whose account is delinquent, state the date by which disconnection may occur if payment is not made, and the amount the Subscriber must pay to avoid disconnection, and a telephone number of a representative of the Franchisee who can provide additional information concerning and handle complaints or initiate an investigation concerning the services and charges in question;

 

19.1.3. The Subscriber fails to pay the amounts owed to avoid disconnection by the date of disconnection: and

 

19.1.4. No pending inquiry exists regarding the bill to which Franchisee has not responded in writing.

 

19.2. If the Subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges, before the date scheduled for disconnection, the Franchisee will not disconnect service. Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer can reach a representative of the Franchisee either in person or by telephone.

 

19.3. After disconnection (except as noted below), upon payment by the Subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the Franchisee will promptly reinstate service.

 

20. Immediate Disconnection. A Franchisee may immediately disconnect a Subscriber if:

 

20.1. The Subscriber is damaging, destroying, or unlawfully tampering with or has damaged or destroyed or unlawfully tampered with the Franchisee’s Cable System;

 

20.2. The Subscriber is not authorized to receive a service, and is facilitating, aiding or abetting the unauthorized receipt of service by others; or

 

20.3. Subscriber-installed or attached equipment is resulting in signal leakage that is in violation of FCC rules.

 

20.4. After disconnection, the Franchisee will restore service after the Subscriber provides adequate assurance that it has ceased the practices that led to disconnection, and paid all proper fees and charges, including any reconnect fees and all amounts owed the Franchisee for damage to its Cable system or equipment. Provided that, no reconnection fee may be imposed on a Subscriber disconnected pursuant to this article if the leakage was the result of the Franchisee’s acts or omissions; or in any case unless the Franchisee notifies the Subscriber of the leakage at least three (3) business days in advance of disconnection, and the Subscriber has failed to correct the leakage within that time.

 

21. Franchisee’s Property. Except as applicable law may otherwise provide, a Franchisee may remove its property from a Subscriber’s premises within thirty (30) days of the termination of service. If a Franchisee fails to remove its property in that period, the property will be deemed abandoned unless the Franchisee has been denied access to the Subscriber’s premises, or the Franchisee has a continuing right to occupy the premises under applicable law.

 

22. Deposits. A Franchisee may require a reasonable, non-discriminatory deposit on equipment provided to Subscribers. Deposits will be placed in an interest-bearing account, and the Franchisee will return the deposit, plus interest earned to the date the deposit is returned to the Subscriber, less any amount the Franchisee can demonstrate should be deducted for damage to such equipment.

 

23. Parental Control Option. Without limiting a Franchisee’s obligations under Federal law, a Franchisee must provide parental control devices at no charge to all Subscribers who request them that enable the Subscriber to block the video and audio portion of any Channel or Channels of programming.

 

24. Penalties.

 

     Pursuant to California Government Code § 53088.2, and any successor statute or regulation, penalties will be assessed against a Franchisee for any breach of Sections 1-23 of these customers service standards.

 

25. Notwithstanding the requirements of this article, the City Manager is authorized to relieve a Franchisee of its obligations under this article if:

 

25.1. Franchisee shows that there is an alternative standard that is substantially similar to that established by this article;

 

25.2. In light of the number of customers served by a Franchisee, the requirements of this Article are, in the City Manager’s sole discretion, unduly burdensome and there is an alternative way to serve the same interest.

 

APPLICATION FOR OVS FRANCHISE

 

1.   Please provide the following information on a separate attachment:

 

     a.     The name and address of the Applicant.

 

     b.     Identify who owns and controls the Applicant. Your answer should list the names and addresses of the ten (10) largest holders of an ownership interest in the Applicant, the names and addresses of all Persons in the Applicant’s direct ownership chain, showing their relation to one another. If there are contracts for the management and operation of the OVS, or arrangements for use of the OVS by an Affiliate, the entities involved and their ownership, and their relationship to the Applicant should be described.

 

2.   Please provide information sufficient to show that you have the technical resources to construct and maintain the proposed OVS. Identify the companies and personnel that will be involved in the construction and maintenance, and references for the entities identified.

 

3.   Please check the appropriate box.

 

Yes

No

 

•

•

Is Applicant willing to comply with the provisions of the City Code and other applicable laws; and to comply with such requirements of an OVS Agreement as the City may lawfully require?

•

•

Does Applicant, or its Affiliates hold a Cable system Franchise for the City, or have a pending request a Cable system Franchise (whether a initial or renewal Franchise, or Transfer request)?

•

•

Has Applicant had a request for cable or OVS Franchise denied by the City?

•

•

If so, did the denial occur, or was a challenge to the denial resolved adversely to Applicant, in the last 36 months?

•

•

Has Applicant had cable or OVS Franchise revoked by the City?

•

•

If so, did the Revocation occur, or was a challenge to the Revocation resolved adversely to Applicant, in the last 36 months?

•

•

Does Applicant must have the necessary authority under California and federal law to operate an OVS? (If yes, please provide proof of the authorization).

•

•

During the ten (10) years preceding the submission of the application, was Applicant found guilty of violating any consumer protection laws, or laws prohibiting anticompetitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other similar conduct?

•

•

Does an elected official of the City hold a controlling interest in the Applicant or an Affiliate of the Applicant?

 

In any case where the answer to a question was “yes,” please provide a detailed explanation of your answer.

 

4.   Please provide a statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing that Applicant has the financial resources necessary to construct and operate the OVS as proposed.

 

5.   Please identify the area of the City that will be served by the OVS, with accompanying maps.

 

6.   Provide a schedule for construction of the OVS, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location; whether or not an institutional network will be constructed; information on the availability of space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; and a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities.

 

7.   Describe in detail the Channels, facilities and other support you propose to provide for public, educational and government use of the system.

 

The undersigned hereby certifies the truth and accuracy of the information in the Application, and all attachments thereto, acknowledges the enforceability of Application commitments, and certifies that the Application meets all requirements of applicable law.

 

FOR: ______________________

BY ________________________

ITS________________________

 

Subscribed and sworn before me this_____day of_____, ______________.

Chapter 5.21 STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
5.21.010 General provisions.
     A.    Purpose.

     This section is intended to be applicable to state franchise holders who have been awarded a state video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code section 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 [“DIVCA”]), to serve any location(s) within the incorporated boundaries of the city. It is the purpose of this chapter to implement within the incorporated boundaries of the city the provisions of DIVCA and the rules of the California Public Utilities Commission promulgated thereunder that are applicable to a “local franchising entity” or a “local entity” as defined in DIVCA.

     B.     Rights Reserved.

     1.     The rights reserved to the city under this Chapter 5.21 are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this Chapter 5.21 or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city.

     2.     Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:

     a.     Compliance with generally applicable requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before facilities may be constructed for, or providing, non-video services;

     b.     Any permit or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, pole attachment permits and street cut permits; and

     c.     Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other property of the city or any private person to which access is not specifically granted by the state franchise.

     3.     Except as otherwise provided in DIVCA, a state franchise shall not relieve a state franchisee of its duty to comply with all laws, including the ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and other laws of the city, and every state franchisee shall comply with the same.

     C.     Compliance.

     Nothing contained in this chapter shall ever be construed so as to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are consistent with this section or California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.020 Definitions.
     A.    Definitions Generally—Interpretation of Language.

     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in Chapter 5.20 of the American Canyon Municipal Code as may be amended from time to time, unless the context indicates otherwise. Words not defined in this section or Chapter 5.20 of the American Canyon Municipal Code shall have the same meaning as established in (1) DIVCA, and if not defined therein, (2) Commission rules implementing DIVCA, and if not defined therein, (3) Title VI of Title 47 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 USC Section 521 et seq., and if not defined therein, (4) their common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and “including” and “include” are not limiting. The word “shall” and “will” are always mandatory. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.

     1.     “Access,” “PEG access,” “PEG use,” or “PEG” means the availability of a cable or state franchise holder’s system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder’s editorial control.

     a.     “Public access” or “public use” means access where organizations, groups, or individual members of the general public, on a non-discriminatory basis, are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications;

     b.     “Education access” or “education use” means access where accredited educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications;

     c.     “Government access” or “government use” means access where government institutions or their designees are the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their communications.

     2.     “Gross revenues” means all revenues actually received by the holder of a state franchise that are derived from the operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the incorporated areas of the city, subject to the specifications of California Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

     3.     “State franchise holder” or “state franchisee” means a cable operator or video service provider that has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in California Public Utilities Code Section 5830, within any portion of the incorporated limits of the city. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.030 Franchise fees.
     A.    State Franchise Fees. Any state franchise holder operating within the incorporated areas of the city shall pay to the city a state franchise fee equal to five percent of gross revenues.

     B.     Payment of Franchise Fees. The state franchise fee required pursuant to subsection A of this section shall each be paid quarterly, in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city, by check or other means, which shall be agreed to by the city, a separate payment for the state franchise fee not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report, detailing how the payment was calculated, and shall include such additional information on the appropriate form as designated by the city.

     C.     Audits. The city may audit the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i).

     D.    Late Payments. In the event a state franchise holder fails to make payments required by this section on or before the due dates specified in this section, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent.

     E.     Lease of City-Owned Network. In the event a state franchise holder leases access to a network owned by the city, the city may set a franchise fee for access to the city-owned network separate and apart from the franchise fee charged to state franchise holders pursuant to subsection A of this section, which fee shall otherwise be payable in accordance with the procedures established by this section. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.040 Customer service.
     A.    Customer Service Standards. A state franchise holder shall comply with Sections 53055, 53055.2, and 53088.2 of the California Government Code; the FCC customer service and notice standards set forth in Sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603, and 76.1619 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations; Section 637.5 of the California Penal Code; the privacy standards of Section 551 of Title 47 of the United States Code; and all other applicable state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, include any such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and consumer protection standards under this paragraph shall be interpreted and applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the goals of the standards.

     B.     Penalties for Violations of Standards. The city shall enforce the compliance of state franchisees with respect to the state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards set forth in subsection A. The city will provide a state franchisee with a written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service or consumer protection standards, and will allow the state franchisee thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

     1.     For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

     2.     For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation.

     3.     For a third material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

     C.     Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner consistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.050 Permits and construction.
     A.    Except as expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of Sections 5.20.130 and 5.20.140 shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a state franchise holder on any city public rights-of-way, public property, or city easement as those terms are defined in Chapter 5.20 of the American Canyon Municipal Code.

     B.     Permits. Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by subsection A, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of the subsection and shall comply with all other applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to all applicable requirements of Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code, Section 21000, et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act).

     C.     The city manager or designee shall either approve or deny a state franchise holder’s application for any permit required under subsection A of this section within sixty days of receiving a completed permit application from the state franchise holder.

     D.    If the city manager or designee denies a state franchise holder’s application for a permit, the city manager or designee shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial.

     E.     A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the city manager or designee may appeal the denial to the city council. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city council shall take one of the following actions:

     1.     Affirm the action of the city manager or designee without any further hearing; or

     2.     Refer the matter back to the city manager or designee for further review with or without instructions; or

     3.     Set the matter for a de novo hearing before the city council.

     F.     In rendering its decision on the appeal, the city council shall not hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the record of the matter received from the city manager or designee unless the city council is itself conducting a public hearing on the matter.

     G.    Notification to Residents Regarding Construction or Maintenance. Prior to any construction, rebuild, or upgrade of a cable or video system, a state franchise holder shall establish procedures to notify city residents in the impacted area of construction schedules and activities. Such notices must be provided in the predominant languages spoken by those persons who work and/or reside in the impacted area. The notices shall be provided to the city manager or designee for review and approval no later than twenty days before commencement of construction, rebuild, or upgrade activities.

     H.    At a minimum, the notice required in subsection G shall be provided by the state franchise holder to impacted residents and occupants in the construction area not less than forty-eight hours prior to the planned construction. The state franchise holder shall provide additional notice to the persons described in subsection G on the day of construction. The notice may be in the form of door hangers that indicate, at a minimum, the dates and times of construction and the name and telephone number of a state franchise holder contact.

     I.      The state franchise holder shall provide notice at least twenty days prior to entering private property or public ways or public easements adjacent to or on such private property, public ways, or public easements, and provide a second notice three days prior to entering such property.

     1.     Should there be above ground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and cable paths) which will affect the private property, such notice shall be in writing and shall contain specific information regarding any above ground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths) which shall affect the private property.

     2.     To the extent practicable, aboveground or underground equipment placed on private property shall be placed at the location requested by the property owner. A state franchise holder shall provide the private property owner with at least twenty days advance written notice of its plans to install such equipment, and shall obtain express written consent, in the form of a recorded easement agreement, from the private property owner before installing its appurtenances. The state franchise holder shall notify the property owner, in writing, that the property owner is not obligated to agree to the placement on their property or to enter into an easement agreement with the state franchise holder. Should property owner notify the state franchise holder of objection to placement of any such above-ground or underground installations (excluding aerial cable lines utilizing existing poles and existing cable paths), the state franchise holder shall confer with the city public works department regarding appropriate location and placement of such appurtenances.

     J.      In addition to any other notice of proposed entry required under this subsection, a state franchise holder’s personnel shall make a reasonable attempt to give personal notice to residents immediately preceding entry on private property or public ways or public easements adjacent to or on such private property.

     K.    Identification Required. A state franchise holder, its employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors shall be properly identified as agents of the state franchise holder prior to and during entry on private and public property. Identification shall include the name and telephone number of the state franchise holder on all trucks and vehicles used by installation personnel.

     L.     Restoration of Private and Public Property. After performance of work, the state franchise holder shall restore such private and public property to a condition equal to or better than its condition prior to construction. Any disturbance of landscaping, fencing, or other improvements upon private or public property shall, at the sole expense of the state franchise holder, be promptly repaired or restored (including replacement of such valuables as shrubbery and fencing) to the reasonable satisfaction of the property owner, in addition to the furnishing of camouflage plants on public property.

     M.    Reports to the city clerk, city of American Canyon. Each state franchise holder, within sixty days after the expiration of each calendar year, shall file a report with the city clerk, city of American Canyon, which shall contain a street and highway map or maps of any convenient scale on which shall be plotted the location of the entire transmission and distribution system or systems covered by the report as of the last day of the calendar year, with the system or systems located in city highways indicated by distinctive coloration or symbols. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.060 Emergency alert.
     A.    Emergency Alert Systems. Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder’s network. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.070 Public, educational and government access channel capacity, interconnection, and signal carriage.
     A.    PEG Channel Capacity.

     1.     A state franchisee that has been authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide video service in the city shall designate and activate three PEG channels within three months from the date that the city requests that the state franchisee designate and activate these PEG channels. However, this three-month period shall be tolled for such a period, and only for such a period, during which the state franchisee’s ability to designate or provide such PEG capacity is technically infeasible, as provided in Section 5870(a) of the California Public Utilities Code.

     2.     A state franchisee shall provide an additional PEG channel when the standards set forth in Section 5870(d) of the California Public Utilities Code are satisfied by the city or any entity designated by the city to manage one or more of the PEG channels.

     B.     PEG Support.

     1.     Amount of PEG Support Fee. Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a PEG fee equal to one percent of gross revenues.

     2.     The PEG support fee shall be used for PEG purposes that are consistent with state and federal law.

     3.     A state franchisee shall remit the PEG support fee to the city quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report, detailing how the PEG support fee was calculated.

     4.     To the extent that there is no conflict under state law, if a state franchisee fails to pay the PEG support fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchisee shall pay a late payment charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent.

     C.     PEG Carriage and Interconnection.

     1.     State franchisees shall ensure that all PEG channels are receivable by all subscribers, whether they receive digital or analog service, or a combination thereof, without the need for any equipment other than that needed to receive the lowest cost tier of service. PEG access capacity provided by a state franchisee shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered by commercial channels (unless the PEG signal is provided to the state franchisee at a lower quality or with less functionality), shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) quality television signal, and shall be carried on the state franchisee’s lowest cost tier of service. To the extend feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the lowest cost tier of service and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by any incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law. After the initial designation of the PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the city unless federal law requires the change.

     2.     The holder of a state franchise and an incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. If a state franchisee and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement for PEG carriage, the city shall require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state franchisee to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator’s network at a technically feasible point on the state franchisee’s network as identified by the state franchisee. If no technically feasible point of interconnection is available, the state franchisee shall make interconnection available to each PEG channel originator programming a channel in the city and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchisee requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

 

5.21.080 Notices.
     A.    Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city a copy of all applications or notices that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

     B.     Unless otherwise specified in this section, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this section or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to both the city manager and the city staff person in charge of cable and telecommunications, or their successors or designees. (Ord. 2007-08 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 5.60 CAREGIVER PERMIT ORDINANCE
5.60.010 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon adopts all those certain documents marked and designated, as Chapter 5.60 to Title 5 of the Napa County Code of Ordinances relating to requirements for elders and or dependent adult caregivers. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted Chapter 5.60 to Title 5 of the Napa County Code of Ordinances relating to requirements for elders and or dependent adult caregivers shall be kept on file in the office of the community development director for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2010-06 § 1, 2010)

 

5.60.020 Code amendments.
     A.    Section 5.60.010 is revised to add the following:

 

        “Multi-generational family household” means a household whose members span three or more generations.

 

     B.     Section 5.60.020 D.1 does not apply to a multi-generational family household where there is no consideration or compensation provided for the care of an elder or dependent adult. (Ord. 2010-06 § 2, 2010)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 DOGS
Chapter 6.12 BEEHIVES
Chapter 6.13 KEEPING OF ROOSTERS

Chapter 6.04 DOGS
6.04.010 When dogs to be leashed.
     A.    Any person owning or possessing a dog must keep the dog on a leash not exceeding six feet in length. The leash must be of sufficient strength to hold the dog, and the leash must be held by a person physically able to control the dog.

     B.     Exceptions. A dog may be unleashed under any of the following circumstances:

     1.     When the dog is on enclosed property with the consent of the owner, lessee, or other person with legal control of the property; or

     2.     When the dog is assisting a peace officer who is engaged in law enforcement duties; or

     3.     When the dog is a service animal, guide dog or Seeing-Eye dog used by a visually or mobility-impaired individual; or

     4.     When the dog is assisting a duly authorized person in an official search and rescue operation; or

     5.     When the dog is participating in law enforcement training or demonstration as authorized by the chief of police; or

     6.     When the dog is in a designated off-leash area as designated by the city council pursuant to resolution; or when the dog and the dog owner are in compliance with a park use permit issued by the community resources director for training, exhibition, or competition, and the permit is displayed, on request of any city employee, establishing the dog’s compliance with the permit. (Ord. 2014-05 § 1, 2014)

 

6.04.020 When dogs to be leashed—Enforcement.
     Pursuant to American Canyon Municipal Code Section 1.24.010 violation of when dogs to be leashed constitutes an infraction unless such violation is specifically designated. (Ord. 2014-05 § 2, 2014)

Chapter 6.12 BEEHIVES
6.12.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as hereinafter set forth unless it shall be apparent from the context that a different meaning is indicated. Any word or phrase used in this chapter and not defined in this section shall be given the meaning established for such word or phrase by Chapter 1 of Division 13 of the California Agricultural Code.

     “Apiary” means bees, comb, hives, appliances or colonies, wherever the same are kept, located or found.

     “Bees” means honey-producing insects of the genus Apis, including all life stages of such insects.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of American Canyon.

     “Code” means the municipal code of the city of American Canyon.

     “Commissioner” means the county agricultural commissioner and all regularly appointed employees of the commissioner’s office acting pursuant to their official duties.

     “County” means the county of Napa

     “Hive” means any receptacle or container made or prepared for the use of bees, or which is inhabited by bees. (Ord. 2013-01 § 1, 2013)

 

6.12.020 Apiary best management practices.
     A.    Apiaries shall be permitted within the city consistent with all of the provisions of this section:

     1.     Apiaries shall consist of moveable frame hives in sound and useable condition.

     2.     Apiaries shall be operated and maintained in accordance with best management practices developed by the Napa County Beekeepers Association and as adopted by resolution of the city council.

     3.     Apiaries shall be screened from neighboring dwellings and public walkways.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter, however, shall not authorize the keeping of bees in a manner constituting a public nuisance as defined in Section 1.20.020(B)(2) of the Napa County Code, although no resolution of the city council shall be required to establish the public nuisance. (Ord. 2013-01 § 1, 2013)

 

6.12.030 Right of entry for enforcement.
     The commissioner is empowered to enter upon any premises where bees are kept, or upon which there is reason to believe that bees are kept, in order to carry into effect the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2013-01 § 1, 2013)

 

6.12.040 Violation—Notice requirements.
     A.    Any person owning, controlling or maintaining an apiary who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be given notice thereof and an order to abate, either by the commissioner or any code enforcement officer. The order shall specify the violations of this chapter and conditions to be abated.

     B.     The order of abatement may be personally served, or if personal service cannot be effectuated, then by both posting a copy of the order on the property and mailing a copy of the order by certified mail to the owner of the property.

     C.     If, in the commissioner’s or code enforcement officer’s opinion, the specified violations constitute an immediate threat to the public’s health and safety, the order shall provide the conditions are to be corrected and abated within seventy-two hours of personal service or posting of the order.

     D.    In all other instances, the specified violations shall be corrected and abated within fourteen days of personal service or posting of the order. (Ord. 2013-01 § 1, 2013)

 

6.12.050 Violation—Remedies.
     In addition to remedies otherwise provided by law, a violation of this chapter shall be a public nuisance which may be civilly abated or criminally prosecuted and published in the manner set forth in Chapter 9.04 of this code. (Ord. 2013-01 § 1, 2013)

 

6.12.060 Compliance with state law.
     Nothing in this chapter shall excuse compliance with state laws applicable to apiaries. (Ord. 2013-01 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 6.13 KEEPING OF ROOSTERS
6.13.010 Purpose.
     The intent of this chapter is to limit the number of roosters that may be kept on a single legal parcel, to eliminate the potential for public nuisance, illegal cockfighting and the raising of birds to be used for cockfighting, and for the protection of the health and safety of the residents of American Canyon. (Ord. 2014-02 § 2, 2014)

 

6.13.020 Definitions.
     Unless the context requires otherwise, the definitions in this section shall govern the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter.

     “Agricultural commissioner” means the Napa County agricultural commissioner-sealer of weights and measures, or the agricultural commissioner’s designees.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon

     “Cockfighting” is the practice of setting two male birds or roosters to fight each other.

     “Rooster” means any male chicken which has any one of the following characteristics:

     1.     Six months or older;

     2.     Has full adult plumage;

     3.     Capable of crowing. (Ord. 2014-02 § 2, 2014)

 

6.13.030 Rooster keeping.
     A.    The number of roosters that may be raised or kept on any property within the city of American Canyon is limited in accordance with the following schedule:

 

 

Parcel Size

Max. No. of Roosters

Less than 0.5 acres

0 Roosters

0.5 acres to 1.5 acres

1 Rooster

Greater than 1.5 acres

4 Roosters

 

     B.     Rooster enclosures shall have a minimum setback from adjacent residences of one hundred and fifty feet.

     C.     This section shall not apply to commercial poultry ranches whose primary commodity is the production of eggs or meat for sale as permitted by the city, public or private schools as registered with the California Department of Education, Future Farmers of America (FFA) or 4-H sponsored projects, or to legitimate poultry hobbyists as approved in writing by the agricultural commissioner.

     D.    Each individual rooster beyond the rooster limitation in subsection A of this section constitutes a separate violation.

     E.     No rooster may kept on property so that it constitutes a nuisance in accordance with Chapter 8.12 of the municipal code (Community Noise Ordinance).

     F.     Nothing in the foregoing is to be construed as approving the keeping of any poultry in contravention of any statute, zoning ordinance, or other law.

     G.    At all times, roosters shall be provided:

     1.     Access to water and shelter from the elements (rain, wind, direct sun, etc.);

     2.     Sufficient room to spread both wings fully and to be able to turn in a complete circle without any impediment and without touching the side of an enclosure; and

     3.     Clean and sanitary premises that are kept in good repair.

     H.    The agricultural commissioner shall establish written standards necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter and may condition any approval based on compliance with the written regulations and standards. Failure of any property owner and any person occupying or leasing the property to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter or applicable law, or the regulations and standards of the agricultural commissioner shall constitute good cause for the denial of any approval, either original or renewal, or for its revocation. (Ord. 2014-02 § 2, 2014)

 

6.13.040 Tethering prohibited.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall maintain any rooster by means of a tether attached to an object. Each individual rooster so tethered constitutes a separate violation. (Ord. 2014-02 § 2, 2014)

 

6.13.050 Liability and enforcement.
     A.    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of either an infraction or a misdemeanor.

     B.     In addition to the penalties set forth in subsection A of this section, violators of this chapter may be subject to a public nuisance abatement action brought under the provisions of Chapter 9.12 and the civil penalty provisions as provided in subsection D of Section 9.12.030 and may also be subject to an unfair competition action brought pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 17200 et seq. and up to two thousand five hundred dollars civil penalty per violation.

     C.     The civil remedies and penalties provided by this subsection are cumulative to each other. (Ord. 2014-02 § 2, 2014)

Title 7 (Reserved)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.02 PERSONAL INDOOR CANNABIS CULTIVATION
Chapter 8.04 NUISANCES GENERALLY
Chapter 8.05 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Chapter 8.06 BARKING DOGS
Chapter 8.08 FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.12 COMMUNITY NOISE
Chapter 8.16 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.18 DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS

Chapter 8.02 PERSONAL INDOOR CANNABIS CULTIVATION
8.02.010 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose of this chapter is to permit safe personal, noncommercial cannabis cultivation indoors at home pursuant to state law. This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patient’s right to use medicinal cannabis pursuant to state law, as may be amended. (Ord. 2020-06 § 4, 2020)

 

8.02.020 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter explains reasonable regulations to allow indoor personal cannabis cultivation as authorized by Health and Safety Code Section paragraph (3) of subdivision (a) of Section 11362.1.

     B.     An indoor personal cannabis cultivation permit is not required. However, structural improvements associated with personal cannabis cultivation may require the property owner or cultivator to obtain a building permit or other entitlement to comply with all applicable zoning, building, electrical and fire code regulations.

     C.     Outdoor personal cannabis cultivation is not permitted.

     D.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to allow any conduct or activity relating to the cultivation, distribution, dispensing, sale, or consumption of cannabis that is otherwise illegal under local or state law. Nor shall it be construed, to exempt any activity related to the cannabis cultivation from any applicable electrical, plumbing, land use or other building or land use standards or permitting requirements. No provision of this chapter shall be deemed a defense or immunity to any action brought against any person by the Napa County district attorney’s office, the attorney general of the state of California or the United States of America. (Ord. 2020-06 § 4, 2020)

 

8.02.030 Definitions.
     “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain or varietal of the genus Cannabis that may exist or be discovered, or developed, that has psychoactive or medical properties, whether growing or not, including, but not limited to, the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” also means marijuana as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 11018 and Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f), as both may be amended from time to time. Any reference to cannabis or cannabis products shall include medical and nonmedical cannabis and medical and nonmedical cannabis products, unless otherwise specified. Cannabis or cannabis product does not mean industrial hemp as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5, or the weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. Cannabis does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

     “Cannabis concentrate” means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate the cannabinoid active ingredient, thereby increasing the product’s potency.

     “Cannabis cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis, inside a personal residence or fully enclosed and secure structure located on the same property as the personal residence.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “Commercial cannabis activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transportation, distribution, or sale of cannabis and cannabis products.

     “Fully enclosed and secure structure.” Within a fully enclosed and secure structure that complies with the California Building Code, as adopted in the city of American Canyon, or, if exempt from permit requirements, that has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting walls extended from the ground to the roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and accessible only to the owner or tenant. Walls and roofs must be constructed of sold materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two inches by four inch or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement.

     “Indoor cannabis cultivation” means cannabis cultivation using artificial lighting and/or ambient indoor lighting inside a residence or fully enclosed and secure structure.

     “Outdoor cannabis cultivation” means cannabis cultivation using no artificial lighting conducted in the ground or in containers outdoors with no covering, as well as any cultivation not within a residence or fully enclosed and secure structure regardless of whether artificial and/or ambient lighting is used. Outdoor cultivation includes greenhouses, hoop houses, hot houses or similar structures.

     “Personal cultivation” means indoor cannabis cultivation conducted by an individual strictly for that individual’s personal or medical use, possession, processing, transporting, or giving away without any compensation whatsoever in accordance with this code and state law, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, as may be amended. Except as herein defined, personal cultivation does not include any cultivation conducted outdoors. In addition, personal cultivation does not include, and shall not authorize, as part of a business or commercial activity, including cultivation for compensation or retail or wholesale sales of cannabis.

     “Private residence” or “residence.” A house, apartment unit, accessory dwelling unit, mobile home or other similar dwelling which is permitted by the city. (Ord. 2020-06 § 4, 2020)

 

8.02.040 Personal use indoor cannabis cultivation.
     A.    Indoor cannabis cultivation for personal use is permitted within all private residential dwellings and fully enclosed and secure structures on the same property as the private residential dwelling, subject to all of the following minimum standards:

     1.     No more than six cannabis plants may be cultivated indoors by either a qualified patient, primary caregiver, or an individual at least twenty-one years old at each private residential dwelling regardless of the number of qualified patients or adults twenty-one and older who reside at such private residential dwelling.

     2.     The cultivation area shall not be accessible to minors. The cannabis plants shall be located in a locked space so to prevent access by minor age children, visitors, passersby, or anyone not authorized to possess cannabis.

     3.     Any residence or fully enclosed and secure structure used for indoor cannabis cultivation shall have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall ensure cannabis plant odors are not detectable off-site.

     4.     Personal cannabis cultivation occurring on the property shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

     5.     Structures and equipment used for personal cannabis cultivation, such as indoor grow lights, backup power system, irrigation systems, air filtration systems, shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, electrical and fire code regulations as adopted by the city.

     6.     All fully enclosed and secure structures used for indoor cannabis cultivation shall comply with the setback, lot coverage and other requirements set forth in Title 19.

     7.     Personal cannabis cultivation shall not interfere with the primary occupancy of the building or structure, including regular use of kitchen(s) or bathroom(s).

     8.     The use of power generators for cultivation equipment is prohibited, except as an emergency back-up system.

     9.     Extension cord use in the cultivation room(s) is prohibited.

     10.   Indoor grow lights used for cultivation shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts per light.

     11.   A portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the fully enclosed and secure structure used for cannabis cultivation that complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the state fire marshal and applicable law. If cultivation occurs in a residence, the portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the same room as where the cultivation occurs. (Ord. 2020-06 § 4, 2020)

 

8.02.050 Other requirements for personal use indoor cannabis cultivation.
     A.    The cultivation area shall not adversely affect the health or safety of the occupants of the private residence or the parcel or any other property by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, mold, or other impacts, and shall not be maintained as to constitute a hazard due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes.

     B.     The cultivation area shall comply with all California Building, Electrical, Fire, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes as adopted by the city; and the residence has: (1) a permanent connection to a public water source drawing water; (2) does not engage in unlawful or unpermitted surface drawing of water for such cultivation; (3) does not permit illegal discharges of water from the parcel. (Ord. 2020-06 § 4, 2020)

 

8.02.060 Enforcement.
     A.    Nuisance. Any violation of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance.

     1.     Building Code violations associated with indoor cannabis cultivation shall be deemed a nuisance and subject to enforcement in accordance with Title 9.12 of this code.

     2.     Indoor cannabis cultivation within a private residential dwelling and fully enclosed and secure structure on the same property that exceed six cannabis plants shall be subject to a fine assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council.

     3.     Outdoor cannabis cultivation in violation of Section 8.02.020(C) shall be deemed a nuisance and subject to enforcement in accordance with Title 9.12 of this code. Fines for specific violations of this Ordinance shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2020-06 § 4, 2020)

Chapter 8.04 NUISANCES GENERALLY
8.04.010 Violations public nuisances.
     A.    In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code, or any such threatened violation, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city in accordance with applicable statutes.

     B.     Also, any such violation or threatened violation as referred to in subsection A of this section, or any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, or of the provisions of any other city ordinance, shall be deemed a public nuisance which may be abated by the city attorney in a civil judicial action. (Prior code § 1.01.250)

 

8.04.020 Nuisances—Recovery of abatement expenses.
     A.    Whenever any person creating, causing, committing, or maintaining a public nuisance, as referred to in Section 8.04.010 of this chapter, or other public nuisance, as defined under state law or other ordinance or regulation, has been given notice, by or on behalf of the city attorney or by any other city officer, employee or policing agent authorized to give such notice, to abate such nuisance or cease and desist from continuing such nuisance or violation of law, and such person who was given notice fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with the notice within the time specified therein, or if such a time is not specified, then within a time reasonably sufficient to enable such compliance, such noncomplying person shall be liable to the city for any and all costs and expenses to the city involved in thereafter abating the nuisance and in obtaining compliance with or enforcing the law as referred to or encompassed in the notice.

     B.     Costs and expenses, as referred to in subsection A of this section may include, but are not limited to, any and all direct costs and expenses related to such things as personnel salaries and benefits, operational overhead, rent, interest, fees for experts or consultants, legal costs or expenses, including attorney’s fees, claims against the city arising as a consequence of the nuisance or violation, and procedures associated with collecting moneys due under this chapter.

     C.     The provisions of subsection A of this section shall also apply to any person who received a notice, as specified therein, and thereafter the nuisance or violation was abated, but such person subsequently allowed or was responsible for a recurrence of the nuisance or violation.

     D.    The liability of any person for the payment of the costs and expenses, not to exceed one hundred dollars, provided for in subsection A of this section may be waived in whole or in part by the city attorney in any case wherein he determines, in his sole discretion, that the failure or refusal of such person to comply with the notice therein involved was based upon a good faith and bona fide issue of law or fact specially involved in the circumstances of the case. Any determination or decision of the city attorney in this regard shall be final and conclusive.

     E.     Moneys due to the city pursuant to this section may be recovered in an appropriate civil action. Alternatively, such liability may be enforced by special assessment proceedings against the parcel of land upon which the nuisance existed, which proceedings may be conducted in a manner substantively similar to proceedings described in Sections 39574 et seq., of the Government Code of the state relating to weed abatement assessments. (Prior code § 1.0 1.260)

Chapter 8.05 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
8.05.010 Use of Napa County’s dangerous animal ordinance.
     Napa County Code Chapter 6.16, Dangerous Animals, as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2002-02 § 1, 2002)

 

8.05.011 City expenses to be recovered.
     Any costs incurred by the city as a result of implementing or enforcing this chapter shall be deemed a cost of abatement, which shall be recoverable through the same procedures as set forth in Napa County Code, Section 6.16.090, Impoundment Costs-Assessment. (Ord. 2002-02 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 8.06 BARKING DOGS
8.06.010 Intent and purpose.
     The intent and purpose of this chapter is to ensure the peace and comfort of residents in the city by providing for penalties to owners of dogs that cause a nuisance to neighbors by habitually barking, howling, or yelping and therefore disturbing the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood. (Ord. 2002-02 § 2, 2002)

 

8.06.020 Nuisance declared.
     No person shall knowingly keep or harbor any dog that habitually barks, howls or yelps and thereby causes great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or materially disturbs or annoys persons in the neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs are hereby declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 2002-02 § 2, 2002)

 

8.06.030 Notice to dog owner.
     Whenever any person complains to the police department that a dog that habitually barks, howls, or yelps is being kept by any person in the city, the police department shall notify the owner of the dog or the resident or tenant at the property where the dog is being kept that a complaint has been received and that the person shall take whatever steps necessary to alleviate the barking, howling, or yelping. (Ord. 2002-02 § 2, 2002)

 

8.06.040 Failure to abate nuisance.
     A.    If the warning given to the owner of the dog or the tenant or resident at the property pursuant to Section 8.06.030 where the barking, howling, or yelping dog is being kept is ineffective, then a verified complaint of at least two citizens not from the same household may be presented to the police department, alleging that a dog that habitually barks, howls, or yelps is being kept by such person within the city. The police department shall inform the owner of the dog or the resident or tenant of the property at which the dog is being kept that such a petition has been received and shall cite the owner of the dog for a violation of this chapter as alleged in the complaint.

     B.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, if a police officer responds to a complaint from a resident and hears the barking, howling, or yelping, the officer shall give a warning for a first offense and shall issue a citation for any additional complaints received beyond the initial warning without the need for petition from two or more citizens.

     C.     In the event the nuisance continues, citations will be issued in accordance with the provisions of the administrative citation ordinance. (Ord. 2002-02 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 8.08 FIRE REGULATIONS
8.08.010 Fire protection district regulations—Adopted by reference.
     Ordinance 93-01 of the American Canyon fire protection district is adopted by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 93-07 § 1, 1993)

 

8.08.020 Fire chief—Designated.
     The fire chief of the American Canyon fire protection district is designated as fire chief of the city in order to enforce the Uniform Fire Code within the city limits. (Ord. 93-07 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 8.12 COMMUNITY NOISE
8.12.010 Purpose of provisions—Public nuisance determination.
     The city council has determined that:

     A.    Certain noise levels and vibrations are detrimental to the public health, welfare, safety and quality of life, and are contrary to the public interest;

     B.     The making and creating of disturbing, excessive or offensive noises within the city is a public nuisance, and is unlawful, and the noise ordinance shall be enforced as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.020 Definitions.
     All terminology used in this chapter, not defined in this section, shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.

     “Agricultural property” means any area in which agricultural uses are permitted by the terms of Title 19 Zoning, of this code.

     “Ambient noise level” means the composite of noise from all sources near and far. In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location.

     “Amplified sound” means any sound created by the use of sound-amplifying equipment.

     “A-weighted sound level” means the sound level in decibels, as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The level so read is designated “dB(A)” or “dBA.”

     “Commercial area” means any area defined as commercial in Title 19 Zoning, of this code.

     “Construction” means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.

     “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which are either continuous or interrupted.

     “Decibel (dB)” means a unit of measurement indicating the relative intensity of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound, measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty microPascals.

     “Demolition” means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property.

     “Emergency work or action” means any work or action necessary to restore property to a safe and usable condition after a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or damage, or work by public or private utilities to restore utility service.

     “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, residential, agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.

     “Impulsive sound” means sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop-forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.

     “Industrial area” means any area defined as industrial or manufacturing in Title 19 Zoning, of this code.

     “Intrusive noise” means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing ambient noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency and time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content, as well as the prevailing ambient noise level.

     “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

     “Motor vehicle” means and includes any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under said Code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under said Code.

     “Noise control officer” means the community development director or the designated representative of the director except that for the purposes of granting variances pursuant to Section 8.12.100 of this chapter which are heard in conjunction with an application for land division, use permit or other entitlement for use, the noise control office shall be the person or body authorized by this code to issue such land division, use permit, or other entitlement for use.

     “Noise disturbance” means any sound which endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood; annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities; or endangers or damages personal or real property.

     “Noise zone” means any defined area or region of a generally consistent land use wherein the ambient noise levels are within a range of five dB.

     “Person” means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, including any governmental officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state.

     “Powered model vehicle” means any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.

     “Public right-of-way” means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

     “Public space” means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.

     “Pure tone” means any sound which can be judged as audible as a single pitch or a set of single pitches by the noise control officer.

     “Real property boundary” means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions.

     “Residential area” means any area defined as residential in Title 19 Zoning, of this code.

     “Sound-amplifying equipment” means any device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, excluding:

     1.     Standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed; and

     2.     Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic-safety purposes.

     “Sound level meter” means a sound measuring instrument which meets the American National Standards Institute’s Standard S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof, for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters; or, an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.030 Administration and enforcement—Authority and procedures.
     A.    The noise control program established by this chapter shall be administered by the community development director or by the director’s designated representatives, and shall be enforced by the community development director and the police chief or their designated representatives unless otherwise expressly provided herein.

     B.     In order to implement and enforce this chapter, and for the general purpose of noise abatement and control, the community development director, as city noise control officer (hereinafter “NCO”), shall have, in addition to any other authority vested in the director, the power to:

     1.     Studies. Conduct or cause to be conducted studies, research and monitoring related to noise, including joint cooperative investigation with public or private agencies, and the application for and acceptance of grants;

     2.     Education. Conduct programs of public education regarding the cause, effect and general methods of abatement and control of noise and the actions prohibited by this chapter, and the procedures for reporting violations. Public interest groups shall be encouraged in related public information efforts;

     3.     Training. Provide for training of field inspectors and other technical personnel concerned with noise abatement, in conformance with standards for technical qualifications as established by the State Office of Noise Control;

     4.     Coordination and Cooperation.

     a.     Coordinate the noise-control activities of all city departments,

     b.     Cooperate where practicable with all appropriate state and federal agencies,

     c.     Cooperate where practicable with appropriate county and municipal agencies;

     5.     Public and Private Projects. On all public and private projects which are likely to cause noise in violation of this chapter and which are subject to mandatory review or approval by other departments:

     a.     Review for compliance with the intent and provisions of this chapter,

     b.     Require sound analyses which identify existing and projected noise sources and associated noise levels;

     6.     Inspections. Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter upon and inspect any private property of place, at any time when granted permission by the owner, or by some other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When permission is refused or cannot be obtained, an inspection warrant may be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist. Such inspection authority may include the conduct of any necessary tests;

     7.     Zoning Changes. Prior to the approval of any zoning change:

     a.     Review the potential noise impact of the zoning change by identifying existing and projected noise sources and the associated sound levels,

     b.     Recommend the imposition of adequate control measures on noise sources identified.

     C.     Duties of the Noise Control Officer.

     1.     Develop measurement standards and procedures which will further the purposes of this chapter;

     2.     Develop administrative procedures which will provide for effective enforcement of this chapter;

     3.     Investigate and pursue possible violations of this chapter;

     4.     Where appropriate under this chapter, delegate functions to personnel within the department;

     5.     Assist in or review the total transportation planning of the city, including planning for new roads and highways, bus routes, airports, and other systems of public transportation, to insure that proper consideration is taken with regard to the impact of sound levels and that the policies set forth in the noise element are adhered to;

     6.     Provide ongoing assistance to local agencies in determining possible mitigation measures for current or forecast noise problems;

     7.     Make recommendations to the city council for modifications or amendments to this chapter to insure consistency with all state and federal laws and regulations, and as may otherwise be deemed appropriate;

 

     8.     Administer noise program grants, funds and gifts from public and private sources, including the state and federal governments. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.040 General noise restrictions designated.
     A.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

     B.     The factors which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     The sound level of the objectionable noise;

     2.     The sound level of the ambient noise;

     3.     The proximity and timing of the noise in relation to residential sleeping facilities and normal sleeping hours;

     4.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

     5.     The number of persons affected by the noise source;

     6.     The time of day or night the noise occurs;

     7.     The duration of the noise and its tonal or musical content;

     8.     Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent;

     9.     Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.050 Measurement procedures.
     Upon receipt of a complaint, the noise control officer, or designee, shall investigate the complaint. The investigation may consist of a measurement and the gathering of data required to comply with such code section, and a deadline date for such compliance, and shall warn that if a subsequent inspection or sound level measurement discloses the continued existence of such violation, further action will be taken to adequately define the noise problem, and may include the following:

     A.    Nonacoustic Data.

     1.     Type of noise source;

     2.     Location of noise source relative to complainant’s property;

     3.     Time period during which the noise source is considered by complainant to be intrusive;

     4.     Total duration of noise produced, by noise source;

     5.     Date, time and precise location of the noise measurement survey.

     B.     Noise Measurement Procedure. Utilizing the “A” weighting scale of the sound level meter and the “slow” meter response, the NCO or designee shall measure the noise level at a position or positions at any point on the complainant’s property. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed immediately prior to recording any noise data, and the measurement itself shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the noise control officer. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.060 Interior noise standards.
     Maximum Permissible Dwelling Interior Sound Levels. The interior noise standards for residential dwelling units generated by noise sources outside the dwelling unit, as presented in Table 8.12.060 shall apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, within all such dwelling units.

 

Table 8.12.060

Interior Noise Limits

 

Type of Land Use

Time Interval

Allowable Interior Noise Level (dBA)

Residential

10 p.m. — 7 a.m.

55

 

7 a.m. — 10 p.m.

60

(Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.070 Exterior noise limits.
     Maximum Permissible Dwelling Exterior Sound Levels. The exterior noise standards for residential dwelling units generated by noise sources outside the dwelling unit, as presented in Table 8.12.070 shall apply, unless otherwise specifically indicated, outside all such dwelling units.

 

Table 8.12.070

Exterior Noise Limits

(Levels not to be exceeded more than thirty minutes in any hour)

 

Type of Land Use

Time Interval

Allowable Exterior Noise Level (dBA)

Residential Single and double

10 p.m. — 7 a.m.

50

7 a.m. — 10 p.m.

60

Residential multiple

10 p.m. — 7 a.m.

55

7 a.m. — 10 p.m.

60

(Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.080 Specific types of noise prohibited.
     A.    Noise Disturbances Prohibited. No person shall unnecessarily make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance.

     B.     Specific Prohibitions. The following acts, and the causing or permitting thereof, are declared to be in violation of this chapter:

     1.     Animals, Including Fowl. Keeping or maintaining, or permitting to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person of any animal or animals which, by any frequent or long-continued noise, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to two or more reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness who reside in separate residences, including apartments and condominiums. However, the NCO or designee may proceed on the basis of a complaint from only one person if circumstances are determined to exist whereby a noise disturbance caused by an animal affects only one individual.

     a.     Any noise which is audible continuously for ten minutes, or intermittently for thirty minutes shall be prima facie evidence of such annoyance or discomfort.

     b.     Factors which may be used to evaluate excessive animal noise, include, but are not limited to:

     i.      Pitch;

     ii.     Pattern;

     iii.    Duration;

     iv.    Frequency of occurrence.

     2.     Construction or Demolition.

     a.     Operating or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration or demolition work between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m., such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line, except for emergency work of public service utilities or by variance issued by the appropriate authority. This subsection shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools, as specified in subsection (B)(3) of this section.

     b.     Noise Restrictions at Affected Properties. Where technically and economically feasible, construction activities shall be conducted in such a manner that the maximum noise levels at affected properties will not exceed those listed in the following schedule:

 

Table 8.12.080

Noise Limits for Construction Activities

 

Timeframe

Residential

Commercial

Industrial

Daily: 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.

75 dBA

80 dBA

85 dBA

Daily: 7 p.m. to 7 a.m.

60 dBA

65 dBA

70 dBA

 

     3.     Domestic Power Tools—Machinery.

     a.     Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool between ten p.m. and seven a.m. so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line;

     b.     Any motor, machinery or pump, such as swimming pool equipment, etc., shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise disturbance in accordance with Section 8.12.040.

     4.     Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.12.040.

     5.     Loudspeakers, Amplified Sound. Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar device, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance, or at any time violates the provisions of Section 8.12.040, except for any activity for which a variance has been issued by the NCO.

     6.     Powered Motor Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a residential or commercial real property line or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.12.040.

     7.     Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance, or at any time to violate the provisions of Section 8.12.040, except for activities for which a variance has been issued by the NCO.

     8.     Street Sales.

     a.     The solicitation, sale or advertising of any product or service by shouting or outcry within any residential or commercial area or noise-sensitive zone of the city, except by variance issued by the NCO;

     b.     The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, or other similar licensed public entertainment events.

     9.     Tampering with Noise Control Devices. The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement of any noise-control device or element thereof, from any product required to meet specified noise emission limits under federal, state or local law, and the use of such product after its noise-control device has been removed or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.090 Exemptions to noise regulations.
     A.    Emergency Exemption. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

     1.     The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; or

     2.     The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.

     B.     Warning Devices. Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as for example police, fire and ambulance sirens, and train horns, shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Outdoor Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to temporary events as defined in Chapters 5.05 and 12.04, provided such events are conducted pursuant to licenses issued pursuant to Chapters 5.05 and 12.04, respectively, of this code and then only as specifically required by such chapters or any manual of standards adopted by resolution of the city council for the purpose of implementing such chapters.

     D.    Preexisting Noise Sources. Those commercial and industrial operations in existence prior to the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, if it can be shown that compliance with the provisions in this chapter constitutes a hardship in terms of technical and economic feasibility, a variance may be granted until such time as compliance may be effected. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.100 Variances.
     A.    The noise control officer is authorized to grant variances for a period of not more than five years from any provision of this chapter, subject to limitations as to area, noise levels, time limits, and other terms and conditions as the noise control officer determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the noise disturbance. Variances exceeding five years are not permitted. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any other permit or license that may be required by law before implementing a proposed project.

     B.     Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the noise control officer.

     C.     Any application filed shall include all of the following:

     1.     Information which demonstrates that bringing the source of the sound or activity for which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons; and

     2.     Payment of that environmental and application fee established by resolution of the city council; and

     3.     A list of the owners of each parcel of real property any portion of the outer boundary of which is within three hundred feet of the outer boundary of the parcel on which the fixed noise source for which the variance is requested is, or will be, located. This list must be certified as accurate in a manner approved by the community development director, and must be in a form approved by the director. This subdivision 3 shall not be applicable if the variance is requested for a mobile noise source; and

     4.     If the noise source involves, or may involve, the use of ammunition, a list of all improved parcels that are located within one mile of the parcel on which the noise source for which the variance is requested is, or will be, located. This list must be certified as accurate and complete in a manner approved by the community development director, and must be in a form approved by that director; and

     5.     Such additional information as the noise control officer may require.

     D.    A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that variance requests involving several mobile noise sources under common ownership, or variance requests involving several fixed noise sources to be located on a single parcel, may be combined in one application.

     E.     The following notice of an application for a variance shall be given. If the request for a variance is filed in conjunction with a request that the city approve a land division, use permit or other entitlement for use, the notice shall be consolidated with the notice regarding such application:

     1.     The notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

     2.     If the variance is requested for a fixed noise source, the notice shall be mailed to the owners of all real property located within three hundred feet of the parcel on which the fixed noise source is located or is proposed to be located.

     3.     If the variance is requested for a fixed noise source, and if the noise source involves, or may involve, the use of ammunition, the notice shall be mailed to the owner of each improved parcel that is located within one mile of the parcel on which the noise source for which the variance is requested is located or is proposed to be located.

     F.     A public hearing shall be scheduled before the noise control officer. At the hearing, any person who would be adversely affected by the granting of the requested variance may object orally or in writing and provide any information to support said objection.

     G.    In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the noise control officer shall balance the hardship on the applicant, the community and other persons of not granting the variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected by the noise disturbance, as well as any other adverse impacts that will result if the variance is granted. The variance shall be conditioned in such a way as to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the noise source. In determining the conditions to be imposed, the noise control officer shall, at a minimum, consider the magnitude of the nuisance that is or will be caused by the offensive noise, the uses of the property within the area that will be affected by the noise, operations carried on under existing nonconforming rights or previously approved conditional use permits or zoning variances, and the economic factors related to the age and useful life of the equipment that is creating the noise or will create the noise.

     H.    No variance shall be granted until all conditions are agreed to by the applicant. All variances granted shall provide that noncompliance with any condition of the variance shall terminate the variance and subject the persons holding it to all of the provisions of this chapter.

     I.      The applicant shall be notified of the approval or denial of the variance and of any conditions attached to the approval of a variance by certified mail within ten working days of the close of the public hearing.

     J.      Appeals of an adverse decision of the noise control officer shall be made to the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.04 of this code.

     K.    The noise control officer shall maintain a written record of all decisions denying or granting each variance, including the reasons for such denial or approval. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 

8.12.110 Enforcement.
     A.    Violation of Section 8.12.040 or 8.12.060 of this chapter shall be a public nuisance which may be abated civilly or enforced criminally in accordance with Chapter 9.12 of this code.

     B.     Those employees of the community development department specified in Chapter 9.12 of this code shall have the authority under Penal Code Section 836.5 to issue citations for violations of this chapter, except that no such criminal citation shall be issued for any violation which has already been abated in a fashion satisfactory to the noise control officer or during the period for compliance specified in any abatement order issued for the same violation. (Ord. 2014-01 § 2, 2014)

 
Chapter 8.16 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Article I. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
8.16.010 Statutory authorization.
     The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of American Canyon does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.020 Findings of fact.
     A.    The flood hazard areas of the city of American Canyon are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affects public health, safety and general welfare.

     B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.030 Statement of purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the recreational public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

     A.    Protect human life and health;

     B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

     G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
     In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to:

     A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

     B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

     D.    Control filing, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.050 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

     “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

     “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

     “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

     “Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area.”

     “Area of special flood-related erosion hazard” is the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe flood-related erosion losses. The area may be designated as Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

     “Area of special mudslide (i.e. mudflow) hazard” is the area subject to severe mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).

     “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides.

     “Breakaway walls” are any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable building material which is not part of the structural support of the building and which designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than twenty pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

     1.     Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

     2.     The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

     “Building.” See “Structure.”

     “Coastal high hazard area” means an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as zone V1—V30, VE or V.

     “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

     “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings permanent structure or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

     “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

     “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufacture homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

     “Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:

     1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

     2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

     “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special hazards and the floodway.

     “Flood Hazard Boundary Map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

     “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

     “Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

     “Floodplain management regulations” means this ordinance and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and to the application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, site or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

     “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents (Refer to FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93 and TB 7-93 for guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing).

     “Flood-related erosion” means the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical level or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusually and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.

     “Flood-related erosion area” or “flood-related erosion prone area” means a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body of water, which due to the composition of the shoreline or bank and high water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion damage.

     “Flood-related erosion area management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

     “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

     “Fraud and victimization” as related to Article V, Variance Procedure, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increase risk of damage from floods, which future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

     “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carries out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

     “Governing body” is the local governing unit (i.e. county or municipality) that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

     “Hardship” as related to Article V, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city council requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

     “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

     “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

     1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

     2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;

     3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

     4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

     “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

     “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee or levees and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. See “Basement.”

     1.     An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

     a.     The wet floodproofing standard in Section 8.16.160(C)(3);

     b.     The anchoring standards in Section 8.16.160(A);

     c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 8.16.160(B); and

     d.     The standards for utilities in Section 8.16.170.

     2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements. See “Basement.” This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

     “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

     “Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the floodplain administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by an independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

     “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVFD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

     “Mudslide” describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside, usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground, preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.

     “Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area” means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology, and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.

     “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

     “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

     “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

     “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood.” See “Base flood.”

     “Primary frontal dune” means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively mild slope.

     “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Article V, Variance Procedure, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

     “Recreational vehicle” means vehicle which is:

     1.     Built on a single chassis;

     2.     Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

     3.     Designed to be self-propelled permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

     4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

     “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

     “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

     “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

     “Sand dunes” means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.

     “Sheet flow area.” See “Area of shallow flooding.”

     “Special flood hazard area (SHFA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1—30, AE, A99, AH, V1—V30, VE OR V.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or to other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

     “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

     “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work preformed. The term does not, however, include either:

     1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

     2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

     “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

     “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

     “V Zone.” See “Coastal high hazard area.”

     “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplain of coastal or riverine areas.

     “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

Article II. General Provisions
8.16.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
     This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of American Canyon. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
     A.    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated September 15, 1989, accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway (FBFMs), dated 1980 and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this ordinance and which are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 4381 Broadway, Suite 201, American Canyon, CA 94503 City Hall, or at 205 Wetlands Edge Road American Canyon, CA 94503, Department of Public Works.

     B.     Base Flood Elevation changes due to physical alterations:

     1.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).

     2.     All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permit. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.080 Compliance.
     No structure or land shall thereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. The city of American Canyon may, at the discretion of its floodplain administrator, require prospective builders to prepare detailed studies of possible flood areas for areas outside the FIRM map area and impose reasonable building conditions as a result of the studies. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.100 Interpretation.
     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

     B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other granted under state statutes. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.111 Severability.
     This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

Article III. Administration
8.16.120 Establishment of development permit.
     A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or any other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 8.16.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

     A.    Site plan, including, but not limited to:

     1.     For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site;

     2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and

     3.     If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map; and

     4.     If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway.

     B.     Foundation design detail, including, but not limited to:

     1.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

     2.     For crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 8.16.160(C)(3) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and

     3.     For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five percent using the Standard Proctor Test method).

     C.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 8.16.160(C)(2) of this chapter and FEMA Technical Bulletin 3-93.

     D.    All appropriate certifications listed in Section 8.16.140(D) of this chapter.

     E.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.130 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
     The city manager or the city manager’s designee is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.140 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
     The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     A.    Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

     1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

     2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

     3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

     4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

     B.     Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data.

     1.     When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 8.16.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 8.16.160. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

     2.     If no base flood elevation data is available from a federal or state agency or other source, then a base flood elevation shall be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas — A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (one-hundred-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995 in order to administer Article IV:

     a.     Simplified method:

     i.      One-hundred-year or base year flood discharge shall be obtained using the appropriate regression equation found in a U.S. Geological Survey publication, or the discharge-drainage area method, and

     ii.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the Quick-2 computer program developed by FEMA; or

     b.     Detailed method:

     i.      One-hundred-year or base year flood discharge shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-HMS computer program, and

     ii.     Base flood elevation shall be obtained using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ HEC-RAS computer program.

     C.     Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

     1.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

     2.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

     3.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.

     D.    Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

     1.     Certification required by Sections 8.16.160(C)(1) and 8.16.190 (lowest floor elevations);

     2.     Certification required by Section 8.16.160(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

     3.     Certification required by Section 8.16.160(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

     4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 8.16.180(B) (subdivision standards);

     5.     Certification required by Section 8.16.210(A) (floodway encroachments); and

     6.     Reports required by Section 8.16.220(D) (mudflow standards).

     E.     Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article V.

     F.     Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 8.16.080. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.150 Appeals.
     The city council of the city of American Canyon shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

Article IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
8.16.160 Standards of construction.
     In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

     A.    Anchoring.

     1.     All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

     2.     All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 8.16.190.

     B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed:

     1.     With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

     2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

     3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and if

     4.     Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.

     C.     Elevation and Floodproofing (see Section 8.16.050 definitions for “basement,” “lowest floor,” “new construction,” “substantial damage” and “substantial improvement”).

     1.     Residential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

     a.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height exceeding by one foot the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;

     b.     In an A zone, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods in Section 8.16.140(B) of this chapter;

     c.     In all other zones, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     2.     Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated to conform with Section 8.16.160(C)(1) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

     a.     Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under Section 8.16.160(C)(1) so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

     b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

     c.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this Section 8.16.160(C)(2) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     3.     All new construction and substantial improvement with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB 7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria:

     a.     Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

     b.     Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

     c.     Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood water.

     4.     Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 8.16.190. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.170 Standards for utilities.
     A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

     1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

     2.     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

     B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.180 Standards for subdivisions.
     A.    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

     B.     All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

     C.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

     D.    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

     E.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.190 Standards for manufactured homes.
     A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

     1.     Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

     2.     In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

     3.     In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

     4.     In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement.

     B.     All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites located within zones V1—30, V, and VE on the communities Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 8.16.190(A).

     C.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1—30, AH, AE, V1—30, V, and VE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 8.16.190(A) will be elevated so that either the:

     1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or

     2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.200 Standards for recreational vehicles.
     A.    All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map will either:

     1.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days;

     2.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

     3.     Meet the permit requirements of Article III of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 8.16.190(A).

     B.     Recreation vehicles placed on sites within zones V1—30, V, and VE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of Section 8.16.200(A). (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.210 Floodways.
     Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 8.16.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

     A.    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in the base flood elevation during the occurrence of the base flood discharge;

     B.     If Section 8.16.210(A) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article IV of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.220 Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone areas.
     A.    The floodplain administrator shall review permits for proposed construction of other development to determine if it is proposed within a mudslide area.

     B.     Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed site and improvement will be reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making this determination include, but are not limited to, the:

     1.     Type and quality of soils;

     2.     Evidence of ground water or surface water problems;

     3.     Depth and quality of any fill;

     4.     Overall slope of the site; and

     5.     Weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.

     C.     Within areas which may have mudslide hazards, the floodplain administration shall require that:

     1.     A site investigation and further review be made by persons qualified in geology and soils engineering;

     2.     The proposed grading, excavation, new construction and substantial improvement be adequately designed and protected against mudslide damages;

     3.     The proposed grading, excavations, new construction and substantial improvement not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either onsite disturbances; and

     4.     Drainage, planting, watering and maintenance not endanger slope stability. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.230 Flood-related erosion-prone areas.
     A.    The floodplain administrator shall require permits for proposed construction and other development within all flood-related erosion-prone areas as known to the community.

     B.     Permit applications shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed site alterations and improvements will be reasonably safe from flood-related erosion and will not cause flood-related erosion hazards or otherwise aggravate the existing hazard.

     C.     If a proposed improvement is found to be in the path of flood-related erosion or would increase the erosion hazard, such improvement shall be relocated or adequate protective measures shall be taken to avoid aggravating the existing erosion hazard.

     D.    Within Zone E on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, a setback is required for all new development from the ocean, lake, bay, riverfront or other body of water to create a safety buffer consisting of a natural vegetative or contour strip. This buffer shall be designated according to the flood-related erosion hazard and erosion rate, in relation to the anticipated “useful life” of structures, and depending upon the geologic, hydrologic, topographic and climatic characteristics of the land. The buffer may be used for suitable open space purposes, such as for agricultural, forestry, outdoor recreation and wildlife habitat areas and for other activities using temporary and portable structures only. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

Article V. Variance Procedure
8.16.240 Nature of variances.
     The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.

     It is the duty of the city council to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.250 Appeals to city council.
     A.    In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

     1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

     4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

     11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water system, and streets and bridges.

     B.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

     1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

     2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Napa County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

     C.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

 

8.16.260 Conditions for variances.
     A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level; providing, that the procedures of Articles III and IV of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 8.16.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

     C.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

     E.     Variances shall only be issued upon a:

     1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

     2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Section 8.16.050 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

     3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Section 8.16.050), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 8.16.050) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

     F.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; provided, that the provisions of subsections A through E are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

     G.    Upon consideration of the factors of Section 8.16.250(C) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2016-08 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-13 §§ 1, 2, 2001)

Chapter 8.18 DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
8.18.010 Discharging firearms or weapons.
     Every person who, except in a regularly licensed shooting gallery or shooting range, discharges any pistol, handgun, firearm, air gun, musket, slingshot, or any other instrument, weapon or device of any kind, character, or description which throws a bullet, shot, projectile, or missile for any distance, by means of elastic force of gases or any explosive substance in a negligent or irresponsible manner is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002)

 

8.18.020 Exemption.
     The provisions of Section 8.18.010 shall not apply to a duly sworn police officer or deputy sheriff acting in the course of his or her duties. (Ord. 2002-03 § 1, 2002)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
Chapter 9.06 UNRULY GATHERINGS
Chapter 9.07 SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
Chapter 9.08 POSSESSION OF OPENED CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON THE POSTED PREMISES OF RETAIL PACKAGE OFF-SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSEES, IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT AREAS AND ADJACENT PUBLIC SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED
Chapter 9.12 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS

Chapter 9.04 NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION
9.04.010 Findings and determination.
     The city council finds and determines that the restrictions in this chapter are necessary to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public; to protect the integrity and character of residential neighborhoods and districts; to protect the appearance of the Highway 29 corridor; to prevent the devaluation of property values; and, to enhance and protect the liveability, social and economic conditions of the city. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.020 Declaration of public nuisances.
     A.    Any property, building or other improvements found to be maintained in violation of any one or more of the provisions of Section 9.04.040 of this chapter is declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.

     B.     Any property, building, or other improvement found to be maintained in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance as defined anywhere in this code, the statutes of the state of California or in the common law is declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement under the procedures in this chapter. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.030 Chapter not exclusive.
     A.    This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the city. This chapter shall supplement and be in addition to other provisions of this code and to other statutes, ordinances or regulations existing or subsequently enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.

     B.     The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions provided in this code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.040 Classification of nuisances.
     It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain or permit such property to be maintained in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon and to be of such magnitude as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property or to cause damage to public rights-of-way:

     A.    Property Conditions.

     1.     Overgrown, diseased, dead or decayed trees, weeds or other vegetation which:

     a.     Constitute a fire hazard or a condition considered dangerous to the public health, safety and general welfare due to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, impairment of vehicular traffic or obstruction of vehicular line of site or the ability to clearly observe safety signs and signals,

     b.     Are likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests. This provision identifies conditions which may be deemed to constitute a nuisance within portions of the city that are partially or fully developed because of the potential to adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare and to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property. Due to the diminished potential for such adverse effects, such condition would not constitute a nuisance when existing on grazing lands or large undeveloped parcels except when such conditions exist on properties immediately adjacent to developed property. American Canyon fire protection district standards for weed abatement continue to apply to property city-wide;

     2.     Accumulations of debris, rubbish and trash in the front or side yard areas visible from the public right-of-way or which constitute a health or fire hazard;

     3.     Storage, as to be visible at ground level from a public street or adjoining property for unreasonable periods or as a part of a continuing practice, any of the following:

     a.     Abandoned, inoperative, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles of any kind, and abandoned, inoperative, wrecked or dismantled trailers, campers or boats,

     b.     Broken or discarded household furnishings and fixtures, appliances, boxes and cartons, play equipment, toys and similar materials,

     c.     Discarded, wrecked or inoperable machinery and tools,

     d.     Salvage materials, scrap metal or building and construction materials, including, but not limited to, dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, tile, rocks, bricks, and similar materials except when associated with agricultural uses or ongoing landscape projects;

     4.     Garbage or trash cans which cause offensive odors to neighbors or containers stored in front or side yards, which are visible from public streets unless all of the following conditions exist: a) The garbage/trash container(s) are stored within a defined area that is maintained in a neat and orderly condition, b) all trash is stored completely within a designated container, the container is covered, and no trash has spilled over or has fallen on the ground in the immediately surrounding area, and c) the trash cans/containers are stored behind the front wall plane of the dwelling;

     5.     Conditions which, due to their accessibility to the public, may prove hazardous or dangerous, including, but not limited to:

     a.     Unused and/or broken equipment such as ice boxes and refrigerators,

     b.     Abandoned wells, shafts or basements,

     c.     Hazardous or unprotected pools, pits, ponds or excavations,

     d.     Machinery which is inadequately secured or protected,

     e.     Accumulations of lumber, refuse and waste matter, or discarded materials, including, but not limited to, building and construction materials;

     6.     Parking or storing construction equipment or machinery except during excavation, construction or demolition operations conducted pursuant to a building or grading permit or when associated with ongoing agricultural/noncommercial landscaping activities;

     7.     Parking of any motor vehicle, including a recreational vehicle, trailer, camper or boat on lawns or other landscaped areas within portions of the property visible from a public street where such areas are not paved or otherwise surfaced to allow parking. Allowable surface materials may include gravel, brick, grasscrete, concrete pavers, or similar materials that define the parking area and minimize erosion potential;

     8.     Parking of any motor vehicle, including a recreational vehicle, trailer, camper or boat on property adjacent to Highway 29 for the purpose of offering the same for sale to the general public where a “for sale” or similar sign is displayed on or in the vehicle, trailer, camper or boat which is visible to traffic on Highway 29 and constitutes or tends to constitute a traffic safety hazard or an unsightly appearance.

     B.     Structural Conditions. Structures or buildings, both permanent and temporary, or other improvements, including, but not limited to walls and fences, which are subject to any of the following conditions:

     1.     Are structurally unsafe, either entirely or in part;

     2.     Constitute a fire hazard;

     3.     Have a faulty weather protection, including but not limited to crumbling, cracked, missing broken or loose exterior plaster or other siding, roofs, foundations or floors (including lack of paint or other protective finish), broken or missing windows or doors;

     4.     Have dry rot or warped materials, or are infested with termites;

     5.     Are abandoned, partially destroyed or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction. State of partial construction means building and structures which are partially constructed when the building permit for such construction has expired;

     6.     Are unoccupied and have been left unlocked or otherwise open or unsecured from intrusion by persons, animals or the elements;

     7.     Have exterior walls, fences, driveways or sidewalks which are in hazardous condition, hinder free access to public sidewalks or are in a state of disrepair as to be unsightly. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.050 Inspection.
     A.    Authorized Representatives. The city manager and the community development director or their designated representatives are authorized to make inspections and take such actions as may be required by this chapter to abate public nuisances.

     B.     Inspection of Premises. Whenever there is a reasonable cause to believe that a condition, activity or use of property exists which constitutes a public nuisance, the city manager or community development director or a designated representative may seek to enter the premises at a reasonable time for the purpose of inspection. If the premises are occupied, entry shall be requested and proper credentials shall be presented. If the premises are unoccupied, a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the property owner. If entry is refused or if the property cannot be located, a twenty-four written notice of intent to inspect shall be left at the premises. The notice shall state that the property owner or occupant of the property has the right to refuse entry and if such entry is refused, the city may seek assistance from a court of competent jurisdiction to obtain entry to inspect the premises. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.060 Summary abatement of immediate dangers.
     Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, the city manager or his or her designee may order, without notice or judicial action, the immediate abatement of the public nuisance. The expense of such abatement shall be collectible as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.070 Notice to abate public nuisance.
     A.    Contents of Notice. Whenever the city manager or the community development director or his or her designee finds that a nuisance, as declared in Section 9.04.030, exists on any property located within the city, he or she shall give written notice to the owner and to any tenant or occupant or other person having charge or possession of the property. The notice shall:

     1.     Describe the property sufficient to identify the location of the public nuisance;

     2.     Identify the nuisance and reference the section(s) of this code that have been violated;

     3.     Direct abatement of the nuisance by a specified date;

     4.     State the available methods of abatement;

     5.     Contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner or occupant of the property on which any public nuisance is located; and

     6.     Indicate that if no request for hearing is made or that if after a hearing an order of abatement is issued, and the nuisance is not properly abated, then the city may abate the nuisance and charge the expenses as a personal obligation and/or a special assessment or lien against the property.

     The amount of time allowed to abate a nuisance shall be determined by considering the severity of nuisance and its effect on the health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the community.

     B.     Service of Notice. A notice to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner and occupant of property, or shall be served upon the owner or occupant in person. The notification shall be sent to the owner at the address appearing on the latest tax assessment roll and if there is no such address, then in care of the property address. In addition to personal service or service by registered or certified mail, notice to abate shall be posted on two conspicuous places on the affected property attested to by affidavit of city official Service shall be deemed complete at the time the notice is personally served or deposited in the mail with the correct amount of postage affixed and is posted on the affected property as described. The failure of any owner or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     Property Owner Definition. The term “property owner” or “owner” as used in this chapter, shall mean the owner or owners of record of real property as shown on the last Napa County equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll, whichever is more current. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.080 Request for hearing.
     The city council shall hold a public hearing to determine that a public nuisance exists upon the written request of the owner or occupant of the property for which a notice to abate has been issued. The request shall be made to the city clerk within ten days from the date of personal service or within fifteen days from the date of mailing of the notice to abate. The request for hearing shall state the grounds upon which the hearing is requested. The matter shall be scheduled for hearing and the city clerk shall notify the owner or occupant requesting the hearing of the same, not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the person requesting the hearing. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.090 Hearing by the city council.
     At the time and place stated in the notice of public hearing, the city council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from owners, occupants, witnesses, city personnel and interested persons relative to the alleged public nuisance and to the proposed abatement measures. The hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.100 Decision of the city council.
     A.    Following the public hearing, the city council shall consider all evidence and determine whether the property, or any part of the property, constitutes a public nuisance as alleged. If the city council finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the nuisance, the city council shall prepare a statement of findings and an order, which shall specify the nature of the nuisance, and order the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises to abate the nuisance, the method of abatement and the time within which the work shall be commenced and completed.

     B.     A copy of the statement of findings and order shall be served on the property owner and any occupant in the manner provided in Section 9.04.110. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.110 Limitation on filing judicial action.
     Action to review the city council statement of findings and order shall be commenced within thirty days of the date of service of the statement of findings and order and the same shall contain the statement advising of this time limit on seeking court review. After the expiration of thirty days from the date of service of the statement of findings and order, all objections to the decision shall be deemed waived. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.120 Abatement by property owner.
     The property owner, or person having charge or control of the property, may at his or her own expense abate the nuisance as prescribed by the notice to abate or the order of the city council, if any, prior to the expiration of the abatement period set forth in the notice or the order. If and when an owner or occupant undertakes to abate any such nuisance, the community development director or his or her designated representative may impose such conditions as are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Any necessary permits and/or approvals shall be obtained by the owner or occupant. After the property has been inspected by the community development director or his or her designated representative, and the nuisance has been fully abated in accordance with the notice to abate or order, the proceedings shall terminate. The city manager or the community development director or his or her designated representative may extend the abatement period specified in the notice to abate or any order to abate upon a showing of good cause. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.130 Abatement by the city.
     A.    Failure to Abate. If a declared nuisance is not completely abated by the owner or person having charge or control of the property within the time prescribed in the notice to abate or after a public hearing, in the city council order, if any, the city manager or his or her designee shall cause the same to be abated by city employees or private contract. The city manager or his or her designated representative is expressly authorized to enter upon the property for the purpose of abating the nuisance.

     B.     Abatement of Motor Vehicles. Abatement of any motor vehicle registered or subject to registration with the Department of Motor Vehicles shall be carried out in conformance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code and Ordinance No. 92-19 of the city establishing the American Canyon traffic code and any amendments thereto.

     C.     Cost of Abatement Constitute Civil Debt. Upon the abatement of the public nuisance, or any portion thereof, by the city, all the costs, including incidental expenses shall be a civil debt owing to the city jointly and severally by the persons who have been given notice as provided in this chapter, except for any persons which the city council concludes pursuant to proof at the hearing to confirm the costs of abatement are not persons properly charged with responsibility of abatement. The costs shall be billed to the owner or occupant and shall be collectible in the same manner as any other civil debt owing the city. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.140 Record of cost of abatement notice and hearing to confirm.
     A.    The city manager or his or her designee shall keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of abating such public nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done by the city and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council showing the cost of abatement, including the rehabilitation, demolition or repair of said property, including any salvage value relating thereto; provided that before said report is submitted to the city council, a copy of the same together with a notice of the time when said report shall be heard by the city council for confirmation, shall be served upon the owner of the property in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.04.070 of this chapter at least ten days prior to submitting the same to the city council. Proof of said service shall be made by affidavit filed with the city clerk.

     B.     At the time fixed for hearing, the city council shall consider the correctness or reasonableness of the costs included in the accounting together with any protests or objections as may be offered against it, and shall correct, modify or amend the same, after which, by motion, the accounting as submitted, corrected, modified or amended shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

     C.     The term “incidental expenses” means and includes, but is not limited to, the personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorneys’ fees, costs incurred in documenting the nuisance, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work, and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.150 Assessment lien.
     A.    The total cost for abating such nuisance, as confirmed, by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, as so made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on said property for the amount of such assessment.

     B.     After such confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of the city council’s decision confirming the abatement costs shall be filed with the Napa County auditor-controller on or before August 1st each year, whereupon, it shall be the duty of the county auditor-controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against said respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes and thereafter said amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessments.

     C.     In the alternative, after such recordation, such lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in the manner and means provided by law. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.160 Nuisance abatement lien.
     As an alternative to the assessment lien procedure contained in Section 9.04.150 the total cost for abating such nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, may be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 38773.1 as a nuisance abatement lien.

     A.    Prior to the recordation of any nuisance abatement lien, the city shall provide notice of the same to the owner of record of the parcel or lot on which the nuisance is maintained as shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current.

     B.     The notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county of Napa pursuant to Government Code Section 6062.

     C.     The notice of nuisance abatement lien shall specify the amount of the lien, that the city is the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed, the date the notice to abate was served or the date on which the city council issued its order to abate, if any, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the record owner of the parcel.

     D.    After recordation of the nuisance abatement lien, the city may foreclose the lien by an action brought by the city for a money judgment. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.170 Alternative actions available.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council or the city manager from ordering the city attorney to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable civil or penal code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings as set forth in this chapter.

     B.     Pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that property owner is responsible for a public nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter, the city shall be entitled to an order of the court requiring the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

 

9.04.180 Violations—Penalties.
     A.    The owner or other person having charge or control of any property, building or structure who maintains any condition described as a public nuisance in Section 9.04.040 or who fails to abate a nuisance within the time periods specified in a notice to abate or any city council order to abate is guilty of an infraction pursuant to Section 1.24.010 of this code.

     B.     Any occupant or person in possession of any such building or structure who fails to vacate such building or structure in accordance with an order given pursuant to this chapter is guilty of an infraction pursuant to Section 1.24.010 of this code.

     C.     Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any authorized representative or agent of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in a building which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provision of this code whenever any such person is engaged in proceedings involving the abatement of a nuisance is guilty of an infraction pursuant to Section 1.24.010 of this code.

     D.    Section 1.24.010 provides that each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and may be separately punished and that fourth and subsequent violations may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.

     E.     Section 9.12.030 provides the penalty for any violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-01 § 2, 2017; Ord. 94-07 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 9.06 UNRULY GATHERINGS
9.06.010 Purpose and application.
     The purposes of this chapter are:

     A.    To assist law enforcement officers in controlling unruly gatherings;

     B.     To defray the cost of providing an emergency response during a second call to such gatherings; and

     C.     To deter noisy or dangerous gatherings which are disturbing the public peace.

     D.    This chapter shall have no application to assemblies, meetings, gatherings, demonstrations or marches supporting or espousing political, social, ethical, religious or other causes or beliefs, the expression of which is entitled to protection under the United States or State Constitution. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter the following words or phrases shall be defined as:

     A.    An “unruly gathering” is a noisy or dangerous gathering of two or more persons which is disturbing the public peace.

     B.     A “second call to an unruly gathering” is a second on-site visit to the premises by law enforcement officers which occurs after the initial response has been made to advise the person apparently in charge, or other person as provided in Section 9.06.060 of this chapter, that the gathering is unruly and informing such person of his or her liability under this section. Additional visits to the premises regarding the same unruly gathering shall be deemed second calls for the purpose of this section. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.030 Emergency response charges.
     Whenever law enforcement officers respond for a second time to an unruly individual or gathering after responding within the previous thirty calendar days to an unruly individual or gathering, the law enforcement personnel making the second call are deemed to be providing special emergency security services the cost of which, shall be charged to the individual or individual responsible for the unruly individual or gathering as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.040 Calculation of charges.
     The charge for providing such services during a second call to an unruly gathering shall be based on the hourly pay and benefit rates plus the established city administrative fee. The charge shall also include the cost of providing equipment and repairing or replacing damaged equipment. The charge for each call shall be the cost of providing the services, but no less than on hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars plus the cost of actual damage to city property. Additional calls to the same gathering shall be separately charged. The city council may approve a higher charge for a call if it is determined that additional costs were incurred. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.050 Collection of charges.
     The person or persons in charge of the unruly gathering, and if occurring on private property, the person or persons in charge of the property, shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing the special emergency security services. The sheriff, or his designee, shall determine charges for a second call and bill the parties who are liable. Payment shall be within thirty days of mailing of the bill to the parties. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.060 Mandatory warnings.
     No person shall be liable for charges unless such person has been informed of their potential liability by a sheriff’s deputy during the first call. The sheriff’s department shall prepare a written document warning of potential liability under this chapter and during the first call to provide a copy thereof to each such person. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.070 Additional emergency response charges.
     Whenever a law enforcement officer responds for a second time to an unruly individual or gathering, notwithstanding the time limitation of Section 9.06.030 of this chapter, if there has been a conviction of disturbance of the public peace under this code or Penal Code Section 415, within one calendar year of the second response then the cost of providing such services, which are deemed to be special security services, shall be charged to the individual or individuals causing the disturbance or the individual or individuals responsible for the individual or gathering as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.080 Other remedies.
     The foregoing charges are cumulative and shall not limit or replace other remedies or penalties, civil or criminal. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

 

9.06.090 Charge against persons liable—Minors.
     If the person liable is a minor, the parents or guardian of the minor shall be responsible. (Ord. 98-04 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 9.07 SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
9.07.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Social Host Accountability Ordinance.” (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.020 Legislative purpose.
     The purposes of this chapter are to:

     A.    Protect the public health, safety and general welfare;

     B.     Promote the reduction of underage drinking by imposing a civil fine on persons responsible for a party, gathering or event where alcoholic beverages are consumed by, served to or in the possession or control of underage persons;

     C.     Facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the service to, consumption of or possession or control of alcoholic beverages by underage persons; and

     D.    To offset the city’s costs associated with providing fire, police, and other emergency services to a party, gathering or event by imposing a civil fee upon social hosts and/or landowners (including landlords) who allow such party, gathering or event to occur on their premises, at their residences, or at rented facilities for the recovery of costs associated with providing fire, police, and other emergency services to a party, gathering or event where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.030 Legislative findings.
     The city of American Canyon council finds as follows:

     A.    The city of American Canyon, pursuant to the police powers delegated to it by the California Constitution, has the authority to enact laws which promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its residents;

     B.     The occurrence of a party, gathering or event on private property where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person is harmful to underage persons themselves and a threat to the public health, safety, or quiet enjoyment of residential property and the general welfare;

     C.     Section 25658 of the Business and Professions Code makes it unlawful for a person under the age of twenty-one years to purchase or attempt to purchase, or consume alcoholic beverages and makes it unlawful for any person to sell or provide any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of twenty-one years.

     D.    Law enforcement response to a party, gathering or event where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person causes a drain of law enforcement resources and in some situations, leaves other areas of the city with inadequate law enforcement protection. Responses to such gathering or events result in a disproportionate expenditure of public safety resources, which are underwritten by general municipal taxes paid to the city by its taxpayers and residents.

     E.     According to the California Healthy Kids Survey (2008), thirty percent of Napa County 11th graders report obtaining alcohol at parties or other events outside school and seventy-eight percent of Napa County 11th graders report that alcohol is fairly easy or very easy to obtain. Alcohol policy research regarding underage drinking shows that when communities reduce youth access to alcohol, communities experience reductions in youth alcohol use and related problems. Ordinances that reduce youth access to alcohol from social sources have been recognized as a best practice by the United States Department of Justice.

     F.     Underage persons often obtain alcoholic beverages at a party, gathering or event held at private residences or at rented residential and commercial premises that are under the control of a person who knows or should know of the underage service and/or consumption.

     G.    Persons responsible for the occurrence of a party, gathering or event on private property where alcoholic beverages are served have a duty to ensure that alcohol is not served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person at such gatherings.

     H.    Communities that have adopted such ordinances have seen reductions in the size of parties, gatherings and events and reductions in youth perception of ease of access to alcohol.

     I.      Law enforcement ability to abate gatherings where alcohol is consumed by minors on private property will help to decrease abuse of alcohol by minors, physical altercations and injuries, sexual assaults, truancy, driving under the influence of alcohol, adolescent crime, motor vehicle collisions, neighborhood vandalism and excessive noise disturbance thereby improving public safety and overall quality of life of American Canyon residents.

     J.      Persons held responsible for abetting or allowing a party, gathering or event, where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person will be more likely to properly supervise or to stop such conduct at gatherings held on property in their possession or under their control.

     K.    Problems associated with a party, gathering or event where alcoholic beverages are served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of underage persons are difficult to prevent or deter unless law enforcement has the additional legal authority to issue a civil citation for a civil fine and/or a civil citation for the cost of public safety response.

     L.     The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, quiet enjoyment of residential property, and general welfare, rather than to punish. Persons who actively or passively aid, abet, or allow a party, gathering or event where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession of an underage person shall be held liable for the nuisances created by such gatherings, the civil fine(s) for such violations and the costs associated with responding to such gatherings. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.040 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

     “Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

     “Hearing officer” for the purpose of this chapter will be the city manager or designee.

     “Juvenile” means any person less than eighteen years of age.

     “Minor” means any person less than twenty-one years of age and shall have the same meaning as “underage person” defined below.

     “Other private property” refers to hotel or motel room; an assembly hall or meeting room; a common room of a dwelling unit used for a party, gathering or event (e.g., recreation room of an apartment building); a site in a privately owned campground; privately owned vacant lot; privately owned agricultural land; or privately owned rural land, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented or used without compensation.

     “Party, gathering or event” means a group of two or more persons at a residence or on other private property or rented public property who have assembled or are assembling for a social occasion or social activity. These terms used individually have the same meaning as when used collectively and may be used interchangeably.

     “Person(s) responsible for the event” and/or “responsible person(s)” means a person or persons with a right of possession in the premises where the party, gathering or event is held, including, but not limited to:

     1.     The person(s) who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the gathering occurs; and/or

     2.     The person(s) in charge of the premises; and/or

     3.     The person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a party, gathering or event.

     If the responsible person is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the civil fine and/or for the costs incurred for public safety services pursuant to this chapter. To incur liability for the civil fine and/or for the costs incurred for public safety services pursuant to this chapter, the person(s) responsible for the event need not be present at such gathering giving rise to the imposition of such costs. This chapter imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a responsible person consistent with state law.

     “Public safety services” and/or “response costs” means the costs associated with responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to a party, gathering or event where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person, including, but not limited to:

     1.     The portion of cost of salaries and benefits of law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with a party, gathering or event, and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s);

     2.     The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a party, gathering or event; and

     3.     The cost of the use of any equipment or property, and the cost of repairing any equipment or property damaged, in responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of a party, gathering or event.

     “Residence” includes a dwelling unit such as a home, condominium or apartment; structures on the residence other than the dwelling unit including, but not limited to, a garage, studio, tent, boat dock, swimming pool, barn or boat house; land on the residence whether improved or unimproved such as a yard, patio, open fields, piers or lake shores; bodies of water on the residence such as a pond, lake, river or stream; a motor vehicle, camper or trailer located on the residence or a boat, watercraft, or other marine vessel located on the residence whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or gathering, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

     “Underage person” means any person less than twenty-one years of age and shall have the same meaning as “minor,” defined above. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.050 Unlawful party, gathering or event where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person.
     No person shall suffer, permit or host a party, gathering or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place or premises or host a gathering of two or more persons at a public place under his or her control where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.060 Protected activities.
     This chapter shall not apply to activities protected by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution; the California Alcohol Beverage Control Act; or the First or Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.070 Violation(s)—Civil fine(s).
     A.    It is a civil violation for a person to conduct or allow a party, gathering or event where alcohol is served to, consumed by or in the possession or control of an underage person on premises owned by the person responsible for the event, on premises rented by or to the person(s) responsible for the event, on premises where the person responsible for the event resides or on premises where the person responsible for the event is in control of such premises during the party, gathering or event. Law enforcement personnel, at his or her discretion, may immediately issue a citation for this civil violation upon evidence of the violation. There is no requirement of a first warning in order for law enforcement to issue this civil citation.

     B.     Fines.

     1.     Civil Fine. A first violation of this section shall result in a citation with a five hundred fifty dollar fine.

     2.     A second violation of this section at the same residence or other private property, or by the same person responsible for the event, shall result in a citation with a seven hundred and fifty dollar fine.

     3.     A third or subsequent violation of this section at the same residence or other private property, or by the same person responsible for the event, shall result in a citation with a one thousand dollar fine.

     C.     The fines prescribed in subsection (B) are in addition to any civil cost recovery fee for public safety services and/or response costs that may be assessed pursuant to Section 9.07.080.

     D.    Law enforcement shall give notice of a violation of this section by issuing a citation to any and all persons responsible for the event identified by law enforcement within thirty days of the violation. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the validity of the citation and the time for requesting that hearing.

     E.     In the event that the responsible person who is in violation of this section is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the civil violation. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.080 Imposition of civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses.
     In addition to any civil fine imposed for violation of this chapter, expenses and fines which may be assessed or imposed as a result of a violation of this chapter, liability for the cost of providing public safety services (i.e., fire, ambulance, police, and other emergency providers) shall be the responsibility of any person who violates any provision of this chapter. The cost recovery for public safety responses shall be separate and distinct from a citation and fine for a civil violation described in Section 9.07.070.

     A.    The amount of cost recovery under this subsection shall be the response costs as well as any associated costs performed by public safety.

     B.     In the event that the responsible person who is in violation of this chapter is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the imposition of civil fine and/or penalties for the cost of providing public safety services.

     C.     If there is more than one responsible person for the event then each responsible person shall be jointly and severally liable for the civil fine and/or for the costs incurred for public safety services pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    Civil cost recovery fee(s) shall not be imposed for the response costs in those situations where those present at the gathering call for emergency services for an actual emergency at the premises. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.090 Hearings on the imposition of civil fine and/or imposition of civil cost recovery fee for public safety response—Appeals.
     A.    Administrative Hearing. Any person subject to a civil fine pursuant to Section 9.07.070 or subject to a civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses pursuant to Section 9.07.080 shall have the right to request an administrative hearing within forty-five days of the issuance of a citation for a civil violation or the issuance of a citation for the imposition of civil cost recovery fees for a public safety response. To request such a hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall notify the city clerk in writing within forty-five days of the issuance of the citation.

     B.     The city hearing officer is delegated the power and duty to hear any appeal hearing under Section 9.07.070 and/or Section 9.07.080. The city hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the matter within ninety days of the request for the hearing unless one of the parties requests a continuance for good cause. The city hearing officer shall render a decision within thirty days of the conclusion of the hearing. Any aggrieved person may obtain review of the decision by filing a petition for mandate with the Superior Court of California, city of Napa, a unified court in accordance with the timelines and provisions set forth in Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.100 Billing and civil fine and civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses—Debt to city—Enforcement.
     A.    The amount of a civil fine and/or civil cost recovery fee for public safety responses shall be deemed a debt owed to the city of American Canyon by the person responsible for the event, and, if that person is a juvenile, then also his or her parents or guardian. Any person owing such fine and/or fees shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such fine and/or fees. These recovery costs may include reasonable attorney fees incurred in the action if the city prevails, as the city reserves the right to seek to recover reasonable attorney fees, on a case by case basis, pursuant to Government Code Section 25845, subdivision (c). In those cases in which the city seeks to recover reasonable attorney fees, the other party may likewise do so.

     The police chief shall mail notice via certified mail within thirty days of the response for which the person is liable giving rise to such costs. The police chief shall calculate and compile an itemized list of applicable response costs. The notice shall contain the following information:

     1.     The name(s) of the person(s) being held liable for the payment of such costs;

     2.     The address of the residence or other private property where the party, gathering or event occurred;

     3.     The date and time of the response;

     4.     The law enforcement, fire and/or emergency service responder who responded;

     5.     An itemized list of the response costs for which the person(s) is liable;

     6.     Information regarding the date payment is due;

     7.     The right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the imposition of response costs and/or civil fines;

     8.     The imposition of a lien on the subject property in the event of non-payment; and

     9.     The election by the city under Government Code Section 25845, subdivision (c), to allow for recovery of the prevailing party’s attorneys’ fees in the event of an administrative hearing and subsequent appeal.

     The responsible person must remit payment of the noticed costs and/or civil fines to the city of American Canyon within forty-five days of the notice thereof. The payment of any such costs shall be stayed upon a timely request for an administrative hearing made pursuant to Section 9.70.090.

     B.     If, following an administrative hearing, appeal, or other final determination, the owner of the property is determined to be the responsible person for costs of this section, such costs, if unpaid within forty-five days of the notice of the final determination, shall become a lien to be recorded against the property on which the violation occurred pursuant to Section 1.24.010. Such costs shall be collected in the same manner as county taxes, and thereafter the property upon which they are a lien shall be sold in the same manner as property now is sold for delinquent taxes.

     C.     The city attorney shall have the authority to file any action or proceeding to recover such civil fines, police services costs, public safety response costs, expenses and/or expenses and/or penalties, and take any other actions at law which he or she may deem necessary to recover same. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.110 Reservation of legal options—Remedies cumulative.
     The remedies provided under this chapter are cumulative, and shall not restrict the city to any other remedy to which it is entitled under law or equity. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude the imposition of any criminal penalty under state law. Nor shall anything in this chapter be deemed to conflict with any penalty or provision under state law, or prohibit any conduct authorized by the state or federal constitution. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

 

9.07.120 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or work of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 2011-02 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 9.08 POSSESSION OF OPENED CONTAINERS OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON THE POSTED PREMISES OF RETAIL PACKAGE OFF-SALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSEES, IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT AREAS AND ADJACENT PUBLIC SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED
9.08.010 Possession of opened containers of alcoholic beverages on the posted premises of retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees, immediately adjacent areas and adjacent public sidewalks prohibited.
     A.    No person who has in his or her possession any bottle, can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, shall enter, be, or remain on the posted premises of, including the posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, licensed pursuant to Division 9 (commencing with Section 23000) of the Business and Professions Code, or on any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensee and posted premises. Any persons violating this provision shall be guilty of an infraction.

     B.     For the purposes of this chapter, “retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee” means any retail establishment that has been licensed by the state Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to sell unopened packages or containers of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises.

     C.     As used in section (A) of this section, “posted premises” means the premises of any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee, or the parking lot immediately adjacent to the licensee’s premises on which clearly visible notices indicate to the patrons of the licensee and to persons in the adjacent parking lot and on the public sidewalk, that the provisions of subsection (A) of this section are applicable. In order for subsection (A) of this section to be given effect, the premises must be clearly posted to give patrons and persons in the adjacent parking lot and on the public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensee notice of the provisions of subsection (A) of this section.

     D.    All retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees shall post in accordance with provisions of this section their premises and any adjacent parking lot utilized by the licensee to satisfy its parking requirements. Retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees doing business in the city on the effective date of this section shall post within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this section. New retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage licensees starting business after the effective date of this section shall post their premises and adjacent parking lots immediately upon opening for business. The notice to be posted shall read:

 

IT IS UNLAWFUL TO HAVE AN OPEN CONTAINER WHICH CONTAINS ANY ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE IN YOUR POSSESSION ON THESE PREMISES.

 

(American Canyon Municipal Code Section 9.08.010)

 

     E.     The provisions to this section shall not apply to a private residential parking lot which is immediately adjacent to the posted premises. (Ord. 99-10 § 2, 1999)

Chapter 9.12 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
9.12.010 Legislative findings—Statement of purpose.
     A.    The city council has determined that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of the municipal code and applicable state codes. The city council has determined that an appropriate method of enforcement for minor violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4.

     B.     The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the municipal code or applicable state codes.

     C.     The city council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of the American Canyon municipal code, other ordinances adopted by the city, conditions on entitlements and terms and conditions of city agreements are matters of local concern and serve important public purposes. Consistent with its powers as a general law, the city of American Canyon adopts this administrative citation program provision in order to achieve the following goals:

     1.     To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of American Canyon;

     2.     To gain compliance with the municipal code and state codes, ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner;

     3.     To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines;

     4.     To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the municipal code, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the city of American Canyon; and

     5.     To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system.

     D.    Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     A. “Responsible person” means any individual who is the owner or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business, company, or entity or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen years, who causes or maintains a violation of the American Canyon municipal code, applicable state codes, or conditions to an entitlement.

     B.     “Enforcement officer” means any officer or employee with the authority to enforce the American Canyon municipal code or applicable state codes, or conditions to an entitlement.

     C.     “Hearing officers” means the planning commission of the city of American Canyon, and shall hear all appeals from an administrative citation as set forth in Section 9.12.070. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.030 Authority.
     A.    Any person violating any provisions of the American Canyon municipal code or applicable state code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of the municipal code, the uniform codes adopted by the city council, failing to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of this code.

     B.     Section 1.24.010 provides that each day of violation constitutes a separate offense and may be separately punished and that fourth and subsequent violations may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor.

     C.     A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the American Canyon administrative services department.

     D.    Fines for specific violations of the municipal code, conditions to entitlements or applicable state codes shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council, or where no amount is specified:

     1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within one year from the date of the first violation;

     3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within one year from the date of the first violation. (Ord. 2017-01 § 3, 2017; Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.040 Service procedures.
     An administrative citation on a form approved by the city manager may be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of the municipal code, applicable state codes or conditions to an entitlement in the following manner:

     A.    Personal Service. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation. In the event the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or subsequent proceedings.

     B.     Service of Citation by Mail. In the event the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned.

     C.     Service by Citation by Posting Notice. In the event the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posted shall be deemed effective service. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.050 Contents of notice.
     Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

     A.    Date, approximate time and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;

     B.     The municipal or state code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s);

     C.     An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within the time specified and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

     D.    The amount of the fine for the violation(s);

     E.     An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid;

     F.     Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and

     G.    The name and signature of the enforcement officer and, if possible, the signature of the responsible person. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.060 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
     Upon receipt of an administrative citation, the responsible person must do the following:

     A.    Pay the fine to the city within fifteen days from the correction date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed are payable to the American Canyon city treasurer. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s), nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city;

     B.     Remedy the violation(s), if the violation(s) is of such a nature that it can be remedied. If the violation(s) is corrected before the date provided on the administrative citation no fine shall be imposed. If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter or by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.070 Appeal of an administrative citation.
     Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of the American Canyon municipal code, applicable state codes or conditions of an entitlement, or that he or she is the responsible person, by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within fifteen days from the correction date of the administrative citation, together with an advanced deposit of the fine. Any administrative citation fine that has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.080 Hearing officers.
     The city council designates the planning commission as the hearing officers for the administrative citation hearing. To the extent practical and consistent with this chapter, appeal hearings shall be conducted on the evenings of regularly scheduled planning commission meetings. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.090 Hearing procedures.
     A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before the hearing officers shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance.

     B.     A hearing before the hearing officers shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

     C.     The hearing officers shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of the municipal code or other applicable state codes or conditions to an entitlement on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation.

     D.    The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation.

     E.     The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.

     F.     The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the hearing enforcement officers shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

     G.    If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officers for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

     H.    At least ten days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

     I.      The hearing officers may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.100 Hearing officer’s decision.
     A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officers shall issue a written decision within ten days of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for rendering the decision. The decision of the hearing officers shall be final unless a request for judicial review is filed in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.12.120.

     B.     If the hearing officers determine that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the city.

     C.     If the hearing officers determine that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine.

     D.    The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer’s written decision in the manner prescribed by the American Canyon municipal code. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.110 Failure to pay fines.
     The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being referred to the American Canyon finance director to file a claim with small claims court. Alternatively, the city may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the civil fines. The city may also recover all costs associated with collecting any fines. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.120 Right to judicial review.
     Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of the hearing officers on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Napa County municipal court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

 

9.12.130 Notices.
     The administrative citation and all notices to be given by this chapter shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable provisions of the American Canyon municipal code. Failure to receive any notice specified in this chapter does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 99-19 § 1, 2000)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.20 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 10.24 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.28 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Chapter 10.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.36 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Chapter 10.40 VISION OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS
Chapter 10.44 BICYCLES
Chapter 10.48 PENALTIES
Chapter 10.52 TRIP REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 10.56 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.60 PRIVATE STREET ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known and may be officially cited as the “American Canyon Traffic Code.” (Ord. 92-19 § 1, 1992)

 

10.04.020 Construction of singular and plural.
     The singular number includes the plural and the plural number includes the singular. (Ord. 92-19 § 3, 1992)

 

10.04.030 Definitions of words and phrases.
     A.    The following words and phrases when used in this code shall, for the purpose of this code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.

     B.     Whenever any words or phrases used in this code are not defined herein, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter as though set forth in this chapter in full. (Ord. 92-19 § 15, 1992)

 

10.04.040 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Bicycle” means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having tandem wheels either of which is over twenty inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels.

     “City” means the general law city of the city of

American Canyon, incorporated January 1, 1992.

     “Curb” means the lateral physical boundary of the roadway of a street whether marked by curbing construction or not so marked.

     “Holiday” means every Sunday, January first, February twelfth, third Monday in February, last Monday in May, July fourth, first Monday in September, September ninth, second Monday in October, November eleventh, the Thursday in November appointed as “Thanksgiving Day,” the Friday following the Thursday in November appointed as “Thanksgiving Day,” December twenty-fifth. If any of the foregoing days, except Sunday, falls on a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday.

     “Limited access highway” means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or land and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway.

     “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

     “Official time standard” means whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in this city.

     “Official traffic control devices” means all signs, signals, markings and devices, except directional signs, not inconsistent with this code or the Vehicle Code of the state of California, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.

     “Official traffic signals” means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction.

     “Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

     “Parkway” means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.

     “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

     “Pedestrians” means any person afoot.

     “Person” means every natural person, co-firm, partnership, association or corporation.

     “Police officer” means every officer and member of the police department of the city of American Canyon.

     “Resolution” means a resolution of the council of the city of American Canyon.

     “Stop,” when required, means complete cessation of movement.

     “Stop or stand,” when prohibited means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

     “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, bicycles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. (Ord. 92-19 §§ 17—34, 1992)

Chapter 10.08 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10.08.010 Duty of police department.
     It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic accidents and to cooperate with the traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department of this code. (Ord. 92-19 § 40, 1992)

 

10.08.020 Traffic accident studies.
     Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determine remedial measures. (Ord. 92-19 § 42, 1992)

 

10.08.030 Traffic accident reports.
     The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic engineer. (Ord. 92-19 § 43, 1992)

 

10.08.040 Police department to submit annual traffic safety report.
     The police department shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the council. Such report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows:

     A.    The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;

     B.     The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; and

     C.     The plans and recommendations of the department for future traffic safety activities. (Ord. 92-19 § 44, 1992)

 

10.08.050 Duties of traffic engineer.
     It shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer, under this code, to determine the installation and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to perform such others duties hereunder as may be required by the city manager. (Ord. 92-19 § 45, 1992)

 

10.08.060 Authority of police and fire district officers and members.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city.

     B.     Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.

     C.     Officers and members of the fire district, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.

     D.    Civilian employees of the city, when designated by the chief of police, shall enforce those provisions of the American Canyon traffic code and the State Vehicle Code relating to the standing or parking of vehicles that legally may be enforced by persons other than peace officers.

     E.     Inspectors and officers of the fire prevention bureau of the fire district may enforce Vehicle Code Sections 21708 and 22514. (Ord. 92-19 § 50, 1992)

 

10.08.070 Traffic control at school crossing or other places.
     It shall be the duty of any person appointed by the chief of police for such purpose, to control traffic at school crossings or other places designated by him. It shall be unlawful for any person, at any school crossing, or at any designated place, to refuse or fail to comply with any order, signal or direction of any person appointed by the chief of police to control traffic at school crossings or such designated places, provided that such person giving any order, signal or direction at such school crossing, or such designated place, shall at the time be wearing some insignia indicating such appointment. It shall be unlawful for any minor to direct or attempt to direct traffic unless authorized to do so by order of the chief of police. (Ord. 92-19 § 51, 1992)

 

10.08.080 Obedience to police and fire officials.
     No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or member of the fire district when directing traffic. (Ord. 92-19 § 52, 1992)

 

10.08.090 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
     No person other than an officer of the police department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or other person authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal. (Ord. 92-19 § 53, 1992)

 

10.08.100 Public employees to obey traffic regulations.
     The provisions of this code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the provisions of this code except as otherwise permitted in this code or by state statute. (Ord. 92-19 § 54, 1992)

 

10.08.110 Exemptions to certain vehicles.
     A.    The provisions of this code regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the police or fire departments, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency.

     B.     The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her wilful disregard of the safety of others.

     C.     The provisions of this code regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 92-19 § 55, 1992)

 

10.08.120 Report of damage to certain property.
     A.    The driver of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, ornamental lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any ornamental shade tree, traffic control devise or other property of a like nature located in or along any street. shall within twenty-four hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city.

     B.     Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning, and of the person driving or in charge of, such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident.

     C.     A driver involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time such driver is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event the driver shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty-four hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 92-19 § 56, 1992)

 

10.08.130 Vehicles obstructing normal flow of traffic—Removal.
     Any vehicle parked or stopped in violation of Sections 10.20.110, 10.32.090, 10.32.280, and 10.32.290 of this code shall be deemed to be left standing upon a street or highway in an unusual position and obstructing the normal movement of traffic thereon and may be removed as provided in Section 22651 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 92-19 § 57, 1992)

 

10.08.140 Solicitation at location of certain occurrences.
     A.    No person shall, at the location of any vehicular accident, collision, or other catastrophe or calamity, solicit or offer the sale of any tow service, or the sale of any other services.

     B.     The prohibition contained in this section shall apply from the time of the happening of any of the aforesaid occurrences until a reasonable time thereafter, and at all times while law enforcement officers, public health personnel, and other persons discharging duties imposed by law, are actively engaged in the performance of duty at the location of the occurrences. (Ord. 92-19 § 201, 1992)

 

10.08.150 Interception of police broadcasts.
     No person, not being authorized by the sender, who intercepts, overhears, or receives any message or communications transmitted by any transmitting station operating upon a wave length or radio frequency assigned by the Federal Communications Commission for use by any police or other person, communicate such message or communication to any other person, or directly or indirectly use the information so obtained for personal gain. (Ord. 92-19 § 202, 1992)

 

10.08.160 Applicability to both public and private streets.
     The duties and powers granted within this chapter shall apply to all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares and curbs, regardless of whether dedicated or open to public use. (Ord. 2002-05 § 1, 2002)

 

10.08.170 Administrative fee—American Canyon police and department of parking and traffic.
     A.    A fee to reimburse the city of American Canyon for costs incurred in the administration of the procedures for removing vehicles shall be charged by the police department to the owner of a vehicle removed pursuant to Section 22651(h), 22651(p), 22655.5 or 22850.5 of the California Vehicle Code. Such charges collected for the removal or storage of vehicles shall not be subject to the reimbursement provisions of Section 10.08.190 of this chapter.

     B.     California Vehicle Code Section 14602.6 (a)(1) authorizes impoundment for up to thirty days.

     C.     The chief of police shall propose the fees authorized by subsection A. The fee shall not go into effect until approved, by resolution, by the city council. The fees shall not exceed an amount that covers the actual costs incurred by the city in the removal, impoundment, storage, release and administrative confirmation of such actions for the involved vehicle.

     D.    The chief of police, with the approval of the city council, is authorized to adopt such rules, regulations and procedures as they determine are necessary for the department to impose, collect and administer the fee imposed by this section. (Ord. 2007-02 § 1, 2007)

 

10.08.180 Traffic offender fund.
     A.    Establishment of Fund. There is established a special fund for the purpose of receiving and expending fees collected for the impoundment of a vehicle pursuant to Section 10.08.170. The special fund shall be known and designated as the traffic offender fund.

     B.     Expenditure of Moneys. The appropriation of all moneys in the traffic offender fund (“fund”) shall be made exclusively for the purposes of the traffic offender program. The traffic offender program shall include the enforcement of, education for, and prosecution of a suspended or revoked driving privilege, unlicensed driver, and persons driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs. Expenditures shall include, but not be limited to, purchase of equipment, contractual services, material and supplies, and any other technology necessary to prosecute the case, and personnel costs, including salary and benefits for additional law enforcement patrol staffing within the city limits, specifically provided by the program. The administration of the fund shall conform to the provisions of the charter, annual appropriation ordinance, and the procurement procedures as prescribed by the controller and the purchaser.

     C.     Accumulation of Moneys in Fund. The balance remaining in the traffic offender fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be deemed to have been provided for a specific purpose and shall be carried forward and accumulated in the fund for the purposes recited herein. (Ord. 2007-02 § 1, 2007)

 

10.08.190 Reimbursement for tow on vehicles—Conditions therefore.
     A.    Except as provided in this code, fees, charges or costs imposed for the towing or storage of vehicles may be reimbursed to the owner or person in lawful possession of the vehicle if the fees, charges or costs were incurred:

     1.     Because the subject vehicle was towed and stored at the order of the American Canyon police department to examine the vehicle for evidence of a crime;

     2.     Because the subject vehicle was towed and stored by the order of the police department and the towing or storage was not authorized by any of the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state of California;

     3.     Because officers, agent or employees of the police department were negligent in reporting, filing, or recording the circumstances of the towing and storage of the vehicle;

     4.     Because officers, agents or employees of the police department were negligent in reporting a vehicle as subject to towing or storage or ordering a vehicle towed or stored when, in fact, such a vehicle was not subject to towing and storage; or

 

     5.     Because a vehicle was towed or stored by order of the American Canyon police department for removal of components of the vehicle, which components were placed on the vehicle in violation of Section 10751 of the Vehicle Code.

     B.     No person shall be reimbursed for tow and storage charges collected pursuant to any other section of the American Canyon vehicles and traffic code.

     C.     Pursuant to the provisions of the American Canyon vehicles and traffic code, indigent owners of vehicles and victims of auto theft shall be exempt from paying fees, charges, or costs imposed for the towing and storage of the vehicle, except no person shall be exempt from tow and storage charges pursuant to Sections 10.08.170 and 10.08.180 of this chapter. (Ord. 2007-02 § 2, 2007)

Chapter 10.12 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10.12.010 Authority to install traffic control devices.
     A.    The traffic engineer shall have the exclusive power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required under the traffic regulations of this city to make effective the provisions of the regulations.

     B.     Whenever the Vehicle Code of this state requires, for the effectiveness of any provision thereof, that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the traffic engineer is authorized to install the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.

     C.     The traffic engineer may also place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in the traffic regulations of this city or as may be hereafter determined by the legislative body of this code. (Ord. 92-19 § 60, 1992)

 

10.12.020 When traffic control devices required for enforcement purposes.
     No provisions of the Vehicle Code or of this code for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 92-19 § 61, 1992)

 

10.12.030 Obedience to traffic control devices.
     The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control devices applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic regulations of this city unless otherwise directed by a police officer subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls. (Ord. 92-19 § 62, 1992)

 

10.12.040 Installation of traffic signals.
     A.    Official traffic signals shall be installed and maintained at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.

     B.     The traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required to resort to field observation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Maintenance Manual issued by the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). (Ord. 92-19 § 63, 1992)

 

10.12.050 Lane markings.
     The traffic engineer is authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway. When authorized signs have been placed designating off-center traffic lanes, no person shall disobey the instructions given by such signs. (Ord. 92-19 § 64, 1992)

 

10.12.060 Authority to remove, relocate or discontinue traffic control devices.
     The traffic engineer is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by state law or this code whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain. (Ord. 92-19 § 65, 1992)

 

10.12.070 Traffic control devices—Hours of operation.
     The traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this code. (Ord. 92-19 § 66, 1992)

 

10.12.080 Unauthorized painting of curbs.
     It shall be unlawful for any person, without authority from the city to place or maintain paint or other material upon any curb in the city in a manner which purports to be, or is, an imitation of or resembles official indication of parking regulations. (Ord. 92-19 § 67, 1992)

 

10.12.090 Traffic engineer to erect stop signs.
     Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the traffic engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:

 

        A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in Section 21355 of the Vehicle Code.

(Ord. 94-01 § 9, 1994; Ord. 92-19 § 90, 1992)

 

10.12.100 Stop at through street or stop sign.
     A.    Those streets and parts of streets described in such resolution, and those streets and parts of streets heretofore designated and signed by this city as through streets until other designations are made, are declared to be through streets for purposes of this section.

     B.     The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections have been heretofore designated and signed by this city until other designations are made or as may be hereafter described in such resolution.

     C.     The provisions of this section shall also apply at those railroad grade crossings as such railroad grade crossings have been heretofore designated and signed by this city until other designations are made or as may be hereafter described in such resolution.

     D.    When stop signs are erected, as herein provided, at the entrance to any intersection or at any railroad grade crossing every driver of a vehicle shall stop, as required by the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 92-19 § 91, 1992)

Chapter 10.16 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.16.010 Authority to place and obedience to turning markers.
     A.    The traffic engineer is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the Traffic Engineer is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left turns, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or this code.

     B.     When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. (Ord. 92-19 § 70, 1992)

 

10.16.020 Authority to place restricted turn.
     The traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 92-19 § 71, 1992)

 

10.16.030 Obedience to no-turn signs.
     Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Ord. 92-19 § 72, 1992)

 

10.16.040 Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal.
     The traffic engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction of any such sign. (Ord. 92-19 § 73, 1992)

Chapter 10.20 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10.20.010 Traffic regulations in parks.
     It is unlawful for any person to drive or ride within the boundaries of any public park in the city at a rate of speed exceeding five miles per hour, or for any person to ride or drive within the limits of the parks other than upon the avenues and roads provided therefore. (Ord. 92-19 § 100, 1992)

 

10.20.020 Driving through funeral processions.
     No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. (Ord. 92-19 § 101, 1992)

 

10.20.030 Clinging to moving vehicles.
     Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, skate board, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or him/herself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (Ord. 92-19 § 102, 1992)

 

10.20.040 Vehicles shall not be driven on the sidewalk.
     The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or any parkway except at a permanent or temporary driveway. (Ord. 92-19 § 103, 1992)

 

10.20.050 New pavement.
     No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a barrier or sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 92-19 § 104, 1992)

 

10.20.060 Limited access.
     No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access highway except at such entrances and exits as are established by or with the consent of public authority. (Ord. 92-19 § 105, 1992)

 

10.20.070 Vehicles on private property.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon any private property without the express permission of the owner thereof. (Ord. 92-19 § 106, 1992)

 

10.20.080 Left turns between intersections.
     It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle to the left, whether for the purpose of entering or leaving. a driveway or otherwise, at any place between the intersections and during the times designated by the traffic engineer when such places are appropriately signed or marked. (Ord. 92-19 § 107, 1992)

 

10.20.090 Parking on grades.
     It is unlawful for any person driving, or in control of, or in charge of, a motor vehicle to permit it to stand on any highway unattended when upon any grade exceeding three percent within any business or residence district without blocking the wheels of said vehicles by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 92-19 § 108, 1992)

 

10.20.100 Intoxicated persons in or about vehicles.
     It is unlawful for any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs to be in or about any vehicle to which he has the right or access or control while such vehicle is in or upon any street or any other public place in the city, unless the same is under the immediate control or operation of a person not under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs. (Ord. 92-19 § 109, 1992)

 

10.20.110 Obedience to barriers and signs.
     No person, public utility or any department of this city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type first approved by the traffic engineer. It is unlawful for any person to disobey the instructions of any barrier or sign placed in any street by any public utility or by any department of this city, provided the type of barrier or sign so erected has been first approved by the traffic engineer. (Ord. 92-19 § 110, 1994)

 

10.20.120 Stop when traffic obstructed.
     No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 92-19 § 111, 1992)

 

10.20.130 Decrease of maximum speed limit between districts.
     Whenever by resolution it is determined on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the maximum speed limit of fifty-five miles per hour is more than is reasonable or safe upon any portion of a street or highway other than a state highway for a distance of not exceeding two thousand feet in length between districts, business or residential, the prima facie speed limit not less than twenty-five miles per hour, upon that portion shall be as determined in the resolution, and shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street or highway. (Ord. 9219 § 112, 1992)

 

10.20.140 Regulations of traffic on freeways.
     No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor driven cycle, or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a freeway or limited access highway, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so established except in space set aside for the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Ord. 92-19 § 113, 1992)

Chapter 10.24 PEDESTRIANS
10.24.010 Traffic engineer to establish crosswalks.
     A.    The traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at the intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:

     Crosswalks shall be established and maintained where the traffic engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.

     B.     Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet in length. Elsewhere not more than one additional crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block. (Ord. 92-19 § 140, 1992)

 

10.24.020 When pedestrians must use crosswalks.
     No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district, (established as State Route 29). (Ord. 92-19 § 141, 1992)

 

10.24.030 Crossing at right angles.
     No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk. (Ord. 92-19 § 142, 1992)

 

10.24.040 Standing in roadways.
     No person shall stand in any roadway other than a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This provisions shall not apply to any public officer or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty. (Ord. 92-19 § 143, 1992)

 

10.24.050 Pedestrian signals.
     Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the word “walk” or exhibiting the color red are in place, the term and color shall indicate and apply to pedestrians as follows:

     A.    “Walk.” Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.

     B.     “Red.” No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the color red is showing. (Ord. 92-19 § 144, 1992)

Chapter 10.28 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
10.28.010 Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets.
     A.    Whenever the council of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which by any commercial vehicle is prohibited, the traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets so designated.

     B.     Those streets and parts of streets so marked are declared to be streets the use of which by any commercial vehicle is prohibited. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. (Ord. 92-19 § 188, 1992)

 

10.28.020 Heavy loads on streets in restricted districts.
     A.    When the streets in question are appropriately sign-posted no vehicle of any kind or nature whatsoever (other than passenger buses) shall be operated or moved upon or over any of the streets hereinafter in Section 10.28.030 designated without a permit as provided in this section, when the total weight of vehicle and load exceeds four and one-half tons.

     B.     This section shall not apply to, and shall not prohibit any commercial vehicle as defined by the California Vehicle Code having a loaded weight in excess of the limit prescribed in this chapter from using any such streets by direct route from a street the use of which is not restricted as to such vehicles for the purpose of delivering or loading for transportation goods, warns or merchandise without such permit.

     C.     The traffic engineer may, by written permit, authorize the operation of a vehicle or vehicles upon any of the streets hereinafter in Section 10.28.030 set forth, when the total weight of such vehicle or vehicles exceeds the maximum weight prescribed in this section, if, in the judgment of the traffic engineer, streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional weight for a limited operation. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the traffic engineer, may, in his discretion, require. (Ord. 92-19 § 189, 1992)

 

10.28.030 Restricted streets.
     The streets referred to in Section 10.28.020 are described as follows:

     (Not determined upon initial enactment of the traffic code.) (Ord. 92-19 § 190, 1992)

 

10.28.040 Vehicles exceeding four and one-half tons prohibited use of certain streets.
     When such streets are appropriately sign-posted, the use of the hereinafter described portions of the hereinafter named streets or highways by any motor vehicle (other than passenger buses) when the total weight of the vehicle and loads exceeds four and one-half tons, except for the purpose of loading and unloading thereon, is prohibited, between the hours of eleven p.m. and six a.m.

     The streets and portions thereof referred to in subsection A of this section are:

     (Not determined upon initial enactment of the traffic code.) (Ord. 92-19 § 191, 1992)

Chapter 10.32 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.32.010 Application of regulations.
     A.    The provisions of this code prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.

     B.     The provisions of this code imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the State Vehicle Code, or the regulations of this city, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Ord. 92-19 § 150, 1992)

 

10.32.020 Standing in parkways prohibited.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 92-19 § 151, 1992)

 

10.32.030 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
     A.    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours.

     B.     In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two hours, any officer of the police department or any regularly employed and salaried civilian employee of the city who is engaged in the direction of traffic or enforcement of parking regulations when designated by the chief of police, may remove said vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of Sections 22850 through 22854 inclusive of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 94-01 § 10, 1994; Ord. 92-19 § 152, 1992)

 

10.32.040 Parking parallel with curb.
     A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such parking, standing or stopping.

     B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are place permitting such standing or parking.

     C.     The traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

     D.    Whenever the traffic engineer has caused lines or markings painted or otherwise designated upon the parkway, curb, sidewalk, roadway, driveway or street in such a manner as to identify by the markings individual parking spaces, it shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle across any such line or marking or in any position other than within the parking area so designated by the markings. (Ord. 92-19 § 154, 1992)

 

10.32.050 Signs or markings indicating angle parking.
     A.    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof upon which angle parking shall be permitted, the traffic engineer shall mark or sign such street, indicating the angle at which vehicles shall be parked.

     B.     When signs or markings are in place indicating angle parking as herein provided, no person shall park or stand a vehicle at other than the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. (Ord. 92-19 § 155, 1992)

 

10.32.060 Parking adjacent to schools.
     A.    The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

     B.     When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 92-19 § 157, 1992)

 

10.32.070 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
     A.    The traffic engineer is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon the side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet.

     B.     When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 92-19 § 158, 1992)

 

10.32.080 Stopping or parking prohibited—Signs required.
     The traffic engineer may appropriately sign or mark the following places and when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of the places:

     A.    At any place within twenty feet of an intersection in the business district except that a bus may stop in a designated bus stop.

     B.     Within twenty feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device.

     C.     At any place where the traffic engineer determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate unusual traffic hazard. (Ord. 92-19 § 159, 1992)

 

10.32.090 Emergency parking signs.
     A.    Whenever the traffic engineer shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings of functions, or for other reasons, the traffic engineer shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the traffic engineer shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the traffic engineer shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

     B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 92-19 § 160, 1992)

 

10.32.100 Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle disabled.
     A.    Every motor truck having an unladen weight of six thousand pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight, when operated upon any street or highway during the time specified in Section 280 of the Vehicle Code shall be equipped with and carry at least three red emergency reflectors which reflector shall be of a type approved by the Department of Highway Patrol.

     B.     When any vehicle above mentioned, or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residence district within the city, and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred feet during any time mentioned in Section 280 of the Vehicle Code, the warning signals of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed in the manner set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 25300, subsections (b) through (d), inclusive, and shall be displayed continuously during the times mentioned in Vehicle Code Section 280 while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway. (Ord. 94-01 § 11, 1994; Ord. 92-19 § 161, 1992)

 

10.32.110 Parking commercial vehicles in residential districts.
     A.    No person shall park any commercial vehicle, as defined in Section 22507.5 of the Vehicle Code more than five hours in any residence district, or in front of any apartment building, motel, hotel or any other single or multiple dwelling, except:

     1.     While loading or unloading property and time in addition to such five-hour period is necessary to complete such work;

     2.     When such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked and time in addition to such five-hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such service.

     B.     No person shall park a commercial vehicle on any street or portion thereof if such parking would, in the opinion of the traffic engineer, interfere with the reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any person owning or occupying any nearby residence, apartment building, motel, hotel or any other single or multiple dwelling, and if such street or portion thereof has been posted with signs giving notice of such parking limitation. (Ord. 92-19 § 162, 1992)

 

10.32.120 Parking—Commercial vehicles in certain areas designated by resolution.
     No person shall park any truck, tractor, trailer, or other commercial vehicle of any kind, whose weight carrying capacity is one ton or more, for a period exceeding five hours, on any public street in any area of the city which, by resolution, the city council has designated as one to which such time limitation is applicable, and one which has been posted with signs giving notice of such parking limitation, except:

     A.    While loading or unloading property and time in addition to such five-hour period is necessary to complete such work; or

     B.     When parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked and time in addition to such five-hour period is reasonably necessary to complete such. (Ord. 92-19 § 162.1, 1992)

 

10.32.130 Ignition keys.
     No person shall leave a motor vehicle, except a commercial vehicle, unattended on any street, alley, used car lot, or unattended parking lot without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the ignition key therefrom. Provided, however, that any violation of these provisions shall not mitigate the offense of stealing such motor vehicle nor shall such violation be used to effect a recovery in any civil action for theft of such motor vehicle, or the insurance thereon, or have any other bearing on any civil action. (Ord. 92-19 § 163, 1992)

 

10.32.140 Authority to establish loading zones.
     A.    The traffic engineer is authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger zones as follows:

     1.     At any place in the business district;

     2.     Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.

     B.     In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zones.

     C.     Loading zones shall be indicated by a yellow paint line upon the top of all curbs in such zones.

     D.    Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by a white line painted upon the top of all curbs in such zones. (Ord. 92-19 § 170, 1992)

 

10.32.150 Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations.
     A.    The traffic engineer is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this code, to place, and when required in this chapter shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this chapter.

     1.     “Red” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, as except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

     2.     “Yellow” means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except and Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, nor the loading or unloading of materials more than thirty minutes.

     3.     “White” means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except holidays and except as follows:

     When such zone is in front of a theater or hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater, hall or place is closed and then a vehicle may park in the white zone for no longer than one hour.

     4.     “Green” means no standing or parking for longer than twelve minutes at any time between eight a.m. and six a.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays.

     5.     “Blue” means no stopping, standing or parking except for physically handicapped persons whose vehicles display either one of the distinguishing license plates issued to disabled persons pursuant to California Vehicle Code, Section 22511.5 or to disabled veterans, as specified in California Vehicle Code Section 9105.

     B.     Where curb markings have been heretofore placed by authority of this city and when the traffic engineer as authorized under this code, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 92-19 § 171, 1992)

 

10.32.160 Additional authority to establish loading zones.
     A.    In addition to the provisions of Section 10.32.150 and in order to provide additional loading zones at those hours when they may be needed, the traffic engineer is authorized and directed:

     1.     To determine and designate loading zones for the loading and unloading of passengers or materials; and

     2.     To mark such loading zones by appropriate signs which shall set forth the hours during which a sign-posted area is designated as a loading zone.

     B.     When appropriate signs are in place, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to a curb area posted as a loading zone except for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as permitted in Section 10.32.180 and except on Sundays and holidays. (Ord. 92-19 § 171.1, 1992)

 

10.32.170 Curb markings to indicate driveways.
     Upon the request of the owner or occupant, or the agent of either, of the premises being served by a driveway, or driveways, the traffic engineer shall cause to be painted in red, the curbs on each side of said driveway, or driveways, for a distance at least eighteen linear inches. (Ord. 92-19 § 171.2, 1992)

 

10.32.180 Effect of permission to load or unload.
     A.    Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event, more than thirty minutes.

     B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States Mail.

     C.     Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes.

     D.    Within the total time limits specified in this section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading and unloading, but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted. (Ord. 92-19 § 172, 1992)

 

10.32.190 Standing for loading or unloading only.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as is permitted in Section 10.32.180. (Ord. 92-19 § 173, 1992)

 

10.32.200 Standing in passenger loading zone.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 17.32.180. (Ord. 92-19 § 174, 1992)

 

10.32.210 Standing in any alley.
     No person shall stop stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 92-19 § 175, 1992)

 

10.32.220 Bus zones to be established.
     A.    The traffic engineer is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth in this section.

     B.     The word “bus” as used in this section shall mean any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley coach, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.

     C.     No bus zone shall exceed sixty feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the traffic engineer showing the necessity therefor, the traffic engineer may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of any one city block.

     D.    Bus zones shall be indicated by painting the curb red or by the erection of appropriate signs or both.

     E.     No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone. (Ord. 92-19 § 176, 1992)

 

10.32.230 Parking adjacent to curb.
     When stopping to load or unload passengers it shall be unlawful for the operator of a bus, as defined in Section 10.32.220, to stop or park the bus at any place other than at a bus zone established pursuant to Section 10.32.220, and every such bus stopping or parking upon a street in such a bus zone where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such bus parallel with and within eighteen inches of the right-hand curb. (Ord. 92-19 § 176.1, 1992)

 

10.32.240 One-hour parking.
     When heretofore or hereafter provided by resolution, and appropriate signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the hours of eight am. and six p.m. of any day, except holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour on any street or any part of any street so indicated. (Ord. 92-19 § 180, 1992)

 

10.32.250 Two-hour parking.
     When heretofore or hereafter provided by resolution and appropriate signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours on any street or any part of any street so indicated. (Ord. 92-19 § 181, 1992)

 

10.32.260 Parking restrictions on municipal lots or areas.
     When provided by resolution, and appropriate signs are in place and visible giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the hours indicated in said resolution on any municipal parking lot or area, or part thereof, as so designated in said resolution; provided that notwithstanding any other provision of this code the council may by resolution provide for the issuance of special parking permits to authorize parking upon any municipal parking lot or area for the period of time and subject to the conditions specified therefor, and the fee to be charged for the permit. (Ord. 92-19 § 181.1, 1992)

 

10.32.270 Citations and arrests.
     Any police officer is authorized and empowered to issue citations to any person violating any of the provisions of this code or other ordinances by the police department of the city. (Ord. 92-19 § 181.2, 1992)

 

10.32.280 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours.
     When heretofore or hereafter provided by resolution, and appropriate signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle between the hours indicated of any day, except holidays, on any street or any part of any street so indicated. (Ord. 92-19 § 182, 1992)

 

10.32.290 Parking prohibited at all times.
     When heretofore or hereafter provided by resolution, and appropriate signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall park any vehicle at any time on any street or part of any street so indicated. (Ord. 92-19 § 183, 1992)

 

10.32.300 Parking prohibited between certain hours.
     No person shall park any vehicle between certain hours of three a.m. and six a.m. of any day on any street or part of any street hereafter designated by resolution of the city and by appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 92-19 § 183.1, 1992)

Chapter 10.36 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
10.36.010 Findings and declarations.
     In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the State Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the council makes the following findings and declarations:

     The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     The council also finds and declares that constructive leisure pursuits by residents of the city of American Canyon is most important. This chapter is intended to encourage responsible participation in the hobby of collecting, preserving, restoring, and maintaining motor vehicles of historic and special interest, which contributes to the enjoyment of citizens and the preservation of California memorabilia.

     This chapter is the specific standard to control and regulate abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 9.04 of this title. (Ord. 99-11 § 1, 1999; Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Collector” means the owner of one or more historic vehicles or special interest vehicles, as defied in this section, who collects, purchases, acquires, or disposes of such vehicles, or parts thereof, for his or her own use, in order to preserve, restore, and maintain such vehicles for hobby or historic purposes.

     “Dismantled vehicle” means a vehicle that has had, intentionally or unintentionally, one or more critical parts removed for forty-five days or more. A critical part is any part that is needed to safely operate the vehicle, including but not limited to a wheel or tire, windshield, door, side quarter panel, trunk, hood, roof, steering wheel, motor or transmission. A vehicle can be “dismantled” whether or not it is in an inoperative condition.

     “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes streets.

     “Historic vehicle” means any vehicle which is collected, restored, maintained and operated by a collector or hobbyist primarily for historical exhibition or similar purposes and which is either:

     1.     A motor vehicle with an engine of sixteen or more cylinders manufactured prior to 1965;

     2.     A motor vehicle manufactured in the year 1922 or prior thereto;

     3.     A vehicle which was manufactured after 1922, is at least twenty-five years old, and is of historic interest;

     4.     A vehicle described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) which is operated or moved over the highway primarily for the purpose of historical exhibition or other similar purposes shall, upon application in the manner and at the time prescribed by the state Department of Motor Vehicles, be issued special identification plates for the vehicle by the state Department of Motor Vehicles.

     “Inoperative vehicle” means:

     1.     Any vehicle in such condition, as a result of mechanical and/or structural defects, however caused, that it cannot be legally or actually driven under its own power except for any vehicle which is being repaired, within a reasonable period of time; or

     2.     Any vehicle that has not been, for more than six months, validly registered for operation or use on the highways in this state as required under the provisions of Division 3 (commencing at Section 4000 et seq.) of the state Vehicle Code, including any “nonoperated vehicle” as defined in this section.

     “Motor vehicle” means any vehicle which is self-propelled, but, does not include a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tricycle, or motorized quadricycle when operated by a person, who, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian.

     “Non-operated vehicle” means any vehicle for the which the owner of the vehicle has (1) filed a certification under penalty of perjury that the vehicle will not be operated, moved or left standing on any highway during the subsequent registration year without the owner first making application for registration of the vehicle, including full payment of all fees, and (2) obtained a certificate of nonoperation from the state Department of Motor Vehicles.

     For purposes of this subsection, “vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or driven upon a highway having intact and assembled its major component parts including, but not limited to, the frame or chassis, cowl, and floor pan or, in the case of a trailer, the frame and wheels or, in the case of a motorcycle, the frame, front fork, and engine. For purposes of this section, “vehicle” does not include a device moved exclusively by human power, a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or a motorized wheelchair.

     “Nonrepairable vehicle” means a vehicle of a type otherwise subject to registration that meets the criteria specified in subdivisions (1), (2) or (3). The vehicle shall be issued a nonrepairable vehicle certificate by the state Department of Motor Vehicles and shall not be titled or registered.

     1.     A nonrepairable vehicle is a vehicle that has no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap metal, and which the owner irreversibly designates solely as a source of parts or scrap metal.

     2.     A nonrepairable vehicle is a completely stripped vehicle (a surgical strip) recovered from theft, missing all of the bolt on sheet metal body panels, all of the doors and hatches, substantially all of the interior components, and substantially all of the grill and light assemblies, or that the owner designates has little or no resale value other than its worth as a source of scrap metal, or as a source of a vehicle identification number that could be used illegally.

     3.     A nonrepairable vehicle is a completely burned vehicle (burned hulk) that has been burned to the extent that there are no more usable or repairable body or interior components, tires and wheels, or drive train components, and which the owner irreversibly designates as having little or no resale value other than its worth as scrap metal or as a source of vehicle identification numbers that could be used illegally.

     “Nonrepairable vehicle certificate” means a vehicle ownership document issued to the owner of a nonrepairable vehicle by the state Department of Motor Vehicles. Ownership of the vehicle may only be transferred two times on a nonrepairable vehicle certificate. A vehicle for which a nonrepairable vehicle certificate has been issued may not be titled or registered for use on the roads or highways of California. A nonrepairable vehicle certificate shall be conspicuously labeled with the word “nonrepairable” across the front.

     “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

     “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered (and legal) owner of record.

     “Parts car” means any motor vehicle which is owned by a collector to furnish parts for restoration or maintenance of a special interest vehicle, a historic vehicle, or street rod vehicle, thus enabling the collector to preserve, restore, and maintain a special interest vehicle, or a historic vehicle, or street rod vehicle, for which the state Department of Motor Vehicles has issued special plates pursuant to the state Vehicle Code.

     “Special interest vehicle” means a vehicle of any age which is unaltered from the manufacturer’s original specifications and, because of its significance, such as an out-of-production vehicle, or a model of less than two thousand (2,000) sold in the state in any model year, is being collected, preserved, restored, or maintained by a collector as a leisure pursuit.

     “Storage” means the placement of a vehicle or other objects in a location for preservation or future use.

     “Street rod vehicle” means any motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, manufactured in or prior to 1948 which has been individually modified in its body style or design, including through the use of nonoriginal or reproduction components, and which may include additional modifications to other components, including, but not limited to, the engine, drive train, suspension, and brakes in a manner that does not adversely affect its safe performance as a motor vehicle or render it unlawful for highway use.

     “Total loss salvage vehicle” means a vehicle, other than a nonrepairable vehicle, of a type subject to registration that has been wrecked, destroyed, or damaged, to such an extent that the owner, leasing company, financial institution or the insurance company that insured the vehicle considers it uneconomical to repair by or for the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the event resulting in damage.

     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.030 Exceptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to:

     A.    A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building or a carport or in a backyard which is completely fenced or in which the vehicle is reasonably screened from view by trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means, so that the vehicle is not visible from the highway or other public or private property, and is not a health or safety hazard.

     B.     A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner or private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

     C.     One or more historic vehicles, special interest vehicles, parts vehicles, or street rod vehicles, whether currently licensed or unlicensed, operable or inoperable, maintained by a collector in outdoor storage on private property, if every such vehicle and outdoor storage area is maintained in such a manner as not to constitute a health hazard, and is located away from public view, or screened from ordinary public view, by means of a suitable fence, trees, shrubbery, opaque covering, or other appropriate means, so long as the following requirements are met:

     1.     Although registration may not be required by the state Department of Motor Vehicles, vehicles stored in any backyard area must have either a “nonrepairable vehicle certificate,” “nonoperational vehicle certificate” or any other applicable certificate required by the state Department of Motor Vehicles to excuse nonregistration of the vehicle, before such storage of an unregistered vehicle shall occur.

 

     2.     Since nonrepairable vehicle certificate status allows for the vehicle in question to be exempt from being titled or registered, a time limit of six months will be allowed for the owner of said vehicle to remove all parts desired and dispose of remaining portion of the vehicle.

     3.     A “total loss salvage vehicle” must be registered with the state Department of Motor Vehicles, but even with registration and due to the nature of the vehicle’s overall condition, the owner must make a financial commitment to its complete repair and restoration to operational status and repair work must be substantially in progress by the sixth month after the vehicle is first stored on private property, or the vehicle shall be subject to abatement by the city pursuant to this chapter.

     4.     If all of the requirements of subsection (C) of this section are met, any vehicle that is registered as nonoperational may remain in the backyard on private property for an unlimited period of time, as long as it is stored on an all-weather surface as defined by the city.

     5.     Any legally registered and fully operational vehicle may remain in either the front, side or backyard storage areas as long as they are on an all-weather surface, and all other requirements of this chapter and this code are met.

     6.     Any inoperative vehicle shall not be stored in the front yard of any private property for more than thirty days unless otherwise authorized by the city. Storage in any private front yard is restricted to fully operable and legally registered vehicles.

     7.     Once an “inoperable vehicle” has been in the front yard area of a private property for more than thirty days without being fully repaired for legal use on state highways, it is subject to abatement proceedings pursuant to this chapter. The owner of the vehicle shall then have the following options:

     a.     To immediately take the vehicle to a repair facility for the completion of final repairs;

     b.     To remove the vehicle to a proper storage area other than the front yard area, which meets the requirements of this chapter;

     c.     If an inoperative vehicle is in a condition which it can legally or actually be driven under its own power on the highways of this state, and is classified as “inoperative” pursuant to Section 10.36.010 of this chapter solely because it is unregistered, to promptly register the vehicle for use on the highways of this state as required under the provisions of Division 3 (commencing at Section 4000 et seq.) of the state Vehicle Code;

     d.     To permit the abatement process to proceed without objection, or to appeal the abatement process, pursuant to Sections 10.36.080 and 10.36.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-07 § 1, 2000; Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.040 Restrictions on storage of vehicles.
     This chapter is intended to allow private citizens to maintain, store, and ultimately restore or repair their private vehicles needed for normal personal use, whether for recreation, pleasure, collection, or business, with the following restrictions:

     A.    No person shall park, maintain, or store an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on public or private property, including highways, except as otherwise authorized by this chapter or the state Vehicle Code.

     B.     No property owner shall convert his property into a salvage yard, vehicle repair facility, or any other business venture without first obtaining any required permits, business licenses, and/or applicable authorization from the city.

     C.     No person shall store business-related inventory, materials, vehicles, motor vehicles, or heavy equipment, on private residential property. Any business-related vehicles, parts, equipment, or materials found on private residential property in connection with an unauthorized business venture shall be subject to abatement or other legal proceedings as authorized by law.

     D.    No vehicles, parts, or other materials, which belong to persons other than the owner or occupant of the property, shall be stored on private residential property. All commercial storage facilities must first be authorized by the city before such storage is allowed.

     E.     No vehicles stored on private property shall be used for the storage of garbage or refuse, or as living quarters, unless otherwise authorized by the city. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.050 Supplemental legislation.
     This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.060 Officer designated—Authority to enter private property.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the vehicle abatement officer as designated by the city manager. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon property with the written permission of the owner or resident of the property or upon obtaining an inspection warrant pursuant to Section 1822.50 et seq., of the state Code of Civil Procedure, or other necessary judicial authorization, to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.070 Authority of private contractor.
     When the council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons to remove vehicles pursuant to this chapter, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. When legally required, the contractor shall obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to state Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.050 et seq., or other appropriate judicial authorization before entering the property. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.080 Authority to abate and remove.
     Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, which is not lawfully parked or stored pursuant to Sections 10.36.030 and 10.36.040 of this chapter, the vehicle abatement officer shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures described herein. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.090 Notice of intention to abate and remove—Form.
     A.    A fifteen-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance, shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of the vehicle on record, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.

 

(Name and address of owner of the land)

 

        As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Chapter 10.36 of the American Canyon Municipal Code, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to_________, license number _________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 10.36 of the American Canyon Municipal Code.

        You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within fifteen (15) days from the date of the mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do so, the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, will be assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.

 

        As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing, and if such request is not received by the City Clerk of the City of American Canyon within such 15-day period, the designated officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 15-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

 

Notice Mailed: ________/S/___________

             (Date) (Locally designated officer)

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND
REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE
VEHICLE, OR PARTS THEREOF, AS A
PUBLIC NUISANCE.

 

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle notice should be given to both if different).

        As last registered and legal owner of record of (description of vehicle - make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 10.36 of the American Canyon Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 10.36 of the American Canyon Municipal Code.

 

        You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) within fifteen (15) days from the mailing of this notice. As registered and legal owner of record of said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing of this Notice of Intention request a public hearing and, if such request is not received by the City Clerk of the City of American Canyon within such fifteen (15) day period, the designated officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or parts of vehicle) without a hearing.

 

Notice Mailed: _______/S/____________

             (Date) (Locally designated officer)

 

     B.     A copy of the notice referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall also be posted on the vehicle proposed to be abated and on the property where the vehicle is located.

     C.     A notice of intention to abate shall not be required if either of the following exist:

     1.     The property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal of the vehicle and waiving further interest in the vehicle or parts thereof; or

     2.     All of the following conditions are satisfied:

     a.     The vehicle or part thereof is inoperable due to the absence of a motor, transmission, or wheels and is incapable of being towed,

     b.     The vehicle or part thereof is valued at less than three hundred dollars by the police chief of the city or designee,

     c.     The police chief or designee has determined that the vehicle or part thereof is a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to the public health and safety,

     d.     The property owner and record owner of the vehicle have signed a release authorizing the removal of the vehicle and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof, or

     e.     The vehicle is located upon a parcel that is either zoned for agricultural use or is not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units,

     f.      If the vehicle or parts thereof are not claimed and removed from the scrapyard, auto dismantler’s yard, or public disposal area within twelve days after the notice to dispose of vehicle is mailed by the city, final disposition may be proceed;

     3.     If the vehicle is valued at less than three hundred dollars by the city’s police chief or designee, and all of the requirements set forth in subsection (C)(2) of this section are not met, the vehicle may be disposed of pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sections 22851.2 through 22851.10 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.100 Public hearing—Procedure—Action.
     A.    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city manager or his or her designee, who shall hear all facts and testimony deemed pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The city shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle may appear in person at the hearing or present sworn written statements in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial.

     B.     The city may impose such conditions and take such other actions as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or part thereof if in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city manager or designated hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, may order the same removed from the property and disposed of as a public nuisance, in the manner authorized by law and as provided in this chapter. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and a correct identification number and license of the vehicle, if available at the site. Written notice of the decision and a copy of the order shall be given to the property owner and the owner of the vehicle by certified mail within ten days of the city manager’s decision.

     C.     If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner.

     D.    If an interested party makes a written presentation to the city manager or the designated hearing officer, but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision by mail within ten days of the city’s decision.

     E.     An interested party may appeal the order of the city manager or the designated hearing officer to the city council or the city planning commission or a panel comprised of three residents of the city as designated annually by the city council by filing a written request for appeal within the city clerk. A hearing before the appropriate appellate body shall be held within thirty days of the filing of the appeal request preceded by a ten-day notice of the appeal hearing which shall be posted in the same manner and form as regular meetings of the city council. Upon conclusion of the hearing by the designated appellate body, a decision consistent with the provisions of this section shall be prepared and mailed as provided in this section. (Ord. 99-11 § 2, 1999; Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.110 Vehicle disposal.
     Notice of the final order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance shall be mailed to the owner of the real property upon which the vehicle is located and to the record owner of the vehicle by the city manager or the designated hearing officer or the designated appellate body after conclusion of the hearing. After fifteen days from the date of the mailing of the notice of the final order, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal in the manner authorized by law to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plate or a historical vehicle license pursuant to Section 5004 of the state Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.120 Abatement of motor vehicles.
     Abatement of any motor vehicle registered or subject to registration with the state Department of Motor Vehicles shall be carried out and conform with the provisions of the state Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 97-08 § 2, 1998)

 

10.36.130 Recovery of abatement costs by city.
     A.    Cost Recovery Procedures.

     1.     The city may recover reasonable costs incurred in the abatement of motor vehicles, or parts of motor vehicles, pursuant to this chapter through the procedures set forth in this section, pursuant to state Vehicle Code Section 22660.

     2.     Such abatement costs may be made a personal debt of the vehicle owner or the owner of the property from which the vehicle was removed, or a special assessment against any real property owned by the vehicle owner or the property from which the vehicle was removed.

     B.     Report on Abatement Costs. The city manager or his or her designee shall keep a detailed itemized report of the expenses incurred by the city in the abatement of any vehicles pursuant to this chapter. Upon completion of the work, or as soon thereafter as may be practicable, the city manager shall file with the city clerk a report which specifies the address or location of the property from which the vehicle was removed, the license plate, or vehicle identification number for the vehicle, the year, make, model and color of the vehicle, the nature of the work performed in removing the vehicle, and the itemized and total cost of this work.

     C.     Notice of Hearing Before City Council. Upon receipt of the report of the city manager, the city clerk shall set a hearing on the report before the city council, on a date which is no less than ten and no more than sixty days after service of the report on the property owner and the vehicle owner. A notice which specifies the date, time and place of the hearing and the total amount of the expenses for the abatement of the vehicle, shall be served on the owner of the real property from which the vehicle was removed and the vehicle owner, if known, by certified mail. If the address of the owner of the vehicle is not known, the city shall post a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the property from which the vehicle or parts of a vehicle were removed and shall publish a copy of the notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least twice, no less then ten days before the hearing.

     D.    Hearing Before City Council. Unless otherwise continued for good cause, the city council shall hold the hearing at the date, time and place specified on the notice served on the vehicle owner and the property owner. At the hearing, the city manager shall present the report to the city council, and the vehicle owner and property owner shall have the right to present any objections to the report. The city manager, the vehicle owner, and the property owner shall have the right to be represented by counsel.

     E.     Decision of the City Council. At the conclusion of the hearing or within thirty days thereafter, the city council shall approve, reject or modify the city manager’s report on expenses incurred in the abatement of the vehicle and shall issue a written decision which specifies the amount and nature of the approved expenses incurred by the city that shall be recovered from the vehicle owner or property owner and that such expenses shall be made either a personal debt of the vehicle owner or property owner or a special assessment against any real property owned by the vehicle owner or the property from which the vehicle was removed. If the amount of any special assessment imposed exceeds five hundred dollars, the city council may provide in its decision that the special assessment shall be payable in not more than five equal annual installment payments. A copy of the city council’s decision shall be served on the vehicle owner and property owner through the procedure specified by state law for the service of a summons. The notice shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the county tax collector for unpaid assessments.

     F.     Recordation of Notices for Special Assessment. If the city council’s decision designates the amount of approved abatement expenses as a special assessment against real property owned by the vehicle owner or the property from which the vehicle was removed, the city manager shall cause a copy of all notices given to the property owner or vehicle owner, and the city council’s decision to be recorded at the office of the county recorder.

     G.    Status of Special Assessment for Vehicle Abatement Costs. The abatement costs approved by the city council shall immediately, upon recordation, constitute a special assessment lien against the property. Such special assessment lien shall be subordinate to any existing special assessment which exists on the same property, but shall be paramount to all other liens except for state, county and municipal taxes with which the special assessment lien shall be in parity.

     H.    Method for Collection of Special Assessment. The assessment shall be collected by the county tax collector at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall apply to this special assessment. However, if the real property on which the special assessment is placed has been transferred to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if the lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the special assessment becomes delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the property but instead shall be transferred to the unsecured tax roll for collection.

     I.      Sale of Property for Payment of Delinquent Special Assessment. The city may, subject to the requirements of state law, conduct a sale of vacant developed residential real property owned by the vehicle owner for which the payment of the special assessment is delinquent.

     J.      Delinquent Assessments. All special assessments imposed for the removal of any vehicle subject to this chapter which remain unpaid after thirty days from the date for the recordation on the assessment roll shall become delinquent and shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per year. The city may collect the debt through any legal means.

     K.    Council Decision to Make Abatement Costs a Personal Debt of Vehicle Owner or Property Owner. As an alternative to making the city’s abatement costs a special assessment on real property owned by the vehicle owner or property owner, the city council may designate that such approved abatement expenses shall be a personal debt of the vehicle owner or property owner which is payable within thirty days.

     L.     Delinquent Debts. If the vehicle owner or property owner fails to pay the entire amount due within this time, the debt shall become delinquent and may be collected by the city through any legal means. Interest shall accrue on the unpaid debt at the rate of ten percent per year.

     M.    Definition of Abatement Costs. For the purposes of this section, abatement costs shall include, but not be limited to, the city’s costs incurred in removing the vehicle from the property by its own personnel, or by contract with a third party, costs incurred in giving required notices to the property owner and the owner of the vehicle, enforcement costs, including but not limited to, inspections, communications with the property and vehicle owner, and legal costs incurred in any judicial, administrative or special proceeding to abate the vehicle, and costs for the obtaining of an inspection warrant or other judicial order which authorizes removal of the vehicle from the property. Attorneys’ fees may be awarded to any prevailing party in the action, but shall not in any case, exceed the reasonable amount of attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. The city may designate at the beginning of any judicial, administrative or special proceeding whether it will apply for an award of attorney’s fees to the prevailing party. (Ord. 99-11 § 3, 1999)

Chapter 10.40 VISION OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS
10.40.010 Obstructions at intersections prohibited.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no fence, hedge, shrub, wall, retaining wall, earthen bank, or other landscaping or screening which exceeds a height of three feet above the street-pavement grade shall be allowed along the property lines or their projection, which is equal to the sum of the building setbacks on each of the two intersecting streets, existing or legal, whichever is less, or, within the area subtended. (Ord. 92-19 § 220, 1992)

 

10.40.020 Exceptions.
     The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a permanent building or to trees which are trimmed to eliminate foliage for a distance of eight feet above the street-pavement grade. (Ord. 92-19 § 221, 1992)

 

10.40.030 Authority of traffic engineer.
     The traffic engineer of the city, upon ascertaining that a violation of the above provisions exists, shall give written notice of the violation to the owner of the property involved. Such notice shall be given in the same manner and with the same effect as provided in Section 1013 of the California Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 92-19 § 222, 1992)

 

10.40.040 Responsibility of owner.
     The property owner to whom the notice is given shall, within twenty days after the giving of notice by the Traffic Engineer, as provided in the preceding section, do whatever is necessary on his or her property to eliminate the violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-19 § 223, 1992)

 

10.40.050 Appeal procedure.
     The property owner to whom notice has been given, as hereinabove provided, may, within ten days after the giving of such notice, file with the traffic engineer a written notice of appeal. The city public safety committee shall have the power, in exceptional cases, where it is impractical or physically impossible to comply with the strict letter of this chapter, and in order to provide for reasonable interpretations thereof, to modify the requirements of this chapter, in such a manner that the public welfare is secured, and substantial justice done, nearly in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The determination and decision of the committee shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 92-19 § 224, 1992)

 

10.40.060 Nuisance.
     A condition which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The city is authorized to abate such nuisance by entering onto the property and removing the condition. (Ord. 92-19 § 225, 1992)

 

10.40.070 Cost of abatement a charge against the city—Collection of costs, unpaid costs of lien.
     A.    Costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a condition which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a proper charge against the city treasury and paid therefrom. The traffic engineer shall give the owner of the property upon which the condition exists a written notice itemizing the expense of such abatement and requesting payment. If the amount of such costs is not paid to the traffic engineer within five days after giving such notice, he shall record in the office of the recorder of Napa County, California, a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

“Notice of Lien”

 

        “Pursuant to authority vested in me by the American Canyon Traffic Code, I did on the day of ____, 20____, cause to be abated, at the owner’s expense, in the amount of $ _____, a condition upon the real property hereinafter described. Said amount, nor any part, has not been paid. The City of American Canyon does hereby claim a lien upon said real property in said amount, which amount shall remain a lien upon said real property until paid in full, together with interest at the rate of 7% per annum from the date of recordation of this lien in the office of the Recorder of Napa County, California. The real property upon which lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land in the City of American Canyon, County of Napa, State of California, described as follows:

 

(Insert property description)

 

Dated: ______, 20____.

 

         __________________________

         American Canyon Traffic Engineer

 

     B.     Costs incurred in such abatement shall remain a lien upon the property described in the lien notice until paid in full, plus accrued interest at the rate of seven percent per annum from the date of recordation. The statute of limitations shall not run against the city’s right to enforce payment of such lien. (Ord. 92-19 § 226, 1992)

 

10.40.080 Alternate method of collection—Addition to tax bill of amount of costs—Procedure.
     A.    As an alternative method of collection of the amount of the lien, the traffic engineer may record the notice of lien, as hereinabove provided, and may thereafter transmit it, or a facsimile, to the county auditor, who shall thereupon enter that amount on the county assessment book opposite the description of the particular lot or parcel of land; and the amount shall be collected together with all other taxes levied against the property.

     B.     The assessment shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as is provided for all other municipal and county taxes against the property; and all laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement to such special assessment. (Ord. 92-19 § 227, 1992)

Chapter 10.44 BICYCLES
10.44.010 Operation of bicycles on roadways and bicycle routes.
     A.    No person operating a bicycle upon a highway shall ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.

     B.     No operator shall allow a person riding as a passenger on a bicycle, and no person shall ride as a passenger on a bicycle, upon a highway other than upon or astride a separate seat attached thereto. If the passenger is a child, the seat shall have adequate provisions for retaining the child in place and for protecting the child from the moving parts of the bicycle. (Ord. 92-19 § 121, 1992)

 

10.44.020 Bicycle equipment.
     A.    All bicycles licensed pursuant to this chapter shall conform to all the equipment requirements specified by the Vehicle Code and this code.

     B.     No person shall operate upon a highway a bicycle which is of such a size as to prevent the operator from stopping the bicycle, supporting it in an upright position with at least one foot on the highway surface, and restarting it in a safe manner. (Ord. 92-19 § 122, 1992)

 

10.44.030 Parking bicycles.
     A.    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or against a building in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian, bicycle, or motor vehicular traffic.

     B.     No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk or park a bicycle on a sidewalk in a position that does not leave an adequate path for pedestrian traffic.

     C.     Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, no person shall park a bicycle at any location which has been posted with signs prohibiting such parking. (Ord. 92-19 § 123, 1992)

 

10.44.040 Licensing of bicycles.
     A.    No city resident shall ride, move, haul, or leave standing or allow to be ridden, moved, hauled, or left standing, any bicycle on any road, street, highway, or other public property unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance with this chapter.

     B.     This section shall not apply to bicycle manufacturers or bicycle dealers transporting bicycles in the normal course of business. (Ord. 92-19 § 124, 1992)

 

10.44.050 Licensing agency.
     The American Canyon fire protection district, a subsidiary district of the city, shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this chapter and is authorized and directed to register and license bicycles upon a written application for a license and the payment of the required fee. (Ord. 92-19 § 125, 1992)

 

10.44.060 Registration forms.
     The registration form shall contain the following:

     A.    The name and address of the registered owner,

     B.     The make, type and model of the bicycle,

     C.     The serial number of the bicycle,

     D.    The license number of the bicycle,

     E.     The original date of sale,

     F.     A place for the name and address of a new registered owner,

     G.    A place for the signature of the registered owner,

     H.    A place for the signature of the registered owner releasing his interest,

     I.      A place for the signature of the new registered owner, and

     J.      A place for the name of the licensing agency. (Ord. 92-19 § 126, 1992)

 

10.44.070 Licensing and registration forms.
     A.    Bicycle licenses and registration forms shall be supplied to the licensing agency by the city.

     B.     The license shall be permanently affixed to the bicycle by the licensing agency and the registration form completed at the time of the registration or sale, whichever occurs first.

     C.     Records shall be maintained by each licensing agency during the period of validity of the license. (Ord. 92-19 § 127, 1992)

 

10.44.080 Licensing and registration fees.
     Upon an application for registration and licensing, the fee required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be five dollars for a five-year license. (Ord. 92-19 § 128, 1992)

 

10.44.090 Disposition of fees.
     A.    For each bicycle registered and licensed by a bicycle dealer a fee of fifty cents out of the license fee received may be retained by the bicycle dealer for his services.

     B.     Revenues from the registration, replacement, and renewal of the license shall be paid to the director of finance monthly, and shall be retained by the city in a separate account, and shall be used for the support of the bicycle licensing and registration programs, and to improve bicycle safety programs, and to establish bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes, within the incorporated city limits. (Ord. 92-19 § 129, 1992)

 

10.44.100 Renewal of expired licenses.
     The owner of a bicycle may have an expired bicycle license renewed upon the presentation of the bicycle, the last issued registration form or its copy, and the payment of the fee prescribed. (Ord. 92-19 § 130, 1992)

 

10.44.110 Transfers of ownership.
     A.    Whenever the owner of the bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter sells or otherwise disposes of a bicycle, he shall, within ten days, notify the licensing agency of such disposition.

     B.     Any person who purchases or otherwise acquires the possession of a bicycle shall, within ten days of taking such possession, apply for the transfer of the license for such bicycle to his name. (Ord. 92-19 § 131, 1992)

 

10.44.120 Notification of change of address.
     Whenever the owner of a registered bicycle licensed pursuant to this chapter changes his address, he shall, within ten days, notify the licensing agency of the old and new address. (Ord. 92-19 § 132, 1992)

 

10.44.130 Tampering with registration certificates, bicycle licenses and serial numbers.
     A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate, or alter any registration certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, or in any way alter or tamper with any bicycle license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, or mutilate the serial number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 92-19 § 133, 1992)

 

10.44.140 Bicycles in violation of laws.
     The licensing agency shall have the right to impound and retain the possession of any bicycle on which the manufacturer’s identification numbers have been altered, defaced, removed or destroyed. (Ord. 92-19 § 134, 1992)

 

10.44.150 Rental agencies.
     A rental agency operating within the city shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent unless such bicycle is licensed as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 92-19 § 135, 1992)

 

10.44.160 Violations.
     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction. (Ord. 92-19 § 136, 1992)

 

10.44.170 Fines.
     A.    For each impounding fee for bicycles found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, there shall be paid a sum of five dollars.

     B.     For each violation of the provisions of this article, there shall be a fine of five dollars.

     C.     After a “mechanical warning ticket” is issued advising of the new bike license program, a fine of ten dollars or proof of correction shall be written in. (Ord. 92-19 § 137, 1992)

Chapter 10.48 PENALTIES
10.48.010 Violation—Penalty.
     Every person convicted of an infraction for a violation of this code shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not exceeding two hundred dollars and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars. (Ord. 94-01 § 12, 1994; Ord. 92-19 § 10, 1992)

 

10.48.020 Penalties for violations of specific sections of this title.
     Every person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of any of the provisions of Sections 10.24.010 through 10.24.050, 10.32.010 through 10.32.300, 10.40.010 through 10.40.080, and 10.44.010 through 10.44.170, except where a different penalty is expressly provided in said articles, shall be punished upon a first conviction by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars or more or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding five days, and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding ten days, or by both such fines and imprisonment, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within said period of one year by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 92-19 § 11, 1992)

 

10.48.030 Civil penalties for violations of vehicle parking and standing regulations.
     A.    Violations of any provision in this traffic code governing the standing or parking of a vehicle which is not otherwise considered a misdemeanor under the city municipal code, State Vehicle Code or any federal statute or regulation shall be subject to civil penalty as established from time to time by resolution of the council.

     B.     Imposition of any civil penalty for a vehicle parking or standing violation may be contested in accordance with the procedures set forth in Division 17, Chapter 1, Article 3 of the Vehicle Code entitled Procedure on Parking Violations (commencing with Vehicle Code Section 40200). (Ord. 93-12 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 10.52 TRIP REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS
10.52.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish transportation system management (TSM) requirements for employers located in the city. These requirements will promote alternative commute modes and reduce the total number of vehicle trips as part of a program to achieve the following objectives:

     A.    Reduce peak period traffic and congestion by decreasing the number of single occupant vehicle trips associated with commuting;

     B.     Reduce or delay the need for major transportation facility improvements by making more efficient use of existing facilities;

     C.     Reduce present and future motor vehicle emissions as a contribution towards complying with federal and state ambient air quality standards;

     D.    Establish TSM goals for employers so that a significant number of their employees are encouraged to arrive at the worksite by means other than single occupant vehicles. (Ord. 93-14 § 1, 1993)

 

10.52.020 Authority.
     Government Code Section 65089.3 requires cities and counties to adopt and implement a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. The California Clean Air Act requires the Bay Area Air Quality Management District to use all feasible means to meet the state air quality standards. (Ord. 93-14 § 2, 1993)

 

10.52.030 Findings.
     The council of the city fords and declares that:

     A.    The city is projected by both the state and the Bay Area Association of Governments to experience growth in population which will result in increases in traffic volume;

     B.     The geographical and meteorological conditions in the city are conducive to the formation of air pollution attributed largely to motor vehicle emissions according to both state and regional air pollution control agencies;

     C.     Transportation systems management techniques including, but not limited to, ridesharing, transit, compressed work weeks and bicycle use among employees are effective means of reducing work related trips. A reduction in the number of trips will reduce congestion and vehicle emissions. (Ord. 93-14 § 2, 1993)

 

10.52.040 Definitions.
     “Average vehicle ridership (AVR)” means the number of employees who start work at a work site during the peak period divided by the number of vehicles those employees use to arrive at the work site, averaged over the survey week as calculated pursuant to Section 10.52.050(K). (BAAQMD Section 13-1-202)

     “Bus pool” means a privately operated or chartered bus which provides commute transportation on a subscription basis. This term is also known as a club bus.

     “Car pool” means a vehicle occupied by two to six people traveling together between their residence and their work site or destination for the majority of the total trip distance. Employees who work for different employers, as well as nonemployed people, are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of the total trip distance.

     “Commute trip” means the trip made by an employee from home to the work site. The commute trip may include stops between home and the work site.

     “Compressed work week” means a regular fulltime work schedule which eliminates at least one round-trip commute trip (both home-to-work and work-to-home) at least once every two weeks. Examples include, but are not limited to, working three twelve-hour days (3/36) or four ten-hour days (4/40) within a one-week period; or eight one-hour days and one eight-hour day (9/80) within a two-week period.

     “Disabled employee” means for purposes of the performance objective calculation pursuant to Section 14-1-601, an employee with a physical impairment which prevents the employee from traveling to the work site by means other than a vehicle and the employee has been issued a disabled person placard or plate from the Department of Motor Vehicles.

     “Employee” means any person conducting work activity for an employer twenty or more hours per week on a regular full-time or part-time basis. The term includes independent contractors. The term excludes field construction workers, field personnel, seasonal/temporary employees and volunteers. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-209)

     “Employer” means any person(s), trust, firm, business, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, nonprofit agency or corporation, educational institution, school district, hospital or other health care facility, or federal, state, city or county government department, agency, or district, or any other special purpose public agency or district. A city, county, or city and county is a single employer for purposes of this chapter, not individual departments or agencies of the city, county, or city and county. Individual departments or agencies of the state and the federal government are separate employers for purposes of this chapter. The term includes for-profit, not-for-profit, and nonprofit enterprises. Several subsidiaries or units that occupy the same work site and report to one common governing board or governing entity or that function as one corporate unit are consider to be one employer. The term shall not include employers with one permanent work site within the city. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-212)

     “Employee transportation coordinator (ETC)” means an employee, other individual, or entity appointed by an employer to develop, market, administer, and monitor the employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan on full- or part-time basis.

     “Employer program manager” means an employee with policy and budget authority who is responsible for the implementation of the employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan and for fulfilling the requirements of this chapter.

     “Employer trip reduction plan” means a document describing in detail the employer trip reduction program, including an implementation schedule, budget, and all the elements listed in Section 10.52.050(H)(1) which is submitted to the city for review and approval pursuant to Section 10.52.050(H).

     “Employer trip reduction program” means a group of measures developed and implemented by an employer that are designed to provide transportation information, assistance, and incentives to employees. The purpose of such measures is to reduce the number of motor vehicles driven to the work site by increasing AVR or decreasing VER, and to achieve and maintain the performance objectives listed in Section 10.52.050(D).

     “Field construction worker” means an employee who reports for work to a temporary field construction site.

     “Field personnel” means employees who spend twenty percent or less of their work time at the work site and who do not report to the work site during the peak period for pick-up and dispatch of an employer provided vehicle.

     “Independent contractor” means an individual who enters into a direct written contract or agreement with an employer to perform certain services. The period of the contract or agreement is at least ninety continuous days or is open ended.

     “Peak period” means the time from six a.m. through ten a.m. Monday through Friday inclusive. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-221)

     “Seasonal/temporary employee” means an employee who works for the employer for less than ninety continuous days (three months) within a calendar year.

     “Single occupant vehicle” means a vehicle occupied by one employee.

     “Survey week” means a regular five-day, Monday through Friday (inclusive), work week. The survey week for work sites within Saturday and Sunday work schedules will include only those work days Monday through Friday. The survey week cannot contain a federal, state or local holiday, regardless of whether the holiday is observed by the employer. A survey week that meets the above criteria is to be selected by the employer during January through May, or September through November for the employee transportation surveys required by Section 10.52.050(G). The survey week cannot be Rideshare Week or contain any other rideshare or transit promotional event, e.g. “Beat the Back-Up.” (BAAQMD Section 13-1-224)

     “Telecommuting” means a system of working at home or at an off-site, nonhome telecommute facility for the full work day on a regular basis of at least one day per week.

     “Van pool” means a vehicle occupied by seven to fifteen employees including the driver who commutes together to work for the majority or their individual commute trip distance. Employees who work for different employers are included within this definition as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of their individual trip distance.

     “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except (1) a device moved exclusively by human power (2) a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks (3) buses used for public or private transit. Examples of vehicles include, but are not limited to, passenger cars, motorcycles, vans and pickup trucks.

     “Vehicle employee ratio (VER)” means the number of vehicles used by employees who start work at a work site during the peak period, divided by number of those employees averaged over the survey week as calculated to Section 10.52.050(k). VER is the reciprocal of AVR. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-222)

     “Volunteer” means an individual who does not receive any wages, salary, or other form of financial reimbursement from the employer for services provided.

     “Work activity” means any activity for which an employee receives remuneration from an employer. Telecommuting is a work activity.

     “Work site” means any property, real or personal, which is being operated, utilized, maintained, or owned by an employer as part of an identifiable enterprise. All property on contiguous, adjacent, or proximate sites separated only by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way, served by a common circulation or access system, and not separated by an impassable barrier to bicycle or pedestrian travel such as a freeway or flood control channel is included as part of the work site. If two or more employers each have one hundred or more employees at a single work site, then that work site is considered a separate work site for each employer. (BAAQMD Section 12-1-232)

     “Zone” means a geographical area within the district where the performance objectives contained in Section 10.52.050(D) apply to employers with work sites located within that zone. Zone 4 — Napa County. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-233) (Ord. 93-14 § 3, 1993)

 

10.52.045 Compliance.
     If any other agency which has jurisdiction over trip reduction requirements for employers within the city adopts trip reduction requirements that meet or exceed the requirements of this chapter, then any employer within the city that meets those requirements will be deemed to be meeting the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 95-12 § 1, 1995)

 

10.52.050 Requirements.
     A.    Applicability. This chapter applies to all public and private employers with one hundred or more employees at a work site. This ordinance applies only to work sites with one hundred or more employees. If an employer has one hundred or more employees but no single work site with one hundred or more employees this chapter does not apply to that employer. For purposes of determining the applicability of this chapter, the number of employees at a work site is determined as the maximum number of employees reporting to that work site on any single week day Monday through Friday during the current calendar or fiscal year. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-102)

     B.     Exemptions.

     1.     Employee Minimum Level. A work site of one hundred or more employees where less than fifty of these employees normally start work during the peak period is exempt from all requirements of this chapter.

     2.     Exemption—Performance Objectives Achieved. Employer may qualify for an exemption from the requirements of this chapter as specified in this section.

     a.     Work sites that achieve the 1999 performance objectives specified in subsection D of this section as demonstrated pursuant to subsection G of this section are exempt from all other requirements of this chapter except for this section.

     b.     Work sites that meet the requirements of subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section must submit to the city, in a format approved by the city, a listing of the measures or reasons for achieving the 1999 performance objectives.

     c.     Work sites that meet the requirements of subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section must demonstrate continued achievement of the 1999 performance objectives by conducting an employee transportation survey pursuant to subsection G of this section once every three years.

     d.     Work sites that do not continue to demonstrate achievement of the 1999 performance objectives pursuant to subsection (B)(2)(c) of this section no longer qualify for the exemption provided by this section and become subject to the requirements of this chapter at that time.

     3.     Exemption—Construction Site. Construction sites are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. For purposes of this section:

     a.     “Construction” means the on-site fabrication, erection, or installation of a physical structure such as a building, roadway, bridge, etc.; and

     b.     “Site” has the same meaning as work site.

     C.     Effective Dates. Employers become subject to this chapter three to six months after final adoption. But be aware of the air district deadlines: Begin enforcing rule in area with no TRO — July 1, 1993; Employer registration deadline — September 30, 1993; over four hundred employees survey due November 30, 1993; etc. Note that the required survey dates are contained in subsection (G)(7) of this section along with an assumption of when employers become subject to the rule. Note that (G)(7) is a required section. The dates therein are not alterable if one wishes to maintain conformance with the board.

     D.    Performance Objectives. Performance objectives are expressed in terms of AVR and VER. Employers have the option of reporting performance in terms of either AVR or VER or both. The performance objectives for (jurisdiction), by year, by type, follow: (BAAQMD Section 13-1-301)

 

 

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AVR

1.05

1.10

1.15

1.20

1.25

1.30

1.30

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VER

0.93

0.90

 0.87

0.83

0.80

0.77

0.77

 

     E.     Employee Transportation Coordinator (ETC). Employers must have an ETC(s) as specified within this section. (BAAQMD Section 13-1-403)

     1.     Employers shall appoint an ETC for each affected work site. Employers with multiple affected work sites within the city may appoint one ETC for more than one work site, even when these work sites are located in different zones.

     2.     ETCs must complete a training curriculum certified by the Bay Area Pollution Control District Air Pollution Control Officer within nine months of the effective dates of this chapter as specified in subsection C of this section, or within six months of appointment when appointed after the initial nine-month time frame.

     3.     The employer may apply to the city for a waiver from the training requirement of subsection (E)(2) of this section when an ETC has one or more years of experience in trip reduction of equivalent skills.

     4.     An ETC may also serve as the employer program manager provided that the individual meets the criteria specified Section 10.52.040.

     F.     Employer Program Manager. Employers must have an employer program manager as specified in this section.

     1.     Employers shall appoint an employer program manager. Employers with multiple affected work sites within the city may appoint an employer program manager for more than one work site, even when these work sites are located in different zones.

     G.    Employee Transportation Surveys. Employers must conduct employee transportation surveys as specified in this section to establish whether the performance objectives listed in subsection D of this section have been achieved. (BAAQMD Section 131-406)

     1.     An employer shall conduct an employee transportation survey consistent with the procedure contained in subsection K of this section and submit the survey responses to the city in accordance with the schedule contained in subsection (G)(7) of this section;

     2.     An employer has the option of processing the employee transportation surveys on-site or having the surveys processed by an outside entity. Survey processing must be consistent with the procedures contained in subsection K of this section, verifiable records must be maintained, and the survey results are to be submitted to the city in accordance with the schedule contained in subsection (G)(7) of this section;

     3.     An employer may use a random sample employee survey method consistent with subsection L of this section for work sites where four hundred or more employees start work during the peak period;

     4.     The city will notify employers of the due date for subsequent year surveys;

     5.     Employee transportation surveys are to be conducted annually unless a work site demonstrates that a further year performance objective is achieved. These work sites are required to survey every other year as long as future year performance objectives continue to be achieved;

     6.     An employer shall not offer any special incentives or disincentives in addition to its regular employer trip reduction program during the survey week. This limitation does not apply to activities undertaken by an employer in response to a Bay Area Air Quality Management District forecast exceedance day, e.g. the “Spare the Air” campaign;

     7.     Employee transportation surveys are to be conducted as follows:

     a.     Employers subject to this chapter July 1,

1993, with work sites of five hundred or more employees must conduct an employee transportation survey at those work sites by November 30, 1993.

Note that the entire section is required (including the dates) if one wishes to maintain conformance with the BAAQMD. Also, it ties back to nonrequired subsection C of this section.

     b.     Employers subject to this chapter July 1,

1993, with work sites of one hundred to four hundred ninety-nine employees must conduct an employee transportation survey at those work sites by May 31, 1994.

     c.     Employers subject to this chapter July 1,

1994, with work sites of five hundred or more employees must conduct an employee transportation survey at those work sites by November 30, 1994.

     d.     Employers subject to this chapter July 1,

1994, with work sites of one hundred to four hundred ninety-nine employees must conduct an employee transportation survey of those work sites by May 31, 1995.

     e.     Employee transportation survey results are to be submitted to the city within ninety days of the survey week.

     f.      Subject to city approval, an employee transportation survey conducted prior to the effective dates of this chapter may be submitted to fulfill the requirements of this subsection provided that (1) the survey was conducted within six months of this submittal date. and (2) it provides sufficient data to calculate the performance objective pursuant to subsection K of this section.

     8.     Employers who become subject to this chapter subsequent to the schedule above, due to an increase in employees or the establishment of a new or expanded work site shall conduct an employee transportation survey within six months after meeting the requirements of subsection A of this section. The dates in subsection (G)(7)(e) of this section apply regarding submittal to the city.

     H.    Requirement to Submit Employer Trip Reduction Plan. Employers that do not achieve the performance objectives established in subsection D of this section for the applicable year at any work site subject to this chapter shall prepare and submit an employer trip reduction plan for that work site to the city within one hundred twenty days of a determination that the performance objective was not achieved. An employer may submit a consolidated plan that covers multiple work sites. The city will issue a determination that the performance objective has not been achieved based upon information received pursuant to subsection G of this section.

     1.     The employer trip reduction plan shall contain the following:

     a.     A detailed description and inventory of trip reduction measures including a list of specific trip reduction measures already implemented,

     b.     A description, schedule, and commitment to implement additional or enhanced measures which includes all reasonable, feasible, and cost effective trip reduction measures that can be expected to bring about significant progress toward achievement of the performance objectives. The plan should include appropriate measures designed to address unique characteristics of the work site,

     c.     Summary and discussion of the results of an attitudinal survey of employees or an employer/employee work group designed to ascertain employee attitudes toward various incentive and disincentive measures,

     d.     A discussion of the progress achieved to date and an analysis of why the worksite(s) did not achieve the performance objective including special issues, circumstances, or conditions at the work site,

     e.     A budget indicating all current and projected expenditures for the trip reduction measures.

     2.     The plan shall be submitted by the highest ranking responsible official of the employer at the work site or each work site when a consolidated plan is submitted that covers multiple work sites.

     3.     At the option of an employer, the employer trip reduction plan may include an alternative emission reduction program that demonstrates that the measures included in such program will achieve emission reductions equal to or greater than those that would have been realized if the performance objectives were achieved, and that these alternative measures are not required by any other federal, state or local control measure or regulatory requirement. Such an alternative emission reduction program shall include an update or progress monitoring report to be submitted at least every two years to fulfill the requirements of subsection (H)(7) of this section.

     4.     The city shall approve and the employer shall implement an employer trip reduction plan that includes all reasonable, feasible and cost effective trip reduction measures that can be expected to bring about significant progress toward achievement of the performance objectives given the constraints of the work site, the nature of the work activity and the geographical distribution of employees relative to the work site; or the city shall approve an alternative demonstration pursuant to subsection (H)(3) of this section. The city shall disapprove any plan that does not meet the above specified approval criteria.

     5.     An employer shall revise and resubmit to the city any disapproved plan within ninety days of the disapproval. If the revised plan is disapproved, the employer has one additional ninety-day opportunity to revise and resubmit a plan before final disapproval. Final disapproval is a violation of the chapter subject to penalty.

     6.     An employer may appeal any city disapproval of its employer trip reduction plan pursuant to subsection I of this section.

     7.     An employer subject to this section shall update its employer trip reduction plan once every two years after plan approval until such time as the performance objective is achieved. Such plan updates are to be submitted every two years to the city on or before the anniversary date of plan approval.

     8.     An employer subject to this section shall continue to meet the requirements of subsection G of this section.

     9.     An employer shall revise and resubmit its employer trip reduction plan within ninety days of a final determination that an element of an approved employer trip reduction plan violates any provision of law is issued by an agency or court with jurisdiction to make such determination.

     I.      Appeal of Plan Disapproval. An employer may appeal a plan disapproval made pursuant to subsection H of this section to the city through the procedure listed below:

     l.      The employer submits a written notice of appeal to the city within thirty days of plan disapproval.

     2.     The council of the city will convene to hear the appeal.

     3.     The council of the city shall issue its decision on the appeal within thirty days after the close of the hearing.

     4.     The due date for revised employer trip reduction plans pursuant to subsection (H)(5) of this section will be suspended during the appeal process authorized by this section.

     J.      Confidentiality. The city will treat the information and data specified in this section as confidential.

     1.     The city shall treat individual employee transportation survey responses, records and results submitted pursuant to subsection G of this section in a confidential manner and shall not release any information about individual employees to the public. Both aggregate and work site performance objective results for an employer shall be within the public domain.

     2.     The city shall treat employer budget information submitted pursuant to subsection (H)(1)(e) of this section in a confidential manner and shall not release any budget information about individual employers to the public. Aggregate and generic budget information for trip reduction programs and measures shall be within the public domain.

     K.    Performance Objective Calculation. AVR or VER for each affected work site is to be computed in a manner consistent with the following method.

     1.     The employer conducts an employee transportation survey during a survey week.

     2.     AVR is calculated only for’ those employees who start work or are assigned to the work site during the peak period.

     3.     If less than sixty percent of the survey forms are returned for processing from those employees who start work during the peak period, all survey forms not returned from those employees who start work during the peak period shall be counted as single occupant vehicles for purposes of calculating AVR or VER.

     4.     If sixty percent or more of the survey forms are returned for processing from those employees who start work during the peak period, one-half of those survey forms not returned from those employees who start work during the peak period shall be assumed to have the same AVR or VER as that calculated from the responses to the surveys returned, and one-half shall be counted as single occupant vehicles for purposes of calculating AVR or VER.

     5.     AVR for the work site shall be calculated by dividing the total “employee-days” for the survey week by the total “vehicle trip-days” for the survey week.

     6.     VER for the work site shall be calculated by dividing the total “vehicle trip-days” for the survey week by the total “employee-days” for the survey week.

     a.     Employee-days shall be determined as follows: the, total number of employees who start work or are assigned to a work site during the peak period each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. Each day of the survey week that an employee starts work during the peak period counts as one employee-day. For example, an employee who starts work each day Monday through Friday of the survey week between six a.m. and ten a.m. counts as five employee-days. The following procedures are used in totaling employee-days:

     i.      Employees telecommuting or are off due to a compressed work week schedule are counted as reporting to the work site in calculating the total employee-days.

     ii.     The following employees are not included in the employee-days total:

     (A)   Employees not working because of vacation, sickness or other time-off,

     (B)   Employees who report to a different work site or an off-site work related activity,

     (C)   Disabled employees.

     b.     Vehicle trip-days shall be determined as follows: the total number of vehicles used by employees who start work or are assigned to the work site each work day Monday through Friday of the survey week. A vehicle trip-day is based on the means of transportation used for the greatest distance of an employee’s home to work commute trip. An employee who starts work during the peak period and arrives at the work site each day of the survey week Monday through Friday in a single occupant vehicle counts as five vehicle trip-days. The following numerical values are used in calculating the total vehicle trip-days:

     i.      Single occupant vehicle (drive alone) equals one,

     ii.     Carpool equals one divided by the number of people in the carpool,

     iii.    Vanpool equals one divided by the number of employees in the vanpool,

     iv.    Motorcycle, moped, motorized scooter, or motor bike equal one,

     v.     Clean-fueled vehicles are counted as follows:

     (A)   Electric vehicle equals zero,

     (B)   Compressed natural gas vehicle equals one-fourth (0.25),

     (C)   Propane vehicle equals one-half (0.50),

     (D)   Dual or flexible fueled vehicle equals three-fourths (0.75).

     vi.    The following all equal zero vehicle trip-days:

     (A)   Public transit (bus, light rail, ferry, Caltrain, BART),

     (B)   Private buspool or club bus,

     (C)   Bicycle,

     (D)   Walking and other nonmotorized transportation modes,

     (E)   Employees telecommuting (only on the days those employees are telecommuting for the entire day),

     (F)    Employees who work a compressed work week schedule (only on their compressed day(s) off),

     (G)   Disabled employee vehicles at all times.

     vii.   Employers with multiple work sites within the city have the option to average individual work site AVR or VER to demonstrate that the performance objectives are achieved on an aggregate basis for those work sites when the city is implementing the chapter. If the employer demonstrates that the performance objectives (subsection D of this section) are achieved using the averaging methodology, then those work sites included in the averaging are not subject to the requirements of subsection H of this section.

     (A)   The weighted AVR average for the multiple work sites is calculated by (1) adding together the “employee-days” for each work site (2) adding together the “vehicle trip-days” for each work site, then (3) dividing the aggregate “employee-days” by the aggregate “vehicle trip-days” to obtain the weighted AVR average.

     (B)   The weighted VER average for the multiple work sites is calculated by dividing the aggregate “vehicle trip-days” by the aggregate “employee-days.”

     (C)   The weighted VER average for multiple work sites can also be calculated as the number of peak period employees multiplied by VER (Site 1) plus the number of peak period employees multiplied by VER (Site 2) divided by the total peak period employees (Sites 1 and 2).

     L.     Random Sample Method. The method described in this section must be followed when an employer chooses to use a random sample to meet the requirements of subsection K of this section.

     1.     Summary.

     a.     Subsection (G)(3) of this section provides for an option for larger work sites to calculate AVR or VER based upon a random sample of the employee population. The random sample option is available only for work sites where four hundred or more employees start work during the peak period (six a.m. through ten a.m.).

     b.     The size of the random sample depends upon the number of employees who start work during the peak period at the work site. The means to determine the minimum size of the random sample is described in subsection (L)(2)(b) of this section.

     c.     The sample must be selected as described in subsection (L)(2)(d) of this section. Once the sample group has been selected, the employer is not permitted to send additional survey forms to employees beyond the original sample group. This will invalidate the results of the survey and void the employer’s option to utilize the random sample method.

     d.     A high response rate is critical to ensure that the random sample produces an accurate AVR or VER for the work site. The employer should make a concerted effort to obtain a completed survey from each employee in the sample. All nonrespondents in the sample will be treated as drive along commuters (i.e. commuting in a single occupant vehicle) for purposes of calculating the work site AVR or VER.

     2.     Basic Random Sample Selection Methodology.

     a.     The employer shall compile a complete list of employees at the work site, in alphabetical order, and assign a consecutive number to each employee. The employer shall exclude from the list employees who are known to regularly start work outside the six am. through ten a.m. peak period.

     b.     The employer shall determine the number of employees to be included in the random sample using the following formula, where n is the sample size and N is the number of employees who start work between six am and ten a.m.

 


 

     A sample size of “n” based on this formula should produce an AVR or VER with a sampling error of at most plus or minus 0.05, with ninety-five percent probability. The sample size based on this formula is displayed in the table below:

 

Number of Peak Period
Employees at Work Site

Sample Size

400 to 420

200

421 to 440

205

441 to 460

210

461 to 480

214

481 to 500

218

501 to 550

225

551 to 600

235

601 to 650

240

651 to 700

248

701 to 750

255

751 to 800

260

801 to 850

265

851 to 900

270

901 to 950

274

951 to 1,000

278

1,001 to 1,500

300

1,501 to 2,000

320

2,001 to 3,000

340

3,001 to 4,000

350

4,001 to 6,000

360

6,001 to 10,000

370

>10,001

380

 

     c.     In no case can the random sample size be less than indicated in the above table. The employer may choose to include a larger number of employees in the survey. A larger sample group should more accurately represent the entire employee population, provided that the employer obtains a high response rate.

     d.     After the sample size has been determined, the employer has two options for selecting the sample.

     i.      Use a computer program to select distinct random numbers from the employee list (e.g. two hundred seventy-eight distinct random numbers between one and one thousand, where one thousand employees start working during the peak period).

     ii.     Select employees from the list based upon a sampling interval and random starting number.

     To determine the sample interval, the employer shall divide the total population of employees who start work during the six a.m. through ten am. peak period by the sample size and round the result down to the nearest integer.

     Example: If a work site has one thousand employees who start work during the peak period and the sample size is two hundred seventy-eight, then the sampling interval equals 1000 divided by 278 = 3.6. The 3.6 is rounded down to 3 to produce the sampling interval. Therefore, every third name on the list shall be selected beginning at a random starting number X where X is between 1 and 3. If X equals 3, then the sample would include numbers

3, 6, 9, 12, 15, etc., until the required 278 numbers have been selected.

     e.     The methodology described in subsection (L)(2)(d) of this section will eliminate potential bias that could result from choosing survey participants on the basis of department, rank, income level, home code, or other demographic factors, or from excluding certain segments of the employee population.

     3.     Selection Process for Subsequent Surveys.

     a.     In subsequent surveys, the employer may select the random sample using the method described in subsection (L)(2) of this section or the employer may choose to survey the same employees that were included in the previous random sample. Employees in the previous random sample group who have left the orgrni7ation shall be replaced in the new sample by employees selected per subsection (L)(2) of this section. The latter approach may enable the employer to more accurately track changes in commute mode from one survey to next.

     b.     If the number of employees who start work between six a.m. and ten a.m. has increased or decreased by more than twenty percent since last survey, the employer shall select a completely new random sample group using the methodology describe in subsection (L)(2) of this section.

     4.     Performance Objective Calculation, Reporting and Recordkeeping.

     a.     AVR or VER must be calculated according to the methodology describe in subsection K of this section. Notwithstanding, the provision of subsection (K)(4) of this section, any employee in the random sample group who fails to submit a completed survey form shall be included in the performance objective calculation as a drive long commuter (single occupant vehicle).

     b.     The employer shall submit to the city: (1) the completed survey forms for processing or the results of the survey, according to the subsections (G)(7) or (G)(8) of this section; (2) a description of the methodology used to select the random sample; and (3) a tally showing the number of surveys distributed, the number completed, and the number of nonrespondents.

     c.     The employer shall retain records needed to document adherence to this protocol for a period of at least three years, including the master list used to generate the random sample and the names and numbers selected from that list. Such records, files and documentation shall be made available to the city during any on-site audit conducted by the city. (Ord. 93-14 § 4, 1993)

Chapter 10.56 SPEED LIMITS
10.56.010 Decrease of prima facie speed limit.
     It is hereby determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that the prima facie speed limits established by state law upon the following city streets are higher than is reasonable for the safe operation of vehicles thereon and it is hereby declared that lower prima facie speed limits shall be as hereinafter set forth on those streets or parts of streets herein designated when signs are erected giving notice thereof:

 

 

Roadway

Limits

Declared Prima Facie Speed Limit

Green Island Road

between Mezzetta Ct and SR 29

40 mph

Benton Way

between Wetlands Edge Rd and Donaldson Way/Elliott Dr

25 mph

Donaldson Way

between Elliott Dr and SR 29

25 mph

Donaldson Way East

between SR 29 and Newell Dr

30 mph

Donaldson Way

between Eucalyptus Dr and Benton Way

25 mph

Hummingbird Way

between Benton Way and West American Canyon Rd

25 mph

James Road

between Wilson Way and West American Canyon Rd

25 mph

Danrose Drive

between West American Canyon Rd and Mini Dr

25 mph

Broadway Street

between East American Canyon Rd and Mini Dr

30 mph

Newell Drive

between American Canyon Rd and Donaldson Way East

35 mph

American Canyon Road West

between Wetlands Edge Rd to Danrose Dr-James Rd

40 mph

Eucalyptus Drive

between Wetlands Edge Rd to Donaldson Way

35 mph

American Canyon Road East

between Broadway and city limits

45 mph

Flosden Road

City limits to American Canyon Rd

45 mph

Wetlands Edge Rd

Kensington Way to Eucalyptus Drive

25 mph

Broadway

City limits to American Canyon Road

30 mph

Elliott Drive

between Benton Way to American Canyon Road

30 mph

 

(Ord. 2017-02 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2016-10 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 10.60 PRIVATE STREET ENFORCEMENT
10.60.010 Enforcement of California Vehicle Code on private property.
     Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21107 et seq., all provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the privately owned streets listed below when the owner has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to that private street a notice not less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that the private property is subject to public traffic regulations and control:

     A.    Corvina Way; and

     B.     Corvina Court. (Ord. 2016-11 § 1, 2016)

Title 11 (Reserved)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 PARK AND RECREATION AREA USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 12.06 CAMPING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTIES
Chapter 12.08 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT

Chapter 12.04 PARK AND RECREATION AREA USE REGULATIONS
12.04.010 Hours of use.
     It is unlawful for any person to enter, loiter or remain in or upon any city park, playground, par course or other park or recreational facility at any time between ten p.m. and six a.m., except as may be otherwise posted at the entrance to the facility or as designated by the parks and recreation department director or designee. The city manager or designee may close parks to public use if he or she deems it necessary due to unsafe conditions, such as extreme fire danger. (Ord. 99-09 § 1, 1999; Ord. 96-03 § 1, 1996)

 

12.04.020 Alcoholic beverages.
     No person shall serve, or caused to be served, consume or possess alcoholic beverages of any kind within the boundaries of land or within a building owned, managed, controlled or operated, as a city park, playground, or other park and recreational facility without first obtaining a permit from the city, except in areas designated by signage as a picnic area. Other than designated picnic areas, the parks and recreation director, or designee may, at his or her discretion, issue permits for the use, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages only at certain park and recreational facilities owned and operated by the city. Any permit issued may, at the discretion of the parks and recreation director or his or her designee, contain conditions as to the type and amount of beverages to be served, number of persons, time and place, security precautions, and any other conditions reasonably related to the maintenance of the public health and safety. When alcoholic beverages are being served pursuant to such a permit, the permit shall be on the premises and available for inspection by any authorized city employee. (Ord. 99-09 § 2, 1999; Ord. 96-03 § 2, 1996)

 

12.04.030 Restrooms, portable toilets.
     It is unlawful for any person to fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and portable toilets in a neat and sanitary condition, or use such facilities for purposes other than those intended. (Ord. 96-03 § 3, 1996)

 

12.04.040 Fires.
     No person, other than one acting under authorization, direction or permission of a city staff designee, shall build, light, kindle or maintain any open or outdoor fire at any city park, playground, or other park or recreation facility except in areas or facilities specifically built and designated for this purpose. (Ord. 96-03 § 4, 1996)

 

12.04.050 Skateboard use.
     A.    Skateboards are allowed on city sidewalk areas, open space surfaced trails or paths unless otherwise prohibited or on the designated skate park. No person may ride a skateboard upon any other park or city facility, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, basketball courts, parking lots, or playground areas.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to ride a skateboard in a city skate park designated and maintained for recreational skateboard and in line skating use unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads. (Ord. 2013-08 § 1, 2013; Ord. 2003-07, 2003; Ord. 96-03 § 5, 1996)

 

12.04.051 Skate park use—Use of or trespass at skate park when closed.
     A.    No person shall use, remain in or around or enter into the area designated as a skate park during closed hours which are specifically designated in posted skate park rules.

     B.     No person shall ride a skateboard or in line skate in the skate park except while wearing a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads.

     C.     No person shall use the skate park for any purpose other than skateboarding and in line skating. Bicycles, scooters, and motorized equipment are prohibited unless specifically authorized by city council.

     D.    For the purposes of this section, the term “skate park” means the designated fenced area containing ramps, rails and equipment located north of the American Canyon Community Center.

     E.     This section does not apply to any duly authorized city employee.

     F.     Within the skate park, it is unlawful for any person to use or possess glass containers, alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs, or tobacco products.

     G.    Unauthorized ramps, jumps, equipment or obstacles may not be brought to the skate park or used at the skate park.

     H.    Organized events, lessons and contests not sponsored by the city of American Canyon require a city facility use permit.

     I.      Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in law. (Ord. 2003-07, 2003; Ord. 99-16 § 2, 1999)

 

12.04.060 In line skating.
     In line skating is allowed in the designated skate park and on city sidewalk areas only. No person may in line skate upon any other park or city facility unless designated for such use by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 2003-07, 2003; Ord. 96-03 § 6, 1996)

 

12.04.070 Animals.
     “Animal” means any wild or domestic animal, poultry, bird, reptile, dog, horse or other creature.

     A.    No dog shall be permitted to run at large upon land owned, managed, controlled or operated as a city park, playground, par course or other recreational area and facility. All dogs must be leashed whenever upon land or facilities owned, managed, controlled or operated as a city park, playground, par course or other recreational area and facility, except in designated voice control areas. Dogs must be under “effective voice control” defined as a person’s dog responds immediately to single commands in a trained and obedient manner.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person who owns, harbors or keeps, or who has possession, charge, care, custody or control of any dog or other animal to negligently permit said animal to run at large upon any city park or recreation area.

     C.     Upon land owned, managed, controlled or operated as a city park, playground, par course or other recreational area or facility, any person who owns, harbors or keeps, or who has possession, charge, care, custody or control of any dog or other animal is required to remove and properly dispose of all solid animal waste.

     D.    This section shall not apply to persons who are blind, deaf or physically disabled, who shall have the right to be accompanied by a specifically trained assistance dog. (Ord. 96-03 § 7, 1996)

 

12.04.080 Glass containers.
     Within the limits of any existing or future park, playground area in the city, or open space, it is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, to use or possess any glass containers within the boundaries of the park or playground area, or open space without prior city permission. (Ord. 2013-08 § 1, 2013; Ord. 96-03 § 8, 1996)

 

12.04.090 Playing or practicing golf.
     No person shall drive, putt or in any other fashion play or practice golf or use golf balls or golf clubs within any city park, playground or other park or playground facility. (Ord. 96-03 § 9, 1996)

 

12.04.100 Throwing dangerous objects.
     It is unlawful for any person to throw or discharge any stones, wood, sand or other objects or substances that may cause injury to persons or property in any city park, playground or other recreational facility or into any swimming pool, onto a pool deck, or onto or in any pool building. (Ord. 99-09 § 3, 1999; Ord. 96-03 § 10, 1996)

 

12.04.110 Use of vehicles.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to ride or drive any vehicle within any city park, open space, playground or other recreation area, par course, power line easements, or on medians, unless designated for that purpose, without permission of the city manager or designee.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive an automobile, bicycle, motorcycle, truck, motor scooter, or other conveyance on roads or paths not designated for that purpose. Motorized vehicles are not permitted on the par course.

     C.     No person shall park, abandon or otherwise be allowed to remain within any city park, open space, playground, or other facility any automobiles or other conveyances between dusk and dawn except as authorized through the city manager or designee.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person to wash or repair any automobile or other conveyance within any city park, open space, playground, or other facility without the permission of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 2013-08 § 1, 2013; Ord. 96-03 § 11, 1996)

 

12.04.120 Refuse, trash, litter.
     It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse in a place other than in the receptacles provided therefor. Dumping of home furniture, home-generated yard waste and trash is unlawful. (Ord. 96-03 § 12, 1996)

 

12.04.130 Decorations.
     No person shall attach to any park facility, materials, devices or equipment for the purpose of decorating that facility or for any similar purpose without first obtaining permission from the city manager or designee. (Ord. 96-03 § 13, 1996)

 

12.04.140 Wearing shoes.
     No person shall wear shoes or foot covering that will damage, injure or create the need for excessive maintenance on any field, park, turf or specialized surface prepared for particular activities. In areas posted with a sign specifying footwear authorized or approved, it is unlawful for any person to enter any such area in other than the footwear so required. (Ord. 96-03 § 14, 1996)

 

12.04.150 Park and facility reservation system.
     In accordance with the park and facility reservation system, any person using an area or building subject to reservation must immediately leave upon being shown a park reservation permit and/or the posted notice of reservation for that time and facility. (Ord. 96-03 § 15, 1996)

 

12.04.160 Gambling.
     No gambling of any kind or description shall be permitted within the boundaries of land owned, managed, controlled or operated as a city park, playground, or other park or playground facility, without prior city permission. (Ord. 96-03 § 16, 1996)

 

12.04.170 Damaging, tampering with property.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, barbeque, playground equipment, fence, gate, or other structures or equipment, facilities, or city park or open space property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal, including, but not limited to, wood or other pieces of trees, or vegetation.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to engage in any actions or conduct injurious to or to injure in any manner any trees, shrubs, plants, flowers, or other property in any city park, open space, playground or other recreation area or facility.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person to misuse, damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree, plant, wood, turf or groundcover, or pick the flowers or seed of any tree or plant, or attach any rope, wire or other object to any tree or plant within any city park, open space, playground or recreational area, except as authorized by the city manager or designee. (Ord. 2013-08 § 1, 2013; Ord. 96-03 § 17, 1996)

 

12.04.180 Amplified music.
     The use of sound amplifying equipment in or upon any park shall be subject to the following regulations:

     A.    The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both;

     B.     Sound amplifying equipment shall be operated upon parks only between dawn and dusk, except as may be otherwise posted at the entrance to the facility or as designated by the city manager or designee.

     C.     The sound emanating from sound amplifying equipment shall be in accordance with the American Canyon Municipal Code, Chapter 8.12, Community Noise, Section 5811. (Ord. 96-03 § 18, 1996)

 

12.04.190 Vendor sales.
     It is unlawful to sell, peddle or to offer for sale any food, liquids, edibles for human consumption, or any goods, wares, services or merchandise within city parks, playgrounds and recreation areas, except under permit issued by the city manager or designee, and subject to such laws and regulations as may now or hereafter exist. (Ord. 96-03 § 19, 1996)

 

12.04.200 Disorderly conduct.
     No disorderly conduct, excessive noise, riot or breach of the peace shall be permitted in any city park, ground, swimming pool or park or recreational building or facility. This section shall not apply to activities or expression which are protected or authorized by the federal or state constitution. (Ord. 99-09 § 4, 1999)

 

12.04.210 Restrictions in posted areas.
     The parks and recreation director shall have the authority to adopt reasonable regulations regarding the types of activities which may be conducted in city parks, open space, grounds, buildings, swimming pools, hardscape, landscape, or other park and recreation areas, and to post signs authorizing or prohibiting such activities in the designated areas. No person shall play any game, hobby, sport or otherwise engage in any activity in any public park, ground, building, swimming pool, hardscape, landscape or other park and recreation area or facility in which a sign notifying the public that such activity is prohibited has been posted by the parks and recreation services director or designee. (Ord. 2013-08 § 1, 2013; Ord. 99-09 § 5, 1999)

 

12.04.220 Trail use—Regulations.
     A.    All persons and their pets shall remain on mapped and designated trails or areas.

     B.     Smoking is prohibited except at designated areas.

 

     C.     No person shall bring into, carry, or use in any way on the trails any firearm, air gun, pellet gun, or other weapon of any kind, or any instrument or device designed for or capable of hurling projectiles or missiles, or any fireworks or explosives of any kind except as otherwise permitted by state and federal law and persons with a valid permit to carry a weapon.

     D.    Hunting and access to hunting is prohibited.

     E.     All wildlife, plants, and natural objects shall be left undisturbed.

     1.     No person shall move, remove, damage, deface or in any way molest or construct or alter any wildlife including trees, plants, shrubs, rock, soil, turf, wildflowers or wildlife, alive or dead, unless approved by the parks and recreation director.

     2.     No person shall release any domesticated or wild animal, plant, flower, tree, seed, or other vegetation on trails.

     3.     No person shall move, remove, damage, deface or in any way molest or construct or alter any geologic, archaeological, or historic object.

     4.     No person shall disturb livestock or grazing animals.

     F.     Fishing is permitted in the Napa River, but is not allowed in any pond or lake.

     G.    Equestrian Use.

     1.     Pedestrians and bicyclists shall yield to horses. Equestrians shall use caution when approaching or overtaking another person and shall make their presence known well in advance to the person.

     2.     Equestrian use is permitted on trails or trail areas specifically designated for that use.

     3.     Equestrians shall maintain control and speed of their animal at all times.

     4.     Equestrians are encouraged to wear a helmet while riding.

     H.    All or portions of the trails may be closed at any time due to maintenance and/or emergency needs. No person shall use, remain in, or enter a trail when it is posted as closed.

     I.      Hand launch boats (canoes, kayaks, rafts, paddle boards, etc.) are permitted in the Napa River. Hand launch boats are not allowed in any pond or lake, unless associated with a designated launch site.

     J.      Bicycle Use.

     1.     Bicyclists shall yield to pedestrians and horses. Bicyclists shall use caution when approaching or overtaking another person and shall make their presence known well in advance to the person.

     2.     Bicycle use is limited to designated trails. Off-trail riding is prohibited.

     3.     Bicycles must obey posted speed limits.

     4.     Bicyclists shall maintain control and speed of the bicycles at all times.

     5.     Bicyclists shall wear a helmet in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 21200 et seq. (Ord. 2013-08 § 1, 2013)

 

12.04.221 Trail use—Enforcement.
     Pursuant to American Canyon Municipal Code Section 1.24.010 violation of any trail use regulation shall constitute an infraction unless such violation is specifically designated. (Ord. 2013-08 § 2, 2013)

 

12.04.230 Tobacco use in city parks.
     In city parks and recreation facilities, the use of tobacco products including but not limited to cigarette smoking, use of electronic cigarettes or similar nicotine delivery devices and use of smokeless tobacco is prohibited. Parks and recreation facilities is defined as parks, landscaped trail areas, landscape areas proximate to recreation facilities including the Philip West Aquatic Center, Senior Multiuse Center, Recreation Center, Community Gym and any other similar facilities.

     In addition to common municipal code violation practices, violators of this chapter shall be referred to a local anti-smoking program.

     The parks and recreation director may authorize the creation of designated smoking areas for events lasting longer than four hours. (Ord. 2014-03 § 1, 2014)

 

12.04.231 Tobacco use in city parks—Enforcement.
     Pursuant to American Canyon Municipal Code Section 1.24.010, violation of tobacco use in city parks constitutes an infraction unless such violation is specifically designated. (Ord. 2014-03 § 2, 2014)

Chapter 12.06 CAMPING UPON PUBLIC PROPERTIES
12.06.010 Purpose.
     The streets and public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to the residents and the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity can constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial areas. Camping on public property without proper sanitary measures adversely affects the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and interferes with the intended use and enjoyment of public property. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks, and other public areas within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable conditions, camping and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural and educational climate in the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful and ordinary use of public or private property. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth in this section, unless the context otherwise clearly requires.

     “Camp” means to:

     1.     Establish, maintain, operate, place, pitch or occupy camp facilities;

     2.     Live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; or

     3.     Use camp paraphernalia in a camp facility or outdoors.

     “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary shelters, camper trailers, motor homes, or vehicles, as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 670.

     “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or other sleeping equipment or any cooking equipment.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city, the acting city manager, or the city manager’s designee.

     “Establish” means setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials on to public property to camp or operate camp facilities.

     “Maintain” means keeping or permitting equipment, supplies or materials to remain on public property in order to camp or operate camp facilities.

     “Operate” means participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining a camp or camp facility.

     “Parks” means and includes all parks, parkways, trails, malls, plazas, greenbelts, gardens, lakes, and any other property owned by the city, including structures thereon, and used, operated, or maintained for recreational purposes whether passive or active. The term “park” also includes all off-street parking areas which are used or intended to be used in connection therewith. The term “owned” includes any property interest under which the city department of community services operates, maintains, or controls said property. The term also includes any property owned or kept by the city as open space, including undeveloped sites for future parks.

     “Public property” means all public property, including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, improved or unimproved land, buildings, parking lots, streams, waterways, rights-of-way, trails, and parks.

     “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

     “Street” means a street, avenue, highway, alley, way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.030 Unlawful camping.
     A.    It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp, either overnight or on a day-to-day basis, on any public property.

     B.     The city manager may, as provided in Section 12.06.050 of this chapter, issue a temporary permit to allow camping on public property in connection with a special event.

     C.     A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code Section 370, the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.040 Storage of personal property on public property.
     A.    It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property, including camping facilities and camping paraphernalia, on any public property, except as otherwise provided by resolution or ordinance of the city council.

     B.     A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code Section 370 the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter.

     C.     This section shall not apply to vehicles that are stored consistent with City Code Section 10.32.030, so long as such vehicles are not being occupied on an overnight or day-to-day basis for camping or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.050 Permit for special events required.
     A.    The city manager may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit to establish, maintain and operate a camp or a camp facility in connection with a special event. A special event is intended to include, but not be limited to, programs operated by the departments of the city, youth or school events, marathons or other sporting events and scouting activities. The city manager may consult with various city departments, the health officer and the public prior to issuing any temporary permit. Each department or person consulted may provide comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns and provide recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the permit. A reasonable fee, to be set by the city council shall be paid, in advance, by the applicant. The fee shall be returned if the application is denied. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit, the city manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary, health, safety and welfare conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of land upon which the proposed temporary camp or camp facility is to be located.

     B.     Any person who establishes, maintains or operates a camp or camp facility without a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor and constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to remedies provided in Penal Code Section 370 the city attorney may institute civil actions to abate a public nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.060 Posting copy of permit.
     It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any camp or camp facility unless there shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place upon the area or tract of land upon which the camp or camp facility is located a permit obtained from the city manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.06.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.070 Power of the city manager to make rules and regulations.
     The city manager is further empowered to ascertain that the operation or maintenance of any camp or camp facilities to which a temporary permit shall apply will in no way jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare and for this purpose may make additional rules and regulations pertaining to their establishment, operation or conduct. The city manager may also impose conditions on the establishment, maintenance and operation of the camp or camp facility, including, but not limited to, security, sanitation facilities, the number of occupants, posting of bonds or deposits, insurance, quiet hours, duration of the permit, and permitted activities on the premises. When the city manager shall issue any permit under the terms of Section 12.06.050 of this chapter, the same may be revoked at any time thereafter by the city manager if the city manager becomes satisfied that the maintenance or continuing operation of the camp or camp facilities is adverse to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

 

12.06.080 Current ordinance provisions.
     Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provision applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 2015-10 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 12.08 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT
12.08.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases are defined as provided in the following subsections:

     “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

     “District” or “underground utility district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in Section 12.08.020 of this chapter.

     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

     “Poles,” “overhead wires” and associated overhead “structures” mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

     “Utility” means and includes all persons, agencies, and entities, public or private, supplying by means of electrical materials or devices, any electric, communication or similar or associated service, including any such service supplied only to departments or divisions of the supplier. (Ord. 2000-12 § 1, 2000)

 

12.08.020 Establishment.
             A.       Council Hearing. The council may from time to time call a public hearing to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.

     B.     Notice. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearing at least ten days prior to the date thereof.

     C.     Conducting of Hearing. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive.

     D.    Report. Prior to holding such public hearing, the public works director shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total cost to the city and affected property owners. Such reports shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities.

     E.     Council Designation of District. If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installations. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.

 

     F.     Notice of Establishment. Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to this section, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall prior to the date specified in said resolution, provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

     G.    Notice of Establishment Method. Such notice by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to this section, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 2013-03 § 2, 2013)

 

12.08.030 Prohibitions and exceptions.
     A.    Unlawful Acts. Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.08.020 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.08.040(B) and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

     B.     Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, in order to provide emergency service temporary overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ninety days. Any person installing such temporary overhead facilities shall, as soon as practicable, notify the director of public works of any such temporary overhead facility to be relocated and so maintained as he may deem necessary to prevent unnecessary interference with vehicular traffic or undue hazard to the public safety.

     C.     Other Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to the following types of facilities:

     1.     Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director of public works;

     2.     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

     3.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

     4.     Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

     5.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location of the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

     6.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

     7.     Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

     8.     Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction project. (Ord. 2000-12 § 1, 2000)

 

12.08.040 Responsibility.
     A.    Utility Companies. If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by Section 12.08.020, the supply utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulation and tariffs on file with the Commission.

     B.     Property Owners. Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in subsection A and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within a reasonable time pursuant to the above, the director of public works shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within thirty days after receipt of such notice, all in accordance with the application rules, regulation and tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Commission.

     C.     City. The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within a reasonable time. (Ord. 2000-12 § 1, 2000)

 

12.08.050 Performance.
     A.    Notice. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In the case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, city of American Canyon. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the director of public works shall within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

     B.     Notice—Content. The notice given by the director of public works to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the director of public works will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property.

     C.     Performance by City. If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the director of public works shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the director of public works shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property.

     D.    Cost Report. Upon completion of the work by the director of public works, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof including administrative overhead, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

     E.     Notice of Hearing. The director of public works shall, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

     F.     Hearing on Report. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

     G.    Collection of Cost. If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the director of public works, and the director of public works is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year.

     H.    Time Extension. In the event that any act required by this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 2000-12 § 1, 2000)

Title 13 WATER SERVICE SYSTEM
Chapter 13.04 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS ADOPTED
Chapter 13.06 WATER RATES AND CONNECTION FEES
Chapter 13.10 NEW WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS AND SERVICES
Chapter 13.14 WATER CONSERVATION PLAN

Chapter 13.04 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS ADOPTED
13.04.010 District enactments to remain in effect.
     A.    All ordinances of the American Canyon county water district which have been applicable within the territory now incorporated as the city of American Canyon, to the extent that they applied before incorporation, shall remain in full force and effect as ordinances of the city.

     B.     The resolutions, rules and regulations of the American Canyon county water district which have been so applicable in implementation of the aforesaid ordinances and state law (such as, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act and regulations pertaining to traffic), to the extent that they applied before incorporation shall remain in full force and effect as resolutions, rules and regulations, respectively, of the city, and which may be amended or repealed in the future by any form of enactment (motion, resolution or ordinance) deemed appropriate by the council.

     C.     Additionally, all resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies of the American Canyon county water district to the extent that they applied before incorporation shall be deemed to be of the city, and shall remain in full force and effect as resolutions, rules, regulations, and policies, respectively, of the city. (Ord. 5 § 1, 1992)

 

13.04.020 Declaration of intent.
     Certain provisions of the district enactments referred to in Section 13.04.010 of this chapter reflect the district governmental structure and contain references to officials, official titles, commissions, and other designations which are not a part. of the structure of this city’s government. In order to effectively and intelligently administer the district enactments to the extent that they are continued in effect by this chapter, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the substitution of the appropriate city official, title, or designation in district enactments. (Ord. 5 § 2, 1992)

 

13.04.030 Substitution of appropriate reference to city.
     A.    Whenever in the enactments of the American Canyon county water district which are continued in effect by the city there is a reference to “board of directors,” this reference shall be interpreted to mean the “city council of the city of American Canyon.”

     B.     Whenever in the enactments of the American Canyon county water district which are continued in effect by the city there is a reference to an office, official title, or other designation, the reference shall be interpreted to mean that office, title, or designation in the governmental structure of the city, or if there is none, any official or titleholder of the city who has been specifically directed by the council or the city manager to perform the functions referred to or the duties imposed.

     C.     Whenever it is appropriate under the circumstances, and in the enactments of the American Canyon county water district which are continued in effect by the city, there is a reference to the “American Canyon county water district,” “district,” or “territory” of the American Canyon county water district, such reference shall be interpreted to mean the “city of American Canyon.” (Ord. 5 § 3, 1992)

 

13.04.040 Continuance of district ordinances within city.
     Each ordinance or enactment of the American Canyon county water district which remains in effect as a city ordinance or enactment by virtue of Section 13.04.010 of this chapter shall be deemed a city ordinance or enactment, and may be modified or superseded by the council in the same manner as other city ordinances or enactments. (Ord. 5 § 4, 1992)

 

13.04.050 Enforcement of continuing district ordinances.
     The enforcement of the district ordinances continuing in effect in the incorporated area shall be by the city. (Ord. 5 § 5, 1992)

 
Chapter 13.06 WATER RATES AND CONNECTION FEES
13.06.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set forth below:

     “Commercial” means any nonresidential premises classified as a retail store, restaurant, office building, laundry, master-metered multifamily or mobile home park, and other service establishment (including churches, lodges, government services, or public services) connected to the city water system, and which cannot be classified as a large industrial, raw water, landscape service, recycled water, or single-family residential, pursuant to this section.

     “Cost of service” means the sum of all expenses relating to the ongoing operation of the water enterprise, to include but not be limited to salaries and benefits of all city staff required to run the water enterprise, operating expenses such as utilities and the purchase of water, related wastewater operations debt service related to improvements to the water system, and the maintenance and timely replacement of all existing capital infrastructure.

     “Customer” means any residence, business or other entity that has signed up and contracted with the city for a specific water service. The type of customer is determined by the rate charged; thus, a commercial use could be a single-family residential customer, if the business qualified pursuant to Section 13.06.020(C) of this chapter.

     “Customer charge” means a flat fee per each water billing period, billed on a monthly basis.

     “Inside-the-city” means any water connection within the city corporate boundaries as they presently exist or as they may be modified from time to time.

     “Landscape service” means a metered account used exclusively for landscaping purposes. Such accounts are exempt from wastewater service charges, but must agree to use recycled water, if and when it becomes available; must agree to participate in the city’s water conservation program; and would be subject to use restrictions and/or fee surcharges during periods of drought.

     “Large industrial” means any premises whose annual water use is in excess of four thousand two hundred units (Ccf) per year, is located within city boundaries, is separately connected to the water system, and whose predominant water use is for industrial purposes. Such customers must agree to supplemental conditions of service, including compliance with the city water conservation program, use of landscape service accounts as appropriate, and use of recycled water as appropriate, if and when it becomes available.

     “Meter charge” means a flat fee, based on the size of water meter in service, billed on a monthly basis.

     “Multifamily” means any premises that is residential in nature and consists of more than one dwelling unit served by a single metered water connection including any mobilehome park. Such master-metered customers shall be charged the same as commercial customers. Temporary residential premises (e.g., hotels) are treated as a commercial use.

     “Outside-the-city” means any water connection outside the incorporated city limits.

     “Private fire protection service” means water service for a sprinkler system obtained through a separate service line connected in accordance with city standards to the water system.

     “Quantity charge” means a charge per unit of water consumed by a customer. For example, this charge may be fixed for all units of water consumed for commercial customers, or, for single-family residential customers, may be “tiered” so that the charge increases in increments as more water is used in order to encourage conservation.

     “Raw water” means any premises or property, which, by action of the city council, makes a special arrangement to use water provided by the city that is not treated at the city’s water treatment plant. A raw water customer must agree to use recycled water, when available, and would be subject to use restrictions and/or surcharges during periods of drought or restricted supply.

     “Recycled water” means wastewater effluent treated to tertiary levels consistent with California Code of Regulations Title 22 standards, and may include, but not be limited to, irrigation, landscaping, groundwater, industrial and groundwater recharge uses.

     “Single-family residential” means a free-standing home that is served by a dedicated water service line and meter and has only one legal dwelling unit.

     “Temporary meter” means a metered water connection to the city’s system for a duration of no longer than six months, or, under special circumstances approved by the city manager no longer than twelve months. The connection must conform to city standards for temporary connections.

     “Unit” means one hundred cubic feet of water as measured by water meters approved by the city, or approximately seven hundred forty eight gallons (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.020 Declaration of intent in establishing water rates.
     A.    It shall be city policy to collect water rates and charges that meet but do not exceed the cost of service of the water enterprise.

     B.     It shall be city policy to set water rates and charges that are fair and equitable to all customer classes and recover each customer share of the total cost of service in proportion to their use of the city system.

     C.     It shall be city policy to have a water rate study performed, by a qualified independent rate consultant, at least once every five years, to ensure that water rates and charges are set to an appropriate level. Rate studies will be based on American Water Works Association (AWWA) rate setting principles and shall recommend rates which meet the cost of service of the city water enterprise.

     D.    The city may exercise its discretion consistent with Hansen v. City of San Buenaventura, 42 Cal.3d 1172 (1986) to enact a rate for property owners outside the city which is forty percent greater than the rate for water customers within the city. (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.030 Water meter charges and provisions.
     A.    Each customer shall pay a fixed monthly fee based on the size of water meter in service to allow the city to recover a portion of its fixed costs that it incurs regardless of water use. Water meter charges shall be paid monthly and calculated according to AWWA-approved demand ratios, and shall be equally applied based on meter size to all customer classes.

     B.     As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or January 1, 2008, whichever comes later, the water meter charges for customers shall be levied according to the following schedule.

 

     Inside city customers:

 

Meter size

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

5/8″ and 3/4″

$  4.00

$  4.40

$  4.84

$  5.32

1″
Residential

4.00

4.40

4.84

5.32

1″

6.67

7.34

8.07

8.88

1.5″

13.33

14.67

16.13

17.75

2″

21.33

23.47

25.81

28.39

3″

42.67

46.93

51.63

56.79

4″

66.67

73.33

80.67

88.73

6″

133.33

146.67

161.33

177.47

8″

213.33

234.67

258.13

283.95

 

     Outside city customers:

 

Meter size

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

5/8″ and 3/4″

$5.60

$6.16

$6.78

$7.45

1″ Residential

5.60

6.16

6.78

7.45

1″

9.34

10.27

11.30

12.43

1.5″

18.67

20.53

22.59

24.85

2″

29.87

32.85

36.14

39.75

3″

59.73

65.71

72.28

79.51

4″

93.33

102.67

112.93

124.23

6″

186.67

205.33

225.87

248.45

8″

298.67

328.53

361.39

397.53

 

     C.     As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or January 1, 2008, whichever comes later, temporary water meter charges for customers shall be levied according to the following schedule:

 

     Inside and outside city customers:

 

Meter size

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

Temporary Meter

$59.73

$65.71

$72.28

$79.51

 

     D.    Starting on January 1st, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, all water meter charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.040 Water quantity charges and provisions.
     A.    Each customer shall pay a quantity charge for each unit of water used in a given month. In order to encourage conservation among city users, single-family residential customers will pay a “tiered” rate that increases in increments as water consumption increases. All commercial customers (to include master metered multi-family, industrial, landscaping, public, and schools) shall pay a fixed quantity rate for all water consumed.

     B.     As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or January 1, 2008, whichever comes later, customers will pay quantity rates according to the schedule included below.

 

     Single-family residential—Inside city:

 

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

Tier 1

0-8 hcf

$2.25

$2.41

$2.58

$2.76

Tier 2

9-20 hcf

2.88

3.08

3.30

3.53

Tier 3

21+ hcf

3.45

3.55

3.66

3.77

 

     Single-family residential—Outside city:

 

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

Tier 1

0-8 hcf

$3.15

$3.37

$3.61

$3.86

Tier 2

9-20 hcf

4.03

4.31

4.62

4.94

Tier 3

21+ hcf

4.83

4.97

5.12

5.28

 

     Commercial, industrial, multifamily, landscaping, public—Inside city:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

All water consumed

$2.63

$2.81

$3.01

$3.22

 

 

     Commercial, industrial, multifamily, landscaping, public—Outside city:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

All water consumed

$3.68

$3.94

$4.22

$4.51

 

     Temporary meters—Inside and outside city customers:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

All water consumed

$3.68

$3.94

$4.22

$4.51

 

     Raw water—Inside and outside city customers:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

1-Jan-11

All water consumed

$1.26

$1.35

$1.44

$1.54

 

     C.     Effective January 1, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, water quantity charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.050 Water rates—Adoption by resolution.
     The city council declares its intent that any future changes in the water rates established in this chapter shall be by resolution, and the adoption of such a resolution shall have the same force and effect as though the changes had been made by the adoption of an ordinance. (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.060 Private fire protection.
     A.    Each customer who obtains or utilizes a private fire protection service inside-the-city shall pay a charge for water measured as having passed through a bypass meter on the service protective backflow apparatus. The charge for such service shall be one-half the customer charge for inside-the-city commercial users.

     B.     Each customer who obtains or utilizes a private fire protection service outside-the-city shall pay a charge for water measured as having passed through a bypass meter on the service protective backflow apparatus. The charge for such service shall be one-half the customer charge for outside-the-city users.

     C.     Existing commercial customers requesting to retrofit an existing building with a private fire protection service shall pay the appropriate meter installation fee and related charges, including any required devices. No additional connection fee shall be charged. (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.070 Water rates—Other provisions.
     A.    Commercial users who desire the single-family residential rate may apply for the rate. If approved by the city manager, the single-family rate shall remain in force for a minimum of twelve months. It is the customer’s responsibility to request a further modification.

     B.     The city council may, establish policies and procedures by resolution to administer this chapter, including, but not limited to, allowing credits to customers for large, one time water losses and related wastewater charges.

     C.     Raw water users, prior to connection, shall apply to the city for permission to connect and receive raw water.

     D     Existing commercial customers requesting a landscape meter shall pay the appropriate meter installation fee and related charges. An additional connection fee shall not be required unless either the overall water consumption increases, or the landscape meter size is larger than the currently installed meter. In either event, the customer shall pay the incremental increase in the connection fee amount. Any landscape-related arrangements between the city and any specific customer established by city council action prior to February 3, 2000 shall remain in full force and effect, unless and until it is modified by a subsequent city council action.

     E.     Any water user that establishes a well for domestic water purposes after January 1, 2008 shall apply to the city for permission to receive and use well water upon dedication of the well and well water to the city water system. (Ord. 2007-13 § 3, 2007)

 

13.06.080 Declaration of intent to provide for water capacity fees.
     The purpose of a water capacity fee is to allow the city to recover the costs associated with providing a new connection to the city’s water system. The fee is set to recover the costs of all existing infrastructure, provided by existing customers for the benefit of the new connection, as well as all future capital projects required to provide that new connection with sufficient water supply, treatment, and distribution capacity in the city’s water system. (Ord. 2007-09 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.090 Water capacity fee.
     A.    At the time of submission of an application for a building permit for connection to the city water system, an applicant shall be required to pay a water capacity fee, in proportion to the new connection’s impact on the water system.

     B.     For the purposes of calculating the water capacity fee, a single-family residence shall be considered one “equivalent dwelling unit (EDU),” with one EDU being assigned a design flow of six hundred eighty gallons per day. For the purposes of calculating the maximum daily water use of a multifamily residence requesting connection to the water system, each within a multifamily residence unit will be assumed to be sixty-five percent of one single-family EDU. Single- and multifamily residences will pay water capacity fees according to subsection D of this section.

     C.     All applications for building permits for nonresidential connections will be required to pay a water capacity fee proportional to the expected maximum daily water use of the connection, as calculated by the applicant and certified by the city manager, public works director or other designated staff. The applicant shall, using commonly accepted building and plumbing practices, demonstrate the average daily and maximum daily water use in gallons per day (gpd) for the connection to the water system. Nonresidential water capacity fees shall be calculated according to the cost per gpd detailed in subsection D.

     D.    Water capacity fees shall be calculated according to the following schedule.

 

Single-family residence (one EDU)

$12,462.00

Multifamily residence (0.65 EDU)

$8,100.00

Commercial/industrial/public (per gpd)

$18.33

 

     E.     The city in its sole discretion may adopt revised water capacity fees based on the proportionate effects of inflation or changes to the cost of living. The Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the San Francisco region shall be used for adjusting said fees. Any such adjustment in accordance with this section may be approved by a resolution of the city council. (Res. 2009-76; Ord. 2008-01 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2007-09 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.100 Water use substantially increased—Additional water capacity fee.
     If, in the judgment of the city manager or public works director, and after the final water capacity fee is established, any customer increases the demand on the water system capacity in a substantial and permanent way, due to changes in the size or nature of the building or premises previously permitted, the city shall charge and collect additional water capacity fees based upon the increased water use. The additional water capacity fee shall be established by computing the new number of EDUs in service at the connection, and then subtracting from that figure the number of EDUs originally purchased in accordance with Section 13.06.020. (Ord. 2008-01 § 1, 2008; Ord. 2007-09 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.110 Water capacity fees—Economic development incentives.
     A.    At the written request of the applicant, and with the approval by resolution of the city council, an applicant may enter into an agreement with the city for a revised water capacity fee upon finding of one or more of the following conditions:

     1.     The project provides a needed public service to the city of American Canyon or its residents;

     2.     The project provides a significant contribution of sales tax or transient occupancy tax to the city of American Canyon;

     3.     Based on an independent economic analysis, a project water demand for an inside-the-city application for water service might vary by more than ten percent from anticipated water demand calculated in accordance with Table 13.06.020, including the addition of an allowance for unmetered water losses throughout the city’s water system.

     B.     Agreements for a revised water capacity fee shall be approved by a resolution of the city council.

     C.     An applicant may enter into an agreement with the city to provide improvements to the city water system that are off-site to the project or oversized. In such an event, the applicant may be reimbursed the cost of such facility from water capital improvement funds, not to exceed that portion of the improvement considered off-site or oversized to the applicant’s project.

     D.    The city may require an applicant to construct oversize or off-site facilities as shown on the capital improvement program adopted by the city council, if the applicant’s project increases the city’s water system average-day annual demand by two percent or greater as determined by the city engineer. In such cases, the applicant shall be offered a credit against water connection fees in the amount of the estimated off-site or oversized facilities to applicant’s project. (Ord. 2007-09 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.120 Water capacity fee—Intense uses.
     A.    All projects within the city conforming to city zoning as industrial and all projects within the unincorporated area of Napa County, for which the city provides water connections pursuant to Section 13.10.040 of this title, shall be subject to a limitation on water service if and when the project’s average day annual demand for water exceeds six hundred fifty gallons per acre per day on any parcel. The average day annual demand shall include an allowance for unmetered water losses of the city system as determined by the city engineer. In such cases, the applicant shall mitigate the consumption above six hundred fifty gallons of water per acre per day, average annual demand, as provided in Section 13.10.040.

     B.     The city shall monitor the annual average daily demand, and in increments more frequently than once a year as deemed appropriate by the city.

     C.     The city’s provision of water services to projects located outside city limits shall be governed by Chapter 13.10 of this title and applicable state law. (Ord. 2007-09 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.130 Water capacity fees—Adopted by resolution use.
     A.    The city council declares its intent to make any future changes in water capacity fees established in this chapter by setting forth the changes in a resolution duly adopted, and the adoption of such a resolution shall have the same force and effect as though the changes had been made by the adoption of an ordinance.

     B.     The city may use capacity fees to advance funds to implement provisions of the annual city capital improvement program or to deal with short-term cash flow requirements. (Ord. 2007-09 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 13.10 NEW WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS AND SERVICES
13.10.010 Legislative findings.
     The city council of the city finds and declares the following:

     A.    Under state law, the city may provide water and sewer connections and service to residences and businesses within its corporate boundaries before committing to provide water and sewer connections and services to developments outside city limits;

     B.     The city has approved and may have applications in the future for new developments for residential, commercial and industrial uses that will require water and sewer connections and service;

     C.     Applications for the annexation of various properties to the city and the American Canyon fire protection district, a subsidiary district of the city (district) are currently pending before the Napa County local agency formation commission (LAFCO), and other applications may be submitted in the future from time to time;

     D.    Applications for new developments that will require large amounts of water which will be located in unincorporated county territory are pending before the county of Napa (county) and to date, applications for the annexation of these developments into the city have not been filed with LAFCO;

     E.     The city’s primary obligation as a local government is to provide water and sewer connections and service within its boundaries or to those developments where applications for annexation to the city are pending before LAFCO, rather than to developments in unincorporated county territory;

     F.     The city is committed to the prudent management of its resources and to its economic growth and development;

     G.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, consistent with the City-County Agreement, the city will provide water service to all outside customers and other outside customers upon request under all of the same terms and conditions under which the city provides water service to city customers, and the city will not impose any term or condition on any water service to any outside customer and other outside customers that is different from the terms and conditions that the city imposes on city customers, except that the city may continue to impose higher water rates on outside customers and other outside customers consistent with Hansen v. City of San Buenaventura (1986) 42 Cal.3d 1172;

     H.    The city shall continue to provide water service to existing outside customers and other outside customers and, upon request, the city shall provide new or increased water service to all outside customers and other outside customers under the same terms and conditions under which the city provides water service to city customers, as provided in subsection G of this section. The city shall provide all new city customers, all new outside customers and other outside customers with water service under the conditions set forth in subsection I of this section;

     I.      Water Conditions to be Imposed on all Parcels (City Customers, Outside Customers and Other Outside Customers) for which New Water Service is Requested.

     The city may impose the conditions listed below on new water services for outside customers and other outside customers by including these conditions in the “will-serve” letters that the city provides to such customers, but only if the city also imposes the same conditions on all new water services for parcels with similar uses within the city’s limits. Napa County shall include these same conditions in all new land use development permits for parcels within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan area.

     1.     City Capacity Fees and Conditions of Approval for Water Service. Capacity fees charged for parcels within the city’s water service area shall be established by the city and will be periodically reviewed and updated. Capacity fees (also known as connection fees) will be uniform throughout the water service area, regardless of whether the parcel to which the fee applies is inside or outside the city’s limits. The capacity fee and any conditions on new water service will be determined based on the Water Supply Report, which shall contain the analysis described in the City-County Agreement Part II.C. of Exhibit F, and which will be consistent with the city’s Zero Water Footprint Policy, adopted by the city on October 23, 2007, or as may be subsequently amended.

     2.     Cost of Water Service. The cost of new water service shall be imposed through the capacity fees in the city’s Ordinance 2007-09 or through new capacity fees approved by Napa County and enacted in a new city ordinance. However, if the Water Supply Report finds, consistent with the city’s Zero Water Footprint Policy or as may be subsequently amended (see City-County Agreement Exhibit F), that the city will have to obtain additional water supplies to meet “dry year” shortfalls, then the cost of water to meet such “dry year” shortfalls will be the sole responsibility of the applicant. In determining whether or not such “dry year” shortfalls will occur, the city shall include in the base supplies available to the city during “dry years” the new water supplies that have been or will be included in the calculations used to set the city’s capacity fees and water rates. The city will conclude that “dry year” shortfalls will occur only if such base supplies will not be adequate to meet anticipated “dry year” demands. The city may not impose any costs on the applicant under this section to reimburse the city for any capital or operating costs that have been or will be included in the calculations used to set the city’s capacity fees or water rates. The city may impose the additional costs described in the preceding sentence on outside customers and other outside customers only if the city also imposes such additional costs uniformly on city customers.

     3.     Maximum Allowable Water Use. Water received from the city for use on parcels within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan area and on parcels with similar uses within the city’s limits and other outside customers with similar uses shall be limited to an average of six hundred fifty gallons of water per day per acre (measured monthly), and applicants for new or increased city water service for all such parcels shall be required to demonstrate to the city while the city is preparing the Water Supply Report for the applicant the maximum extent to which the applicant can further reduce its water consumption by applying the following best management practices:

     a.     No Flow or Low Flow Fixtures. These applicants shall be required to install no flow or low flow water fixtures, and to implement other reasonable water conservation measures that are described in the city’s Water Conservation Guidelines adopted in the city’s Resolution No. 2008-08 or in new city water conservation guidelines approved by Napa County and adopted in a new city ordinance or resolution.

     b.     Drought Tolerant Landscape and Irrigation with Recycled Water. These applicants shall be required to use only drought tolerant landscaping, and they may only irrigate landscaped areas with recycled water, when it is available.

     c.     Purple Pipe. These applicants shall be required to dual plumb their buildings and install “purple pipe” in all landscape areas in anticipation of the availability of recycled water and shall use the recycled water when available.

     d.     These applicants shall follow the water conservation methods that are described in the Water Conservation Guidelines adopted in the city’s Resolution No. 2008-08 or in new city water conservation guidelines approved by Napa County and adopted in a new city ordinance or resolution.

     The city may apply the provisions of this paragraph to applicants for new or increased city water service for parcels within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan area only if the city also uniformly applies these provisions to all applicants for new or increased city water service for parcels with similar uses within the city’s limits and other outside customers.

     4.     Water Offsets. Applicants for city water service for parcels within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan area and for parcels with similar uses within the city’s limits and other outside customers with parcels with similar uses that wish to use more than an average of six hundred fifty gallons of water per day per acre (measured monthly) shall offset the proposed water use over six hundred fifty gallons per day per acre (measured monthly) through the use of one or more options that are made available by the city to the applicants. These options include, but are not limited to, retrofitting of existing residences with low flow fixtures, purchase of otherwise developable land as permanent open space, or acquisition of other water supply resources as provided for by a water supply analysis that follows the Zero Water Footprint Methodology, or as may be subsequently amended, described in Exhibit F to the City-County Agreement. The city shall make all such options available uniformly to applicant for city water service for parcels within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan area and for parcels with similar uses within the city’s limits and other outside customers with parcels with similar uses, and that seek such offsets.

     5.     Drought Restrictions. To the extent permitted by law, the city may curtail or ration the use of water provided by the city below the limit of six hundred fifty gallons per day per acre (measured monthly) in dry years through the imposition of drought restrictions that are uniformly applied throughout the city’s water service area.

     J.      For purposes of this Chapter 13, “city customers” shall mean all persons and entities presently receiving water service from the city, and all persons and entities that are requesting or in the future request new or increased water service from the city, for parcels that are located within city’s incorporated limits.

     K.    For purposes of this Chapter 13, “outside customers” shall mean all persons and entities presently receiving water service from the city, and all persons and entities that are requesting or in the future request new or increased water service from the city for parcels that are located outside the city’s limits but within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan boundaries.

     L.     For purposes of this Chapter 13, “other outside customers” shall mean all persons and entities presently receiving water service from the city, and all persons and entities that are requesting or in the future request new or increased water service from the city for parcels that are located outside the city’s limits but not within the Airport Industrial Area Specific Plan boundaries. (Ord. 2008-08 §§ 1, 3, 2008; Ord. 2000-04 § 1, 2000)

 

13.10.020 Priority of service.
     A.    The city shall give first priority for new water and sewer connections and services to residential developments with affordable housing as defined in California Government Code 65589.7 or any successor statute.

     B.     The city shall give second priority for new water and sewer connections and services to residences and businesses located within the city corporate boundaries.

     C.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, consistent with the City-County Agreement, the city will provide water service to all outside customers and other outside customers upon request under all of the same terms and conditions under which the city provides water service to city customers, and the city will not impose any term or condition on any water service to any outside customer and other outside customers that is different from the terms and conditions that the city imposes on city customers, except that the city may continue to impose higher water rates on outside customers and other outside customers, consistent with Hansen v. City of San Buenaventura (1986) 42 Cal.3d 1172.

 

     D.    Applicants for water service from other outside customer applicants must comply with all standards applicable to outside customers set forth in this chapter and in the discretion of the city, applicants may be required to enter into a revenue sharing agreement. (Ord. 2019-09 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2008-08 §§ 2, 4, 2008; Ord. 2000-04 § 1, 2000)

 

13.10.030 Exemptions.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 13.10.020 of this chapter, city may provide water and sewer connections and services to developments outside of city limits, but within the urban limit line area or the water service area of city when it is established that there is a vested right to such connections or services under agreement or as otherwise provided by state law. Interested parties claiming a vested or other legal right to water or sewer connections or service which predated the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may advance such a claim and appeal to the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.04 of this code. (Ord. 2000-04 § 1, 2000)

 

13.10.040 General requirements and limitations on will-serve letters issued to developments outside city’s corporate limits.
     Unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city council, any development outside the city’s corporate boundaries must agree to the following conditions, in order to receive city water and/or sewer services:

     A.    The applicant must clearly define the project being proposed, including the estimated water or sewage services required;

     B.     The applicant must agree to abide by the rules and regulations of the city, including the payment of any and all fees and charges, unless otherwise specified in writing;

     C.     The applicant must agree to waive any protest to the city’s forty percent surcharge on outside city water customers, established to offset the tax and other revenue loss to the city by not annexing into the city;

     D.    The applicant must agree to grant any required utility or access easements that may be reasonably required by the city;

     E.     The applicant must agree to pay a nonrefundable deposit of five percent of the engineer’s estimated costs of all required on- and off site public water and/or sewer facilities, in order to cover plan check and inspection charges;

     F.     In the event the applicant’s estimated or actual water consumption exceeds the city’s per acre water limit, currently at six hundred fifty gallons of water per day per acre, then the applicant must agree to any one or a combination of the following conditions:

     1.     Reduce or redesign the project to reduce overall water consumption to a point at or below the city’s limit, including but not limited to, a more aggressive water conservation program, or the use of recycled water whenever possible,

     2.     Integrate additional land into the project, which is also within the city’s water service area, in such a manner that the overall consumption for the entire area is at or below the city’s limit, or

     3.     Agree to advance the costs to enhance the city’s water supply, treatment and/or delivery system in order to compensate for the extra water demand. Any costs in excess of the project’s fair share will be credited against the project’s connection fees or be reimbursed to the applicant, as future development occurs;

     G.    The applicant shall connect to city’s wastewater collection and treatment system, if the applicant’s project is within the city’s sewer service area, unless the city council finds it creates an undue hardship on applicant;

     H.    To the extent practical, the applicant must agree to utilize recycled water in its business operations or for landscaping and irrigation purposes, if and when it becomes available to applicant;

     I.      The city may impose any other requirements that are appropriate to the specific development being proposed, such as, but not limited to, participation in a benefit assessment district;

 

     J.      No will-serve letter shall be valid for a period greater than two years, unless specified in the letter itself;

     K.    Any changes to the project description may void the letter, at the sole discretion of the city council; and

     L.     In granting a will-serve letter, city makes no determination as to land use entitlements required for the proposed project, and the issuance shall not be construed to be an expression of city’s position regarding the use or intensity of use of the development property.

     M.    Notwithstanding the foregoing, consistent with the City-County Agreement, the city will provide water service to all outside customers and other outside customers upon request under all of the same terms and conditions under which the city provides water service to city customers, and the city will not impose any term or condition on any water service to any outside customer and other outside customers that is different from the terms and conditions that the city imposes on city customers, except that the city may continue to impose higher water rates on outside customers and other outside customers consistent with Hansen v. City of San Buenaventura (1986) 42 Cal.3d 1172. (Ord. 2008-08 § 5, 2008; Ord. 2000-04 § 1, 2000)

 

13.10.050 Declaring outdated will-serve letters to be null and void.
     Any will-serve letter issued two years prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and for which no building permit has been issued, shall be considered null and void, and shall have no effect whatsoever on city. Furthermore, the will-serve letter will be void if the use for which it was intended has changed substantially, as determined by city council. (Ord. 2000-04 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 13.14 WATER CONSERVATION PLAN
13.14.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Water Conservation Plan” of the city of American Canyon and may be so cited. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.020 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose of this chapter is to have a plan for water conservation resulting from a reduced supply of water such as may result from drought, water supply shortages, or limitations of water delivery conditions.

     Nothing in this chapter will preclude the city council from passing an emergency resolution for the immediate curtailment of water use by its customers due to water supply shortages and delivery limitations caused by catastrophic events and conditions, either natural or unnatural. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.030 Definitions.
     The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

     “City” means the city of American Canyon acting by and through the city of American Canyon public works department as operator of the city of American Canyon water and recycled water systems.

     “Customer” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, property, or governmental entity, whether within or outside the geographic boundaries of the city of American Canyon, who uses water supplied by the city.

     “GPD” means gallons per day.

     “Low-flow toilet” means a toilet that uses no more than 1.6 gallons of water per flush or less.

     “Manager” is the city manager of the city of American Canyon.

     “Nonresidential uses” means all other uses not classified as residential pursuant to ACMC 19.05.040.

     “Public works director” is the public works department head of the city of American Canyon.

     “Recycled water” means water treated in accordance with Title 22, Section 60301 et seq., of the California Code of Regulations and suitable for reuse under the circumstances outlined.

     “Residential uses” means all those uses classified as residential pursuant to ACMC 19.05.040.

     “Turf” means a species of grass that was developed to be used as a lawn together with the surface layer of earth held together by its roots.

     “Water” means potable water. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.040 Authorization.
     The manager or designee is authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this chapter upon adoption of a city council resolution determining that such implementation is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.050 Application.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons, customers and properties served by the city including expressly those outside the geographic boundaries of the city of American Canyon. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.060 Water waste prohibitions.
     The following uses of water are defined as “waste of water” and are absolutely prohibited:

     A.    Failing to repair a leak and/or otherwise permit the escape of water through breaks or leaks within the customer’s plumbing or private distribution system for any substantial period of time within which such break or leak should reasonably have been discovered and corrected. It shall be presumed that a period of seventy-two hours after the customer discovers such a break or leak or receives notice from the city, is a reasonable time within which to correct such a break or leak or, at a minimum, to stop the flow of water from such break or leak.

     B.     Use water to irrigate grass, lawns, groundcover, shrubbery, crops, trees or other vegetation or in such a manner as to result in runoff to any gutter, ditch, drain or impermeable surface. Every customer is deemed to have his or her water system under control at all times, to know the manner and extent of his or her water use and any run-off, and to employ available alternatives to apply irrigation water in an efficient manner.

     C.     Washing cars, boats, trailers or other vehicles and machinery directly with a hose not equipped with a shutoff nozzle.

     D.    Water for non-recycling decorative water fountains.

     E.     Water for single-pass evaporative cooling systems for air conditioning in all connections installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, unless required for health or safety reasons.

     F.     Water for non-recirculating conveyor car wash systems, industrial clothes wash systems, and/or other commercial purposes for which recirculated or recycled water can safely and effectively serve the same purpose.

     G.    Water for the irrigation of turf for nonresidential uses.

     H.    Water for the flushing of toilets for nonresidential uses with the exception of water for flushing low-flow toilets and/or as provided by Section 13.14.110.

     I.      The use of water for earth compaction, dust control, or other construction use, including the testing of new sewer lines unless the water is obtained from a source expressly approved by the public works director; provided, however, notwithstanding the foregoing, that water may be used for purposes of testing new water service lines.

     J.      Withdrawal of water from fire hydrants within the service area of the city, except for purposes of fire-fighting, water system maintenance, and other uses as permitted by the city.

     K.    All restaurants, hotels, cafés, cafeterias, bars, or other public places where food or drink are served and/or purchased are to serve water to customers only when specifically requested by the customer.

     L.     All hotels and motels shall provide guests with the option of choosing not to have towels and linens laundered daily. The hotel or motel shall prominently display notice of this option in each guestroom using clear and easily understood language.

     M.    The irrigation with water of landscapes outside of newly constructed homes and buildings in a manner inconsistent Chapter 16.14.

     N.    Use of water that is inconsistent with state or federal regulations. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.065 Recycled water service required.
     Following a public hearing, the city’s nonresidential water customers whose properties may be served by recycled water shall connect their property to recycled water for those uses for which the use of potable domestic water would be deemed a waste or unreasonable use of water as specified in Division 7, Chapter 7, of the California Water Code (Section 13550 et seq.). Recycled water customers shall pay for recycled water at the rate established by the city council.

     Upon written notification from the city, new development shall construct the infrastructure to accept recycled water from the city. New development shall pay any applicable recycled water connection fees at the rate established by the city council.

     Upon written notification from the city, new development abutting on any street in which there is now or may in the future be located a public recycled water line, is required to connect the property directly to the recycled water line, provided that the public recycled water line is within two hundred feet of the nearest point of the property. The expense to extend the public recycled water line and associated appurtenances to and across the street frontage is the sole responsibility of the developer.

     Upon written notification from the city, new development abutting on any street in which there may be located a public recycled water line in the future is required to construct the recycled water line and associated appurtenances along the street frontage at the developer’s sole expense, including the new development’s connection thereto.

     Failure of a water customer to accept service of recycled water when it is made available, where use of potable water would otherwise be deemed a waste or unreasonable use of water, may be grounds for termination of the customer’s potable water service.

     Failure of a recycled water customer to comply with the city’s conditions for recycled water use shall be deemed a violation and shall be subject to enforcement as outlined in Section 13.14.120.

     Water customers may appeal the city’s determination that recycled water of suitable quality is available as outlined in Section 13.14.110. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.070 Water conservation stages.
     The intent of this section is to provide for the escalation of customer demand management strategies that may be necessary due to an emergency caused by drought and/or water supply shortages. There are four stages of strategies, each of which builds upon its predecessor stage and are to be implemented as the severity of conditions increase. No customer of the city shall make, cause, use, or permit the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this chapter, or in an amount in excess of what is permitted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The reductions shall be based upon the amount of water used during that base period defined as the amount of water used on a customer’s property during the corresponding monthly billing period in the previous year, or other year as may be designated by the city council. New services or services without a base year billing history shall be allotted on comparable customer usage.

     A.    Stage 1. Voluntary Conservation. The intent of Stage 1 is to achieve an overall system-wide demand reduction of ten percent. The city council may by resolution declare a “Drought Emergency Stage 1 (Voluntary Conservation)” upon recommendation by the manager and based on water supply and delivery projections by the public works director, that an overall system-wide reduction of ten percent is necessary. During Stage 1, all water customers of the city shall be requested to implement the following best practices:

     1.     Apply irrigation water only during the evening and early morning hours to reduce evaporation losses.

     2.     Utilize water conservation incentive, rebate and giveaway programs to replace water guzzling plumbing fixtures and appliances with water efficient models.

     3.     Utilize city information regarding using water efficiently, reading water meters, repairing ordinary leaks, and water efficient landscape.

     4.     Wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment during the evening and early morning hours to reduce evaporation losses. Such washing shall be done with a hand-held bucket, or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle used for quick rinses.

     5.     Reduce monthly demand by ten percent when compared to the same time period in the established base year.

     B.     Stage 2. Mandatory Compliance—Water Alert. The intent of Stage 2 is to achieve an overall system-wide demand reduction of twenty percent. The city council may by resolution declare a “Drought Emergency Stage 2 (Mandatory Compliance—Water Alert)” upon recommendation by the manager and based on water supply and delivery projections by the public works director, that an overall system-wide reduction of twenty percent is necessary. In addition to the mandatory twenty percent reduction for each water customer, and in addition to the requirements in Stage 1, the following activities shall be prohibited:

     1.     Gardening and landscape irrigation utilizing individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems on lawns, gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs, or other plants except as expressly provided for by resolution of the city council.

     2.     The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment is except as expressly allowed by the adoption of a resolution by city council.

     3.     The washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas except as expressly allowed by the adoption of a resolution by city council.

     4.     The irrigation of turf on street medians with water.

     5.     The use of water to fill a new swimming pool, spa, pond, or similar recreational basin of water.

     6.     The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure making similar or otherwise ornamental use of water outside.

     C.     Stage 3. Mandatory Compliance—Water Emergency. The intent of Stage 3 is to achieve an overall system-wide demand reduction of thirty percent. The city council may, by resolution, declare a “Drought Emergency Stage 3 (Mandatory Compliance—Water Emergency)” upon recommendation by the manager and based on water supply and delivery projections by the public works director, that an overall system-wide demand reduction of thirty percent is necessary. In addition to a mandatory reduction of thirty percent for each water customer, and in addition to the requirements in Stages 1 and 2, the following activities shall be prohibited:

     1.     Planting any new landscaping, except for native, drought tolerant species as defined by Chapter 16.22.

     D.    Stage 4. Mandatory Compliance—Severe Water Emergency. The intent of Stage 4 is to achieve an overall system-wide demand reduction of fifty percent. The city council may, by resolution, declare a “Drought Emergency Stage 4 (Mandatory Compliance—Severe Water Emergency)” upon recommendation by the manager and based on water supply and delivery projections by the public works director, that an overall system-wide demand reduction of fifty percent is necessary. During Stage 4, mandatory water rationing will occur on a property by property basis. Regardless of water consumption in the prior or other base year, the city council may set water allocation amounts based on minimum health and safety standards. In addition to the mandatory conservation goals for each water customer, and in addition to the requirements in Stages 1, 2 and 3, the following activities shall be prohibited:

     1.     The use of water outside of a home or business except as expressly provided for by resolution of the city council.

     2.     Use of water in excess of the allocation to a property. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.080 Mandatory conservation phase implementation.
     After the city council, by resolution, declares a Stage 1, 2, 3 or 4 Drought Emergency, the manager shall order that the appropriate stage of water conservation be implemented in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. Said order shall be made by public announcement; shall be published a minimum of one time in a daily newspaper of general circulation. The city council shall receive a report at least monthly, noticed on a city council agenda, regarding the city’s water supply situation as long as the drought conditions remain in effect. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.090 Duration of conservation stages.
     Mandatory stages shall be effective upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and may be implemented as authorized by city council resolution. Current conservation stages as authorized by city council will be modified at such time that conditions indicate a more or less restrictive stage is necessary. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.100 Drought surcharge.
     Customers will receive prior notification of the standard allotment basis, applicable rates, and the opportunity to request exceptions to the standard allotment basis.

     Water use beyond the maximum allowed for each water conservation stage shall be subject to a drought surcharge pursuant to the schedule set forth below. The customer of record may request an increase in this basic allotment as set forth in Section 13.14.110 hereof. Application forms and instructions will be available at the American Canyon City Hall.

     In addition to the general water service rates, each customer shall pay, during each billing period, a drought surcharge for water delivered in excess of the basic allotment. The surcharge is as follows:

     A.    Up to 10% in excess of allotment = 1.0 times the applicable volume charge.

     B.     10.01% to 20% in excess of allotment = 2.0 times the applicable volume charge.

     C.     Over 20% in excess of allotment = 3.0 times the applicable volume charge.

     Customers whose water usage falls in Tier 1 of the rate schedule are assumed to have maximized their conservation effort and will not be subject to a drought surcharge if their water consumption is not further reduced.

     In addition to the drought surcharge, if drought usage exceeds the allowed allotment, a warning will be issued and enforcement actions may be taken as described in Section 13.14.120. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.110 Exceptions and application procedures for exceptions.
     All water use associated with the operation and maintenance of fire suppression equipment or employed by the city for water quality flushing and sanitation purposes shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Use of water supplied by a private well or from a rain water utilization system is also exempt.

     Any customer of the city may make written application for an exception to uses and activities prohibited by this chapter. Said application shall describe in detail why applicant believes an exception is justified.

     A.    The manager may grant exceptions for use of water otherwise prohibited or required by this section upon finding and determining that failure to do so would cause an emergency condition affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection or safety of the applicant or public; or, cause an unnecessary and undue hardship on applicant or the public, including, but not limited to, adverse economic impacts, such as loss of production or jobs.

     B.     In the event of an appeal of a drought surcharge, customers who can clearly demonstrate that they have taken steps to reduce their water consumption (by installing water efficient appliances, drip irrigation, drought tolerant landscaping, etc.) shall be considered favorably in granting waivers.

     C.     No increase in the basic water allotment shall be granted unless the customer has installed all water-saving devices which are feasible. Water saving devices include: (1) ultra-low flush toilets utilizing 1.6 gallons per flush or less; (2) low-flow shower heads; (3) low-flow faucet restrictors utilizing two gallons per minute or less; (4) drip irrigation systems.

     D.    The decision of the manager may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written appeal to the city clerk within fifteen calendar days of the date of the decision. Upon granting any appeal, the city council may impose any conditions it determines to be just and proper. Exceptions granted by the city council shall be prepared in writing and the city council may require the exception be recorded at applicant’s expense. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.120 Violation—Enforcement.
     The violation of each provision of this chapter, and each separate violation thereof, shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be enforced accordingly.

     A.    Any customer that violates any provision of this chapter shall, in addition to the imposition of the drought surcharge rates of Section 13.14.100 hereof, receive a personal contact by the city at the address of the water service. If personal contact is unsuccessful, written notice of the violation, including a date that the violation is to be corrected, may be left on the premises, with a copy of the notice sent by certified mail to the customer.

     B.     If after issuance of the written warning, the manager determines that the customer has continued or is continuing to violate the provisions of this chapter, the manager may authorize and implement installation of a flow restricting device on the service line or reduce the amount of water available to the customer. Any costs incurred by the city to authorize and implement the flow restricting device or reduce the amount of water available to the customer shall be borne by the customer. The flow restricting device shall be removed and the prior water supply amount resumed no sooner than sixty days after the date of the installation of the flow restricting device or a reduction in water available, provided that no further violations have occurred within that time.

     C.     If after implementation of a flow restricting device or reduction of water available to a customer, the customer continues to violate the provisions of the chapter, the city may disconnect the service to the customer for a period of three days. All costs or expenses incurred by the city for enforcement of this section shall be borne by the customer.

     D.    The unauthorized use of water following a disconnection of service pursuant to subsection C above, or any other unauthorized use of water from a fire hydrant or other use bypassing an installed meter, shall be subject to an automatic fine of two thousand five hundred dollars for the first offense and five thousand dollars for the second offense. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.130 Violation—Penalties.
     In addition to all other remedies provided herein, any person who violates any provision of this chapter after having received a written notice to refrain as provided in Section 13.14.120, is guilty of an infraction. The violation of each provision of this chapter and each separate violation thereof shall be deemed a separate offense and shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.24. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

 

13.14.140 Violation—Additional remedy.
     As an additional remedy, the violation of any provision of this chapter by any person who has received more than one written warning pursuant to Section 13.14.120 to refrain from the same or any other violation under this chapter in one calendar year shall be deemed and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement in accordance with Chapter 8.04 of the city of American Canyon Municipal Code. (Ord. 2015-07 § 2, 2015)

Title 14 SEWER AND SANITATION SERVICES
DIVISION 1. SEWER SERVICE AND CONNECTION CHARGES
DIVISION 2. SEWER SERVICES SYSTEM

DIVISION 1. SEWER SERVICE AND CONNECTION CHARGES
Chapter 14.04 WASTEWATER RATES AND CHARGES
14.04.005 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the definitions in Sections 13.06.010 of the Municipal Code shall be construed as applicable to this chapter except as set forth in this section:

     “High strength, nonresidential customer” includes all customers whose discharge exceeds the levels of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) or total suspended solids (TSS) set forth in the “normal strength, nonresidential customer” definition in this section.

     “Meter factor” means the ratio applied to meter readings to determine the billable flow for nonresidential users. For domestic water meters, the factor shall equal 1.00; for sewer meters the flow shall equal 1.11.

     “Multifamily residential” includes any premises that is residential in nature and consists of more than one dwelling unit served by a single metered water connection. Such master-metered customers shall be charged as set forth in this chapter. Temporary residential premises (e.g., hotels) are treated as a commercial use.

     “Normal strength, nonresidential customer” includes all customers whose discharge conforms to “normal strength, nonresidential wastewater” but not included as residential customers in Sections 14.04.010 and 14.04.020. In lieu of separate analysis or adopted tables per Section 14.04.040, these customers shall generally include churches, public schools, private schools, commercial facilities, industrial facilities, government uses, and office buildings. The city reserves the right to assign any customer to high strength, nonresidential status, based on that customer’s actual BOD or TSS.

     “Normal strength, nonresidential wastewater” means all wastewater discharged to the city wastewater collection system with a BOD of no more than two hundred thirty six milligrams per liter or a TSS of no more than two hundred thirty-six milligrams per liter. (Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.010 Wastewater monthly service charge—Purpose.
     A.    It shall be city policy to at all times collect wastewater rates and charges that meet but do not exceed the cost of service of the wastewater enterprise.

     B.     It shall be city policy to set wastewater rates and charges that are fair and equitable to all customer classes and recover each customer’s share of the total cost of service in proportion to their use of the system.

     C.     It shall be city policy to have a wastewater rate study performed, by a qualified independent rate consultant, every three to five years, to ensure that wastewater rates charges, and connection fees are set to an appropriate level. Rate studies will be based on AWWA rate setting principles and shall recommend rates that meet the cost of service of the wastewater enterprise.

     D.    The city may exercise its discretion consistent with Hansen v. City of San Buenaventura, 42 Cal.3d 1172 (1986) to enact a rate for property owners outside the city which is forty percent greater than the rate for property owners within the city. (Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.020 Wastewater monthly service charges—Single-family residences.
     A.    Each single-family residential customer shall pay for wastewater services according to the schedule outlined below. For purposes of determining if a single-family customer is a “low,” “average,” or “high” user, the city will average each customer’s three winter water use bills (January through March) and, on the following July 1st, the city may reassign each customer to the appropriate category based on that average winter water use.

     B.     Single-family residential customers will be billed according to the following schedule:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

Low winter water use (0—4 hcf)

$34.55

$37.83

$41.42

Average winter water use (4—13 hcf)

36.79

40.29

44.11

High winter water use (13+ hcf)

38.11

41.73

45.69

 

     C.     Effective January 1, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, wastewater service charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2011-06 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.030 Wastewater monthly service charge—Mobilehome residential service.
     A.    Each mobilehome customer with an individual metered account shall pay for wastewater services according to the following schedule:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

Mobilehome—individually metered

$ 27.59

$30.21

$33.08

 

     B.     The billing for mobilehome customers with an individual metered account may be adjusted up or down by as much as ten percent of the mobilehome rate in force at that time to provide credit or additional payment for customers who use smaller or larger amounts of winter water relative to other single-family residential customers. The city council may initiate such an adjustment, including any other implementing procedures, by resolution.

     C.     Effective January 1, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, wastewater service charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2011-06 § 2, 2011; Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.040 Wastewater monthly service charge—Multifamily.
     A.    The monthly service charge for any multifamily customer shall pay for wastewater service according to the following schedule:

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

Multifamily -per unit

$ 27.591

$30.211

$33.08

 

     B.     The city council may, by resolution, establish policies and procedures to discount the per-unit charge for vacant spaces or apartments for multifamily customers provided such vacancies could be documented and such vacancies extend beyond one billing cycle.

 

     C.     Effective January 1, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, wastewater service charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2011-06 § 3, 2011; Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.050 Wastewater service charges—Nonresidential, normal strength.
     A.    Each normal strength, nonresidential customer will pay the greater of the fixed monthly rate in the schedule below or the variable rate in the schedule below multiplied by monthly water consumption of the customer.

 

 

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

Normal strength—nonresidential (fixed)

$36.79

$40.29

$44.11

 

or

Normal strength—nonresidential (variable)

$3.291

$3.601

$3.94

 

     B.     Effective January 1, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, wastewater service charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2011-06 § 4, 2011; Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.060 Wastewater service charges—Nonresidential, high strength.
     A.    Each high strength, nonresidential customer as defined in Section 14.04.005 shall pay the greater of the following fixed monthly fees or a fee calculated according to the following formula.

 

 

1-Jan-08

1-Jan-09

1-Jan-10

High strength—nonresidential (fixed)

$36.79

$40.29

$44.11

 

 

Or

     On January 1, 2008:

 

Charge = Water Unit X Meter Factor

[$1.47+

($.91 x BOD in mg/l)

+

($.91 x TSS in mg/l) ]

 

 

236

 

238

 

     On January 1, 2009:

 

Charge = Water Unit X Meter Factor

[$1.62+

($.99 x BOD in mg/l)

+

($.99 x TSS in mg/l) ]

 

 

236

 

238

 

     On January 1, 2010:

 

Charge = Water Unit X Meter Factor

[ $1.78+

($1.08 x BOD in mg/l)

+

($1.08 x TSS in mg/l) ]

 

 

236

 

238

 

 

     B.     For purposes of determining BOD and TSS in the above formulae, city staff is authorized to require analysis of the user’s flow in accordance with Title 14 of this code. For installations that use less than two thousand gallons per day of domestic water, city staff may use published tables of BOD and TSS that are approved by the State Water Resources Control Board for use in determining BOD and TSS in the above formulae.

     C.     Effective January 1, 2012, and on every January 1st thereafter, wastewater service charges will be adjusted by the percent change in the Bay Area Consumer Price Index over the previous calendar year, or by three percent, whichever is less. (Ord. 2011-06 § 5, 2011; Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.070 Wastewater service charges—adopted by resolution.
     The city council declares its intent to make any future changes in the wastewater rates established in this chapter by setting forth the changes in a resolution duly adopted, and the adoption of such a resolution shall have the same force and effect as though the changes had been made by the adoption of an ordinance. (Ord. 2007-14 § 3, 2007)

 

14.04.080 Wastewater connection charge—Industrial service.
     A.    At the time of submission of application for building permit for an industrial building connection to the city wastewater collection system, an applicant shall pay a sanitary sewer connection charge for industrial uses in accordance with the following formula:

 

Connection Fee =

 

$35.11 x (flow (in gpd) x (0.85 + (.09 x BOD (in mg/l) ÷ 236) + (0.6 x TSS (in mg/l) 238)))

 

     The terms BOD and TSS are as 4.08.010 and are expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Values of BOD and TSS for a particular project shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. The charges shall be subject to adjustment in accordance with Section 14.04.100.

     B.     If, after connection to city wastewater facilities and review of the discharger’s flow data or water use data for any given period, it is determined by the city engineer that the discharger has increased flow, BOD, or TSS levels above those requested at the time of application, then the applicant shall be charged for the increased flow, BOD, or TSS at the then applicable rate as provided in the city’s wastewater connection fee ordinance and as determined by the city engineer. The applicant and/or discharger shall pay the revised connection fee within sixty days of demand by the city; failure to pay the charges within the specified time may result in termination of water and sewer service by the city to the extent allowed by existing law. (Ord. 2004-06 § 3, 2004; Ord. 2001-03 § 5, 2001)

 

14.04.090 Temporary wastewater connection fees.
     The city council may adopt by resolution, temporary wastewater connection fees based on a fording by the city council that a particular use is temporary and does not conform to the typical use categories of residential, commercial or industrial. In such cases the temporary wastewater connection fee shall be charged for each unit of seven hundred forty-eight gallons of wastewater flow based on the following formula:

 

Temporary Connection Fee =

 

$4.20/unit of wastewater x (0.85 + (.09 x BOD (in mg/l) ÷ 236) + (0.6 x TSS (in mg/l) ÷ 238))

 

     The city manager or city manager’s designee may be delegated responsibility for billing and monitoring temporary connection fees in accordance with this section. (Ord. 2004-06 § 4, 2004; Ord. 2001-03 § 6, 2001)

 

14.04.100 Adjustments to wastewater connection fees.
     A.    The city at its sole discretion may adopt revised wastewater connection fees based on the pro-commit participation by the general fund of the city proportionate effects of inflation or changes to the cost of living. For purposes of calculation, the Engineering News Record 20-City Construction Cost Index shall be used for adjusting said fees. Said adjustments in accordance with this section may be approved by a resolution of the city council.

     B.     At the sole discretion of the city council applicants may be charged either the industrial wastewater service connection fee in accordance with Section 14.04.080(A) and (B), or Section 14.04.070, connection fees, commercial wastewater service connection fee.

     C.     The city council, at its sole discretion, may commit participation by the general fund of the city for fifty percent of the connection fee in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars to be applied to wastewater connection fees for a qualifying nonprofit or charitable organization in the city. (Ord. 2004-06 § 5, 2004; Ord. 2001-03 § 7, 2001)

 

14.04.110 Reclaimed water mains.
     The city council may adopt by resolution a plan of reclaimed water mains to serve future growth of the city. New development which fronts such reclaimed water mains may be required to install such mains at no cost to the city. (Ord. 2001-03 § 8, 2001)

 

14.04.120 Revenue for repayment of loan—Wastewater capital reserve fund.
     A.    The city dedicates the following sources of revenue to repayment of any and all State Revolving Fund loans on Project No. C-06-4666-110, the water treatment and reclamation project: waste user charges, wastewater connection fees and connection fees, where appropriate. This dedicated source of revenue shall remain in effect until any such loan (or loans) is fully discharged, unless modification or change of such dedication is approved in writing by the State Water Resources Control Board.

     B.     A wastewater capital reserve fund is established. Deposits to the fund shall be made annually at a rate set by resolution by city council, not to exceed seventy-five thousand dollars per year but at least one-half percent of the loan amount for the wastewater treatment plant project. Such funds shall be maintained in accordance with “The Policy for Implementation State Revolving Fund for Construction of Waste Water Treatment Facilities,” as adopted by the state of California Water Resources Control Board. (Ord. 2001-03 § 2, 2001; Ord. 99-04, 1999)

 

Chapter 14.06 WASTEWATER CAPACITY FEE
14.06.010 Wastewater capacity fee—Purpose.
     The purpose of a wastewater capacity fee or wastewater connection fee is to allow the city to recover the costs associated with providing a new connection to the system with capacity in the wastewater system. The fee is set to recover the costs of all existing infrastructure, provided by existing customers for the benefit of the new connection, as well as all future capital projects required to provide that new connection with sufficient wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal capacity in the system. (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.020 Wastewater capacity fee—All normal strength connections.
     A.    At the time of submission of application for building permit for connection to the city wastewater collection system, an applicant shall pay a wastewater capacity fee in proportion to use of the capacity of the wastewater system.

     B.     For the purposes of calculating the wastewater capacity fee, a single-family residence will be considered one “equivalent dwelling unit (EDU),” with one EDU being equal to a discharge of an average of three hundred gallons per day to the sanitary sewer. For the purposes of calculating the average daily discharge to the sanitary sewer for a multifamily residence, each multifamily residence unit will be assumed to be sixty-five percent of one single-family unit.

     C.     All applications for connection to the wastewater system by nonresidential connections will be required to pay a wastewater capacity fee proportional to the expected average daily discharge to the sewer system, as calculated by the applicant and certified by the city manager, public works director, or other designated staff. The applicant shall, using commonly accepted building and plumbing practices (such as the Uniform Plumbing Code) demonstrate the average daily discharge to the wastewater system, and the wastewater capacity fee will be calculated by multiplying this average daily discharge by the unit cost per gallons per day (gpd) according to the schedule below.

     D.    Wastewater capacity fees for all normal strength connections, as defined by Section 14.04.005, shall be calculated based on the following schedule:

 

Single-family residence (one EDU)

$8,016.00

Multifamily residence (.65 EDU)

$5,210.00

Commercial/industrial/public/other (per gpd)

$26.72

(Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.030 Wastewater capacity fee—High strength or industrial.
     A.    For all high strength connections to the wastewater system, the wastewater capacity fee shall be calculated based on the numbers of EDUs of the new connection, with each EDU paying the same rate as one EDU as outlined in Section 14.06.020(D).

 

EDUs =

Average daily flow

X

[.448 +

(.276 x BOD in mg/l)

+

(.276 x TSS in mg/l)]

 

300 gpd

 

 

236 mg/l

 

238 mg/l

 

 

     “BOD” means bio-chemical oxygen demand and “TSS” means total suspended solids. BOD and TSS are expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). Values of BOD and TSS for a particular project shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. The charges shall be subject to adjustment in accordance with Section 14.04.050(B). (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.040 Wastewater use substantially altered—Additional wastewater capacity fee.
     If, in the judgment of the city manager or public works director, and after the final wastewater capacity fee is established, any customer increases the discharge to the wastewater system in a substantial and permanent way, due to changes in the size or nature of the building or premises previously permitted, the city shall charge and collect additional wastewater capacity charges based upon the increased use of wastewater capacity. The additional wastewater capacity fee shall be established by computing the new number of EDUs in service at the connection, and then subtracting from that figure the number of EDUs originally purchased in accordance with Section 14.08.020 or 14.08.030. (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.050 Temporary wastewater connection fees.
     A.    The city council may adopt by resolution, temporary wastewater connection fees based on a finding by the city council that a particular use is temporary and does not conform to the typical use categories of residential, commercial or industrial. In such cases the temporary wastewater connection fee shall be charged for each unit of seven hundred forty-eight gallons of wastewater flow based on the following formula:

 

Temporary Connection Fee =

 

$3.29/unit of wastewater x (0.448 + (.276 x BOD (in mg/l) ÷ 236) + (0.276 TSS (in mg/l) ÷ 238))

 

     B.     The city manager or his or her designee may be delegated responsibility for billing and monitoring temporary connection fees in accordance with this section. (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.060 Adjustments to wastewater connection fees.
     A.    The city at its sole discretion may adopt revised wastewater connection fees based on the proportionate effects of inflation or changes to the cost of living. The Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index for the San Francisco Area shall be used for adjusting wastewater connection fees. The adjustments in accordance with this section shall be made annually through 2011, thereafter adjustments to the connection/capacity fees shall be approved by a resolution of the city council.

     B.     The city council, at its sole discretion, may commit participation by the general fund of the city for fifty percent of the connection fee in an amount not to exceed ten thousand dollars to be applied to wastewater connection fees for a qualifying nonprofit or charitable organization in the city. (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.070 Reclaimed water mains.
     The city council may adopt by resolution a plan of reclaimed water mains to serve future growth of the city. New development which fronts such reclaimed water mains may be required to install such mains at no cost to the city. (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

 

14.06.080 Revenue for repayment of loan—Wastewater capital reserve fund.
     A.    The city dedicates the following sources of revenue to repayment of any and all State Revolving Fund loans on Project No. C-06-4666-110, the water treatment and reclamation project: waste user charges, wastewater connection fees and connection fees, where appropriate. This dedicated source of revenue shall remain in effect until any such loan (or loans) is fully discharged, unless modification or change of such dedication is approved in writing by the State Water Resources Control Board.

     B.     A wastewater capital reserve fund is established. Deposits to the fund shall be made annually by the city council, not to exceed seventy-five thousand dollars per year but at least 0.5 percent of the loan amount for the wastewater treatment plant project. Such funds shall be maintained in accordance with “The Policy for Implementation State Revolving Fund for Construction of Waste Water Treatment Facilities,” as adopted by the state of California Water Resources Control Board. (Ord. 2007-12 § 1, 2007)

DIVISION 2. SEWER SERVICES SYSTEM
Chapter 14.08 DEFINITIONS
14.08.010 Definitions.
     The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meaning designated in this section unless the context specifically indicates otherwise:

     “Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended. (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., ref. 40 CFR 403.3(b).)

     “Administrator” means the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

     “Applicable pretreatment standard” means the federal, state or local discharge limit, whichever is most stringent.

     “Applicant” means the person making application for permit for a sewer or plumbing installation and shall be the owner or his authorized agent of the premises to be served by the sewer for which a permit is requested.

     “Approval authority” means the state of California. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(c).)

     “Approved laboratory procedure” means any method contained in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or otherwise approved by EPA for the determination of flow measurement or pollution concentration of discharges to the public sanitary sewer system.

     “Baseline monitoring report (BMR)” means a report submitted by categorical industrial users within one hundred eighty days after the effective date of an applicable categorical standard which indicates the compliance status of the user with the categorical standard. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(b).)

     “Bed and breakfast facility” means an existing single-family dwelling that has been converted to rental rooms with common restroom facilities, which rentals are usually fifty percent of that of a motel or hotel.

     “Beneficial uses” means uses of the waters of the state that may be protected against quality degradation including domestic, municipal, agricultural and industrial supply, power generation, recreation, aesthetic enjoyment, navigation and the preservation and enhancement of fish, wildlife and other aquatic resources or reserves, and other uses, both tangible and intangible as specified by federal or state law.

     “Best professional judgment (BPJ)” means the highest quality technical opinion of a permit writer, after consideration of all reasonably available and pertinent data or information, forming the basis for the terms and conditions of a permit.

     “Bioassay or aquatic toxicity test” means a procedure in which the responses of aquatic organisms are used to detect or measure the presence or effect of one or more substances, wastes, or environmental factors, alone or in combination.

     “Biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.)” means the results obtained using an approved laboratory procedure to measure the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in satisfying the oxygen demand of other materials present.

     “Building lateral” means that portion of a side sewer beginning at the plumbing or drainage outlet of any building or industrial facility and running to the property line or to a private sewage disposal system.

     “Bypass” means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user’s treatment facility. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.17.)

     “Categorical industrial user” means an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards.

     “Categorical pretreatment standards” means limitations to pollutant discharges to POTWs promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Clean Water Act, that apply to specified process wastewaters of particular industrial categories. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.6 and Parts 405—471.)

     “Chain of custody” means a written record of sample possession for all persons who handle (collect, transport, analyze, dispose of) a sample, including names, dates, times and procedures followed.

     “Church” means a structure which is used as a place of worship for a congregation; but if the structure contains living quarters, these shall be regarded as a separate unit chargeable at a single-family dwelling rate.

     “City” means city of American Canyon, California.

     “City manager” means the person or persons appointed by the council to administer and enforce the rules and regulations of city.

     “City rules and regulations” means the rules and regulations for sewer use adopted by the council and as amended from time.

     “Clean Water Act (CWA)” (otherwise known as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act) enacted by Public Law 92-500, October 18, 1972, 33 USC 1251 et seq.; as amended by PL 95-217, December 28, 1997; PL 97-117, December 29, 1981; PL 97-440, January 8, 1983; and PL 100-04, February 4, 1987, and future amendments.

     “Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)” means a codification of the general and permanent roles published in the Federal Register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government.

     “Combined sewer” means a sewer designated to receive both surface run-off and sewage.

     “Combined wastestream formula (CWF)” means the procedure for calculating alternative discharge limits at industrial facilities where a regulated wastestream from a categorical industrial user is combined with other wastestreams prior to treatment. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.6(e).)

     “Commercial unit” means a single business in a structure or structures on a parcel. A structure may contain several commercial units because each separate business shall be counted as a commercial unit.

     “Compatible pollutant” means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in Napa Sanitation District’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit if the city’s treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutants to a substantial degree.

     “Concentration limit” means a limit based on the mass of pollutant per unit volume, usually expressed in milligrams per liter.

     “Confidential information” means information and data on a discharger including products used, industrial processes or methods of projections, etc., which the discharger can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his designee, constitute trade secrets. Effluent constituents and characteristics shall not be considered confidential information.

     “Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the water of the state by waste to a degree which creates hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. “Contamination” means any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of wastewater, whether or not waters of the state are affected.

     “Contractor” means an individual, firm, corporation, partnership or association duly licensed by the state to perform the type of work to be done under the permit.

     “Contributing industry” means any wastewater contributor identified in the 1987 Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual and subsequent revisions in any of its divisions.

     “Control authority” means a POTW with an approved pretreatment program or the approval authority in the absence of POTW pretreatment program. (Ref. 40 UFX 403.12(a).)

     “Conventional pollutants” means as defined by federal law, include BOD, TSS, fecal coliform bacteria, oil and grease, and pH. (Ref. 40 CFR, 401.16.)

     “Council” means the city council of the city.

     “County” means the county of Napa, California.

     “Cyanide” means a substance when combined with some element or radical results in an extremely poisonous compound with an odor of bitter almonds, i.e., sodium cyanide, potassium cyanide, hydrogen cyanide.

     “Daily maximum limit” means the maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day.

     “Development document” means detailed report of studies conducted by the U.S. EPA for the purpose of developing categorical pretreatment standards.

     “Dilution” means the increase in use of water or any other attempt to dilute a discharge or a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard.

     “Director” means the chief administrative officer of a state or interstate water pollution control agency with any NPDES permit program and state pretreatment program approved pursuant to Section 402(b) of the Clean Water Act and an approved state pretreatment program. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(e).)

     “Domestic sanitary sewage” means water-carried wastes from residences, hotels, motels, restaurants and business establishments, but excluding all groundwater, surface water, storm water and industrial wastes.

     “Environmental protection agency (EPA)” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.

     “Federal Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act.

     “Federal categorical pretreatment standards” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1317). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(j).)

     “Flashpoint” means the minimum temperature of a liquid at which the liquid gives off a vapor in sufficient concentrations to ignite when tested under specific conditions.

     “Flow proportional composite sample” means a sampling method which combines discrete aliquots of a sample collected over time, based on the flow of wastestream being sampled. There are two methods used to collect this type of sample. One method collects a constant sample volume at time intervals which vary based on the stream flow (i.e., two hundred milliliters (ml) sample collected for every five thousand gallons discharged). The other method collects aliquots of varying volume, based on stream flow, at constant time intervals.

     “Flow weighted averaging formula (FWA)” means a procedure used to calculate alternative limits where wastestreams regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard and nonregulated wastestreams combine after treatment but prior to the monitoring point.

     “Garbage” means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.

     “Government buildings” means buildings for governmental agencies, such as federal, state, county, city and special districts.

     “Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow of the wastestream and without consideration of time.

     “Holding tank waste” means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum pump trucks.

     “Hotel or motel unit” means sleeping quarters where no cooking facilities are available, including combinations with office or offices, restaurants, bar or bars, shop or shops. If the hotel or motel contains units with cooking facilities available, each such unit shall be charged the fee applicable to a multiple-family dwelling unit.

     “Incompatible pollutant” means any pollutant which is not a “compatible pollutant” as defined in this section.

     “Indirect discharge or discharge” means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (e), or (d) of the Act. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(g).)

     “Industrial discharger” means a source of discharge to the public sanitary sewer system from any nondomestic source as regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act.

     “Industrial user (IU)” or “user” means a source of indirect discharge.

     “Industrial user management practices” means schedules of activities, prohibitions or practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices designed to prevent or reduce pollution discharges. These practices may address treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control spills or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

     “Industrial wastes” means the waste of producing, manufacturing and processing operations of every kind and nature. It does not include domestic sanitary sewage, such as might be discharged from residences, hotels, motels, restaurants or business establishments.

     “Installation permit” means any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other regulation of city for the installation of any sewerage works.

     “Instantaneous maximum limit” means the maximum allowable concentration of a pollutant determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.

     “Interference” means any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the POTW; its treatment processes or operations; or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and therefore causes a violation of the POTW’s NPDES permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified federal statutes, regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the S WDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.

     “Lateral sewer” means the portion of a side sewer beginning at the sewer clean-out within a public right-of-way or easement or if no sewer clean-out, the property line, and terminating at the main sewer.

     “Lethal toxicity or lethal concentration (LC)” means toxicant concentration producing death of test organism.

     “Local limits” means technically based, defensible numerical limits imposed on discharges to the POTW. These limits are developed to comply with the general pretreatment regulations.

     “Lower explosion limit (L.E.L.)” means the point where the concentration of gas-in-air is sufficiently large enough to result in an explosion if an ignition source is present.

     “Main sewer” means a public sewer designed to accommodate more than one lateral sewer.

     “Manifest” means a manuscript identifying and tracking all hauled wastes. This includes, but is not limited to, industrial user identification, type and volume of waste, destination, required signatures.

     “Mass emission rate” means the weight of material discharged to the public sewer during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents.

     “Material safety data sheet (MSDS)” means an information document regarding chemical products and their hazardous name.

     “Monitoring facility” means a safely accessible facility located at the discharger’s connection to the public sanitary sewer system or at the end of an industrial process or pretreatment system, which allows for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of a discharge.

     “Monthly average limit” means the maximum allowable value for the average of all observations obtained during one calendar month.

     “Multiple-family dwelling” means any structure constructed for occupancy of more than one family, each separate living quarters to be referred to as a unit.

 

     “National pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard” means any regulation continuing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5, including local limits. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(j).)

     “National prohibited discharges” means prohibitions applicable to all nondomestic dischargers regarding the introduction of pollutants into POTWs set forth in 40 CFR 403.5.

     “Net/gross calculations” means an adjustment to categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water. (Ref. 40 CJ 1( 403.15.)

     “New source” means:

     1.     Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:

     a.     The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at the site at which no other source is located;

     b.     The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or

     c.     The production of wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered.

     2.     Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b), or subsection (1)(c) of this section but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.

     3.     Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has:

     a.     Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:

     i.      Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment;

     ii.     Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or

     iii.    Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time, options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(k).)

     “Ninety-day compliance report” means a report submitted by a categorical industrial user, within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical standards, or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, that documents and certifies the compliance status of the user. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(d).)

     “Noncontact cooling water” means the water discharged from any system of heat transfer, condensation, air conditioning, refrigeration, or other sources to which no pollutant is added other than heat.

     “Nonconventional pollutants” means all pollutants which are not included in the list of conventional or toxic pollutants in 40 CFR Part 401.

     “Nondomestic waste” means the same as “industrial waste.”

 

     “Nondomestic wastewater discharger or nondomestic discharger” means any source of discharge of nondomestic waste to the public sanitary sewer system.

     “NPDES” means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by a Regional Water Control Board of the state of California.

     “NPDES state” means a state (as defined in 40 CFR 1222) or interstate water pollution control agency, with a NPDES permit program approved pursuant to Section 402(b) of the Act. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(m).)

     “Oil and grease (mineral based)” means any material recovered from an acidified sample as a substance soluble in a designated solvent.

     “Oil and grease (vegetable and animal based)” means any material recovered from an acidified sample as a substance soluble in a designated solvent. This includes fats, oil and grease of all origins.

     “Outside sewer” means a sanitary sewer beyond the limits of the city’s sewer service area not subject to the control or jurisdiction of the city.

     “Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(n).)

     “Periodic compliance report” means a report on compliance status submitted by categorical industrial users to the control authority at least semiannually. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(e).)

     “Person” means any human being, individual, firm, company, partnership, association and private or public and municipal corporations, the United States of America, the state of California, districts and all political subdivisions, governmental agencies and mandatories thereof. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context.

     “pH” means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. Values above 7.0 represent alkaline conditions and those below 7.0 represent acid conditions.

     “Phenols” means hydroxy derivatives of benzene and its condensed nuclei.

     “Pollution” means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or affects the facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include contamination.

     “Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs)” means certain cyclic compounds having many nuclei, containing only hydrogen and carbon and a distinguishable odor. Often these are by-products of petroleum processing or combustion.

     “POTW pretreatment program” or “approved POTW pretreatment program” means a program administered by a POTW that meets the criteria established in 40 CFR 403.8 and 403.9 and which has been approved by a Regional Administrator or State Director in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11 (Ref. 40 CeR 403.3(d).)

     “POTW treatment plant” means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of municipal sewage and industrial waste. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(p).)

     “Premises” means any lot, parcel of land, building or establishment, either residential, commercial or industrial, both public and private, including schools, churches and institutes without limitation.

     “Pretreatment” means the application of physical, chemical and/or biological processes to reduce the amount of pollutants, eliminate pollutants, or alter the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater to the public sanitary sewer system. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(q).)

     “Pretreatment standards and requirements” means all applicable federal rules and regulations found in 40 CFR subchapter N; as well as any nonconflicting or more stringent state or local standards and any substantive procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(r).)

     “Pretreatment standards for existing sources (PSES)” means categorical standards and requirements applicable to industrial sources that began construction prior to the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards for that industrial category. (See individual categorical standards in 40 CeR Parts 405-471 for specific dates.)

     “Priority pollutant” means the EPA list of one hundred twenty-six substances which are an environmental hazard and may be present in water. Because of the known or suspected hazards of these pollutants, industrial users of the substances are subject to regulation.

     “Private sewer” means a sewer which is owned, operated and maintained by private persons or businesses, and which accommodates one or more buildings or industries.

     “Process wastewater” means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with, or results from the production of, or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product or waste product.

     “Production-based standard” means a discharge limitation expressed in terms of allowable pollutant mass discharge per unit of production.

     “Properly shredded garbage” means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle having a dimension greater than one-quarter inch in any dimension.

     “Public nuisance” means continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city.

     “Public sewer” means a sewer which is owned, operated and maintained by a public agency.

     “Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act which is owned by the state of California, municipal corporations and other governmental agencies. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(o).)

     “Receiving waters” means a natural water course or body of water into which treated sanitary sewage is discharged.

     “Reclaimed water” means water which, as a result of treatment of waste, is suitable for direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur.

     “Regional administrator” means the appropriate EPA regional administrator.

     “Regulated wastestream” means an industrial process wastestream regulated by a national categorical pretreatment standard.

     “Removal credit” means a revised pollutant limit given for a specified categorical industry as a result of a POTW’s capability to consistently remove a specific pollutant. Removal credits are not granted by the city.

     “Residential care facility” means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility which is occupied by seven or more persons not related by blood, which provides twenty-four-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services to sustain the activities of daily living, which facility has received licensing from the state of California.

     “Resource conservation and recovery act (RCRA)” means a federal statute regulating the management of hazardous waste from its generation through ultimate disposal. The Act contains requirements for waste generators, transporters, and owners and operators of treatment, storage and disposal facilities. (41 USC 6901 et seq.)

     “Roominghouse” means any structure which provides rental rooms for six or less persons which has not received licensing from the state of California.

     “Sanitary sewer” means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.

     “Self-monitoring” means sampling and analysis performed by the industrial user to ensure compliance with the permit or other regulatory requirements. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(b)(g).)

     “Service unit” means a service unit is defined as flow of two hundred ten gallons per day, BOD of one hundred seventy-five mg/l, and SS of two hundred mg/l.

     “Sewage” means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments.

     “Sewage treatment plant” means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.

     “Sewer” means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.

     “Sewage works” means all facilities in which the city has an ownership interest of which the city controls except private sewers, for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.

     “Shall” is mandatory. “May” is permissive.

     “Shell structure” means any single structure constructed wherein the actual number of rental units will depend on future use.

     “Side sewer” means the sewer line beginning at the foundation wall of any building and terminating at the main sewer and includes the building lateral and street lateral together.

     “Significant industrial user (SIU)” means all industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and any noncategorical industrial user that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW; or contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(t).)

     “Significant noncompliance” means:

     1. Chronic violations (exceeding the daily maximum limit or the average limit sixty-six percent of the time during a six-month period) of the same pollutant parameter;

     2.     Technical review criteria (TRC) violations (thirty-three percent or more of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceeding the product of the applicable limit and the TRC value [1.4 times the limit for a conventional pollutant or 1.2 times the limit for a toxic pollutant]);

     3.     A violation of pass through or interference;

     4.     A discharge of imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment, or which required the POTW to use its emergency authorities under 40 (.FR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(b);

     5.     Violations of a compliance schedule milestone by ninety days;

     6.     Failure to provide, within thirty days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

     7.     Failure to accurately report noncompliance;

     8.     Any other violation deemed significant by the control authority. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii).)

     “Single-family unit” means any structure constructed for occupancy of one single-family. This classification includes trailers and mobile home units with plumbing hook-up.

     “Slug discharge” means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. Also known as slug loading, shock loads, or batch dumps of comparable or noncomparable pollutants from industries, whether accidental or on purpose.

     “Slug load” means any pollutant (including biochemical oxygen demand) released in a discharge of a flow rate or concentration which will cause a violation of the specific discharge prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5(b) to 403.12(f).

     “Solvent management plan” means a strategy for keeping track of all solvents delivered to a site, their storage, use and disposal. This includes keeping spent solvents segregated from other process wastewater to maximize the value of the recoverable solvents, to avoid contamination of other segregated wastes, and to prevent the discharge of toxic organics to any wastewater collection system or the environment.

     “Spill prevention and control plan” means a plan prepared by an industrial user to minimize the likelihood of a spill and to expedite control and cleanup activities should a spill occur.

     “Split sample” means portion of a collected sample given to the industry or to another agency to verify or compare laboratory results.

     “Standard industrial classification (SIC) code” means a classification scheme based on the type of manufacturing or commercial activity at a facility; some facilities have several activities which will cause them to have more than one code number.

     “Standard industrial classification manual” means prepared by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget 1987 (WITS Order No. PB 87-10001Z).

     “Standard specifications” means a set of documents containing design and construction standards for all sewerage works within the city’s jurisdiction.

     “Storm sewer or storm drain” means a sewer which carries storm and surface or groundwaters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.

     “Stormwater” means the water running off or draining from the surface and subsurface of an area during and after a period of rain or irrigation.

     “Street” means any public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, way, public place, public easement or right-of-way.

     “Submission” means a request by a POTW for approval of a pretreatment program to the EPA or a director; a request by a POTW to the EPA or a director for authority to revise the discharge limits in categorical pretreatment standards to reflect POTW pollutant removals; or a request to the EPA by an NPDES state for approval of its state pretreatment program. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(u).)

     “TICH” means total identifiable chlorinated hydrocarbons.

     “Time proportional composite sample” means a sampling method which combines discrete sample aliquots of constant volume collected at constant time intervals (i.e., two hundred milliliter (ml) samples collected every half hour for a twenty-four-hour period). This method provides representative samples only where the sample stream flow is constant, or where the volume is manually adjusted based on the stream flow variation prior to being added to the composite sample container.

     “Total suspended solids (TSS)” or “nonfilterable solids” means the suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.

     “Total toxic organics (TTO)” means the sum of the masses or concentrations of the specific toxic organic compounds regulated by specific categorical pretreatment regulations which is found in the discharge at specific quantifiable concentrations. (Refer to the specific categorical regulations to identify which compounds are regulated, what numeric value is considered “quantifiable,” and what sampling or certification alternatives may be available.)

     “Toxic organic management plan (TOMP)” means a written plan submitted by industrial users in accordance with some categorical pretreatment standards as an alternative to TTO monitoring which specifies the toxic organic compounds used, the method of disposal used, and procedures for assuring that toxic organics do not routinely spill or leak into wastewater discharged to the POTW.

     “Toxic pollutants” means those pollutants identified pursuant to Section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act and 40 CFR 403 (App. B.).

     “Treatment works” means all facilities in which the city has an ownership, interest or which the city controls except private sewers used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature or necessary to recycle or reuse water at the most economical cost over the useful life of the works, including interceptor sewers, outfall sewers, sewage collection systems, pumping, power and other equipment and appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions and alterations thereof; including the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment; or any other method or system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or disposing of municipal land industrial waste.

     “Unpolluted water” means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction thereof for disposal; to storm or natural drainage or directly to surface waters.

     “Unregulated wastestream” means for purposes of the combined wastestream formula, a wastestream that is not regulated by a national categorical pretreatment standard and is not considered a dilute wastestream.

     “Upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with the categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.16(a).)

     “Use permit” means any written authorization required pursuant to this or any other regulation of the city for the discharge from a contributory industry.

     “User classification” means a classification of user based on the 1987 Edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) manual prepared by the Executive Office of Management and Budget.

     “Volatile organic compounds (VOCs)” means as listed in 40 CPR 136.

     “Waste” means sewage and any and all other waste substance, liquid, solid, gaseous, or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing, or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal.

     “Waste minimization” means the reduction or elimination, to the extent feasible, of any waste that is generated or subsequently treated, stored or disposed of. It is the elimination or reduction in the use of hazardous materials and the generation of hazardous wastes. It seeks to prevent pollutant releases to all environmental media: water, land or air.

     “Wastewater constituents and characteristics” means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters, including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure the contents, quality, quantity and strength of wastewater.

     “Wastewater discharge permit” means a permit for the discharge of nondomestic waste as set forth in this chapter.

     “Wastewater treatment system” means any device, facility, structure or equipment owned or operated by the city for the purpose of transmission, storage treatment, recycling, or reclamation of nondomestic or domestic wastes, including intercepting sewers, outfall sewers, sewer collection systems, pumps, powerplants and other equipment, and their appurtenances; extensions, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof, any works, including site acquisition of the land that will be an integral part of the treatment process or is used for ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such treatment.

     “Water management division director” means one of the directors of the Water Management Divisions within the regional offices of the Environmental Protection Agency or delegated representative. (Ref. 40 CNR 403.3(f).)

     “Waters of the state” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of the state. (Ord. 2001-12 § 2, 2001; Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 Art. 1, 1993)

 

Chapter 14.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS
14.12.010 Rules and regulations.
     The following rules and regulations respecting disposal of sewage and drainage of buildings and connections to the sewage works of the city are adopted, and all work in respect thereto shall be performed as required in this chapter and not otherwise. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 201.00, 1993)

 

14.12.020 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to provide rules and regulations for the use of sanitary sewer facilities hereafter installed, altered or repaired within the city’s jurisdiction. This chapter shall not apply retroactively, and in the event of an alteration or repair hereafter made, it shall apply only to the new materials and methods used in this chapter. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 202.00, 1993)

 

14.12.030 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the city sanitary sewer ordinance. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 203.00, 1993)

 

14.12.040 Publication.
     Upon adoption, this chapter shall be entered in the minutes of the council and an excerpt needs to be published in the county, and the Napa Register, newspapers of general circulation printed and published in the city, within fifteen days following its passage and adoption, and shall take effect and be in force and effect immediately upon the expiration of thirty days after its passage. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 204.00, 1993)

 

14.12.050 Violation unlawful.
     Following the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to connect to, construct, install or provide, maintain and use any other means of sewage disposal from any building in the city except by connecting to a public sewer in the manner specified in the ordinance codified in this chapter and in other applicable ordinances of the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 205.00, 1993)

 

14.12.060 Relief on application.
     A.    When any person, by reason of special circumstances, is of the opinion that any provision of this title is unjust or inequitable as applied to his or her premises, he or she may make written application to the city manager or designee, stating the special circumstances, citing the provision complained of, and requesting suspension or modification of that provision as applied to his or her premises.

     B.     If such application be approved, the city manager or designee may, but only to the extent compatible with state and federal laws, rules and

regulations pertaining to wastewater facilities constructed, in part, with grant funds, by resolution, suspend or modify the provision complained of, as applied to such premises, to be effective as of the date of application and continuing during the period of the special circumstances. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 206.00, 1993)

 

14.12.070 Relief on own motion.
     The council may, on its own motion, find that by reason of special circumstances any provision of this regulation and the title should be suspended or modified as to a particular premises, but only to the extent compatible with state and federal laws, rules and regulations pertaining to wastewater facilities constructed, in part, with grant funds, and may by resolution, order such suspension or modification for such premises during the period of such special circumstances or any part thereof. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 207.00, 1993)

 

14.12.080 City manager.
     The council shall employ some fit and qualified person or persons to perform the duties of city manager. The city manager may delegate certain of his or her duties to other qualified officers of employees of the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 208.00, 1993)

 

14.12.090 Installation permits and fees.
     No public sewer, side sewer, building lateral or other sewage facility shall be installed, altered or repaired within the city jurisdiction until a permit for the work has been obtained from the city and all fees paid in accordance with the requirements of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 209.00, 1993)

 

14.12.100 User permit.
     No contributory industry shall be allowed to discharge wastewater until a user permit has been obtained from the city and all fees paid in accordance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Existing contributory industries shall obtain a user permit within one hundred twenty days after adoption of this title. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 210.00, 1993)

 

14.12.110 Plumbing and sewers on private property.
     The installation, use, maintenance, repair and inspection of all plumbing and sewers inside private property shall be subject to and governed by the plumbing ordinance of the city and the county, now existing or as hereafter amended, except the city will inspect building sewers to insure proper line, grade and tightness of joints for infiltration/inflow control. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 211.00, 1993)

 

14.12.120 Disposal of wastes.
     It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 301.00, 1993)

 

14.12.130 Treatment of wastes required.
     It is unlawful to discharge to any stream or watercourse any sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 302.00, 1993)

 

14.12.140 Unlawful disposal.
     Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 303.00, 1993)

 

14.12.150 Occupancy prohibited.
     No building, industrial facility, or other structure shall be occupied until the owner of the premises has complied with all rules and regulations of the city and/or applicable regulations of city, county or other applicable special district. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 304.00, 1993)

 

14.12.160 Sewer required.
     The owner of any building situated within the jurisdiction of the city and abutting on any street in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sewer of the jurisdiction of the city, is required at his or her expense to connect the building directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within ninety days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within two hundred feet of the nearest point of the property; provided, however, that where territory is annexed to the city or jurisdiction of the city upon which existing improvements are located which are served by a satisfactorily operating and maintained septic tank, the owner may continue to dispose of waste to the septic tank so long as it remains in operating condition to the satisfaction of the county health officer or until any additional building or buildings or any division of the property is proposed at which time connection to the public sewer shall be required. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 305.00, 1993)

 

14.12.170 Sewer use regulations—Objective.
     A.    It is the objective of the city to regulate and control the quantity and quality of the discharges into the sewer system so that they will not adversely affect the various collection, transmission, treatment, discharge requirements or environmental conditions; enhance opportunities to recycle and reclaim treated effluent and wastewater to meet requirements of the federal government and the state of California and their designated agencies.

     B.     The adverse affects can include:

     1.     Health and safety of personnel employed in the operation and maintenance of the sewage collection, transmission and treatment facilities;

     2.     The operational cost, maintenance and durability of collection, transmission and treatment facilities;

     3.     The quality of the receiving waters with respect to requirements established by the federal government and the state of California through their properly designated and responsible agencies;

     4.     The air quality and pollution abatement requirements established by the federal government and the state of California through their properly designated and responsible agencies;

     5.     Damage, deterioration or excessive maintenance costs to sewage collection, pumping, treatment or disposal facilities;

     6.     It is the general intent of the city to provide collection and treatment of domestic sanitary sewage and for commercial and industrial wastewaters that do not adversely affect the objectives stated hereinbefore and to provide equitable charges for the costs incurred. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 501.01, 1993)

 

14.12.180 Sewer use regulations—Authority.
     This regulation is adopted under authorization of the Government Code Section 38900 and the Health and Safety Code Section 5470 et seq. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 502.00, 1993)

 

14.12.190 Sewer use regulations—Legal authority.
     Legal authority for the city industrial user permit program and permit issuance procedures. The city has authority over all industrial users contributing wastewater to the POTW. This title provides the authority to issue control mechanisms, conduct compliance monitor activities, and when warranted, take appropriate enforcement action in response to noncompliance by users located within the city jurisdiction. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.00, 1993)

 

14.12.200 Protection from damage.
     No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the city sewerage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties provided by law. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 601.00, 1993)

 

14.12.210 Powers and authorities of inspectors.
     A.    The officers and any duly authorized employees of the city shall carry evidence establishing their position as authorized representatives of the city and upon exhibiting the proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter in and upon any and all buildings, industrial facilities and properties for the purposes of inspection, reinspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing and otherwise performing such duties as may be necessary in the enforcement of the provisions of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

     B.     All plumbers shall be held strictly responsible for any and all acts of agents or employees done under this title. Upon being notified by the city manager or designee of any defect arising therefrom in any sewer or of any violation of this title, the person or persons having charge of the work shall immediately correct the same. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 602.00, 1993)

 

14.12.220 Maintenance responsibility for lateral sewer
     The responsibility for the structural maintenance of lateral sewers shall be the responsibility of the city of American Canyon subject to the following exceptions:

     A.    The owner of the property served by the lateral sewer shall be responsible for all other failures of the lateral sewer including, but not limited to, plugs and clogs of the pipeline.

     B.     The property owner lateral sewer must have a clean-out approved by the city of American Canyon public works department with the main sewer’s right-of-way or easement.

     The city council may adopt by resolution a fee schedule for construction of clean-outs by property owners within city rights-of-way or easements and may adopt a policy for maintenance of lateral sewers. (Ord. 2001-12 § 3, 2001)

 

Chapter 14.16 SEWER USE REGULATIONS
14.16.010 City may deny new or increased contributions of pollutants.
     The city may deny or condition new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its discharge permit. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(i).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.01, 1993)

 

14.16.020 Industrial users—Must comply with pretreatment standards.
     All industrial users must be in consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. (Ref. 40 CFR 403(f)(1)(ii).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.02, 1993)

 

14.16.030 Discharge permit elements.
     Every significant industrial user and any other industrial deemed necessary by the city must be issued a permit. The minimum components contained with the permit are:

     A.    Duration of permit (three years maximum);

     B.     Nontransferability of permits;

     C.     Applicable effluent limits (local, state, federal);

     D.    Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type;

     E.     Civil and criminal penalties;

     F.     Compliance schedules which may not exceed the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.03, 1993)

 

14.16.040 Compliance schedule.
     The city may require from any industrial user a compliance schedule for the installation of technology required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and submit all notices and reports from industrial users including, but not limited to, the reports required in this chapter. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iv).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.04, 1993)

 

14.16.050 Right of entry.
     Representatives of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties served by the city for the purposes of inspection, surveillance, observance, and monitoring procedures (including measurement, sampling and testing). This includes authority to enter any industrial user’s discharge source, treatment system or recordkeeping location with authority to copy records. Such authority is provided under Section 308 of the Act. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.05, 1993)

 

14.16.060 Remedies for noncompliance.
     The city may obtain remedies for noncompliance by any industrial user with any pretreatment standard and requirement including injunctive relief, civil and criminal penalties, judicial relief, termination of service, etc., as detailed in the enforcement provisions contained within this title. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 503.06, 1993)

 

14.16.070 Discharge permits.
     A.    Permits to discharge into the sewage system of the city will only be granted after considering all elements of this title.

     B.     Each user shall be classified as categorical industrial user, significant industrial user, nonresidential user (other commercial), or domestic user. Each user, with the exception of domestic user, may be required to possess a waste discharge permit issued by the city.

     C.     Nonresidential users may be exempted from the permit requirements of this title at the discretion of the city manager if they are known to discharge only domestic sanitary sewage (as defined).

     D.    Users required to obtain waste discharge permit shall complete, and file with the city, a permit application accompanied by any appropriate fees.

     E.     Permits will be issued to all significant industrial users, categorical industrial users and all nonresidential users that the city deems necessary. A permit fee shall be established to recover administrative costs associated with each class of permitted user.

     F.     Within thirty days of receiving approval of the list of significant industrial users from the approval authority, the city will notify the significant industrial users of applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

     G.    Upon determining that an industrial user (IU), meeting the definition of a significant noncategorical industrial user, has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the city’s operation or for violating any pretreatment regulations, the city may determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user (SIU).

     H.    Long-term permits shall be renewed yearly or as defined in each individual permit.

     I.      Short-term permits shall be renewed as defined in each individual permit. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 504.00, 1993)

 

14.16.080 Acceptable wastes—Domestic and industrial sanitary sewage.
     The physical, chemical and biological characteristics of domestic sanitary sewage shall be based on daily composite average of the discharge and shall conform to the following limits:

 

Domestic Sanitary Sewage

Waste Characteristic

Maximum Concentration

Hydrogen ion concentration

5.0—10.0

Total dissolved solids

500 milligrams/liter

Turbidity

250 JTU

Color

500 CU

Biochemical oxygen demand

175 milligrams/liter

Chemical oxygen demand

500 milligrams/liter

Suspended solids

200 milligrams/liter

Settleable solids

10 milligrams/liter

Sulfide

0.5 milligrams/liter

Grease (vegetable based)

75 milligrams/liter

Toxicity (LC Bioassay)

25%

Detergent (MBAS)

10 milligrams/liter

Ammonia Phosphate (total)

25 milligrams/liter

 

     The physical, chemical and biological characteristics of industrial sanitary sewage shall be based on daily composite average of the industrial discharge and not exceed the influent design limits of the city wastewater treatment facility as follows:

 

Industrial Sanitary Sewage Maximum
Allowable Concentration

Performance Parameter

 

BOD

200 milligrams/liter

TSS

220 milligrams/liter

TKN

35 milligrams/liter

Alkalinity

≤ 120 milligrams/liter as CaCO

 

(Ord. 2004-09 § 1, 2004; Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 55.01, 1993)

 

14.16.090 Prohibited wastes.
     Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following water or wastewaters into public sewers as outlined in Sections 706.01 through 706.04.3. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.00, 1993)

 

14.16.100 Sewer use prohibitions.
     A user may not introduce into any POTW any pollutant(s) which cause pass through or interference. These specific prohibitions and the general prohibitions apply to each user introducing pollutions into any POTW whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state or local pretreatment requirements. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.01, 1993)

 

14.16.110 Application of most stringent limitation.
     The most stringent regulations or standards: federal, state, regional or local shall apply. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.02, 1993)

 

14.16.120 Specific prohibitions—Fire or explosion hazard.
     Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW including wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty degrees Celsius). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(1).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.1, 1993)

 

14.16.130 Specific prohibitions—Corrosive materials.
     Any waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the city. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(2).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.2, 1993)

 

14.16.140 Specific prohibitions—Obstructions.
     Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, resulting in interference with the proper operation of the sewerage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, containers, cups, feathers, garbage, glass, grease, hair, hides, leaves, metal, mud, oil, paper dishes, plastics, rags, sand, sawdust, seeds, shavings, stems, straw, tar, wood, wool, etc. either whole or ground by a garbage grinder. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(1).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.3, 1993)

 

14.16.150 Specific prohibitions—Pollutant causing interference.
     A.    Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. “Interference” means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both inhibits or disrupts the POTW; its treatment processes or operations; or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and therefore causes a violation of the POTW’s NPDES permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified federal statutes, regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)) and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.

     B.     A user shall have affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(2) if the user can demonstrate that:

     1.     It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and

     2.     If city local limits for pass through and interference were not developed according to 40 CFR 403.5(c). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(2)(i)(ii).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.4, 1993)

 

14.16.160 Specific prohibitions—Temperature.
     Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds forty degrees Celsius (one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(5).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.5, 1993)

 

14.16.170 Specific prohibitions—Mineral oil.
     Any waters or wastes containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral origin in amounts that cause interference or pass through. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(6).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.6, 1993)

 

14.16.180 Specific prohibitions—Noxious and malodorous substances.
     Any noxious or malodorous substances which themselves or by interaction with other wastes may result in toxic gases, fumes, or vapors in a quantity capable of causing a public nuisance or worker health and safety problems. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(7).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.7, 1993)

 

14.16.190 Specific prohibitions—Limitations on point of discharge.
     No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a public sewer other than through an approved building sewer, unless he has been issued a wastewater discharge permit by the city designating the discharge location. If a wastewater discharge permit is issued for such direct discharge, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.5(b)(8).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.8, 1993)

 

14.16.200 Specific prohibitions—Pass through.
     A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.3(n).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.03.9, 1993)

 

14.16.210 Local limits—Discharge limit development.
     As required in this section and pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8, the control authority, (the city) continually develops and enforces specific limits to implement the prohibitions listed in 403.5(a)(1) and 403.5(b) including the local limits. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.04.1, 1993)

 

14.16.220 Local limits—Toxic substances.
     Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantities to injure or interfere with or create any hazard in the sewage treatment process, effluent quality, sludge quality, or receiving water quality requirements to humans, animals or plant life. The following “local limits” comprise a partial list of toxic pollutants of concern (and others designated pursuant to Section 3 07(a)(1) of the Act) and their maximum concentration allowable by any discharger for admission into the sewerage system:

     A.    Any industrial user who discharges directly into the city service area or jurisdiction of the city shall not exceed the following discharge limits:

 

Maximum Allowable Concentration
Milligrams/Liter

Toxicant

 

Ammonia

47.43

Arsenic

0.2

Cadmium

0.16

Chromium—Total

3.5

Copper

0.87

Cyanide

1.0

Dissolved sulfide

0.10

Lead

0.45

Mercury

0.00020

Nickel

0.30

Oil and grease (petroleum based)

50.00

Oil and grease (vegetable and animal based)

75.00

pH

6.0—9.0

Phenol

29.59

Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH)

0.92

Selenium

—

Silver

0.30

Total toxic organics

1.00

Volatile organic compounds (VOC)

10% LEL

Zinc

3.2

 

Additional Wastewater Constituents

of Agronomic Importance

 

     Recommended maximum concentration from the California State Water Resources Control Board, “Guidance Manual, Irrigation With Reclaimed Municipal Wastewater.” Report Number 84-1 R.

 

Maximum Allowable Concentration
Milligrams/Liters

Constituent

 

Salinity

2.5 dS/m (mmhos/cm)

TDS

1.500

Chloride (CI)

350 mg/l

Sodium (Na)

70 mg/l*

Boron (B)

1.5 mg/1

Mo

.01

V

0.1

Li

2.5

F

1.0

Co

.05

Be

.1

 

*       (Na) 70 mg/I or if Sodium concentration exceeds this value then discharge must not have an SAR exceeding 6.

 

     B.     The maximum allowable concentration of toxic or potentially toxic material not listed above will be determined on an individual basis. No industrial waste shall be discharged which has a lethal toxicity as determined by a ninety-six-hour static bioassay using threespine stickleback of less than twenty-five percent concentration of wastewater. (Ord. 2004-09 § 2, 2004; Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 §§ 506.04.2, 506.04.3, 1993)

 

14.16.230 General prohibitions—Rainwater or uncontaminated water.
     No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any rainwater, stormwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, water from yard fountains, ponds or lawn sprays or any other uncontaminated water into any sewerage facility which directly or indirectly discharges to facilities owned by the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.1, 1993)

 

14.16.240 General prohibitions—Groundwater from cleanup projects.
     Wastewater generated from the cleanup of spills, leaking underground storage tanks, monitoring wells or other similar source shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections to a community sewer unless a temporary discharge permit is issued by the city. The city may approve the discharge of such water only when no reasonable alternative method of disposal is available. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.2, 1993)

 

14.16.250 General prohibitions—Cooling water and swimming pool drainage.
     Uncontaminated cooling or swimming pool drains unless special permission has been granted by the city manager. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 9301 § 506.05.3, 1993)

 

14.16.260 General prohibitions—Garbage.
     Any garbage excepting properly shredded garbage from dwellings or restaurants engaged in preparation of foods and beverages for consumption. Properly shredded garbage shall contain less than five percent (dry weight basis) of material and able to pass a three-eighths-inch screen. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.4, 1993)

 

14.16.270 General prohibitions—Suspended solids.
     Any industrial process water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such material at the sewage treatment plant. Suspended solids discharged in industrial process wastewater shall have a dimension no larger than that of a one-fourth-inch mesh. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.5, 1993)

 

14.16.280 Pretreatment sludges—Nondegradable wastes.
     Any water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or which cause the treatment plant effluent to fail to meet any discharge requirements established by the state of California or the United States Federal Government shall not discharge to the city sewage system. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.7, 1993)

 

14.16.290 Pretreatment sludges—Chemical pesticides and similar toxicants.
     No chlorinated hydrocarbon, organo-phosphate or similar chemical compounds used as algaecides, bactericides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, or pesticides shall be discharged into the sewerage system in any concentration except as specifically approved by a written wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.8, 1993)

 

14.16.300 Pretreatment sludges—Oxidizing and reducing agents.
     Strong oxidizing and reducing agents shall not be discharged into the sewage system at concentrations exceeding the following concentrations, except by special wastewater discharge permit.

 

Agent

Maximum Concentration

Chlorine, chlorine dioxide, potassium permanganate, ozone and other strong oxidants

5 milligrams/liter

 

 

Sulfite, thiosulfate, nitrite and other strong reducing agents

5 milligrams/liter

 

(Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.9, 1993)

 

14.16.310 Pretreatment sludges—Radioactive wastes.
     A.    Radioactive wastes of any kind, except where:

     1.     The person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the state Department of Public Health, Atomic Energy Commission, or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials;

     2.     The waste is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17), State Department of Public Health, Atomic Energy Commission, or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials;

     3.     The person discharging the radioactive waste assumes full responsibility for any injury to personnel, or damage to the sewerage system that may result from such discharge;

     4.     Radioactivity of the treated wastewater prior to disposal does not exceed limits established by the designated agencies of the state; and

     5.     Residual radioactivity is within limits permitted by state or local regulation in final disposal.

     B.     Any person discharging a radioactive waste into the sewerage system in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit to discharge such wastes, and submit a periodic report of discharge occurrences and quantities. In the event of an accidental spill of any radioactive material into the sewerage system, the person responsible shall immediately notify the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.10, 1993)

 

14.16.320 Pretreatment sludges—Hospital wastes.
     A.    Hospitals, clinics, offices of medical doctors and convalescent homes shall not discharge to the sanitary sewer:

     1.     Equipment, instruments, utensils, hypodermic needles, syringes, and associated articles;

     2.     Any article that may harbor or transmit pathogenic organisms and that are used in the rooms of patients having a suspected or diagnosed communicable disease, which by the nature of the disease is required to be isolated;

     3.     Recognizable portions of the human anatomy;

     4.     Waste excluded by other provisions of these regulations.

     B.     Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of appropriate health agencies to define wastes as being infectious and to prohibit discharge to the sanitary sewer. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.11, 1993)

 

14.16.330 Pretreatment sludges—Unusual waste concentrations.
     Materials which exert or cause:

     A.    Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids;

     B.     Excessive discoloration;

     C.     Unusual B.O.D., chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant;

     D.    Unusual volume of flow, including slug discharges;

     E.     Oxygen demanding pollutants discharged at a concentration or volume that will cause interference;

     F.     Pollutants in quantities at a concentration or volume that may cause excessive foaming in the treatment works or POTW discharge. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 506.05.12, 1993)

 

14.16.340 Restricted waste discharges.
     A.    Any substance in any commercial or industrial waste discharge which may result in operational costs and maintenance of sewage collection and treatment facilities in excess of that required for normal domestic sanitary sewage or waste concentrations as listed in Section 705.01, or with any of the prohibited waste characteristics as listed in Sections 706.00 through 706.04.3, and/or having an average daily flow greater than one-quarter of one percent of the average daily flow of the city shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager.

     B.     The discharges shall comply with any of the following restrictions as approved by the city manager or his designee for acceptance of the wastewater into the sewer system. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.00, 1993)

 

14.16.350 Pretreatment.
     Pursuant to Section 307(b) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended, all pretreatment for incompatible pollutants discharged at each industrial plant site to the public sewer shall be consistent with Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards in 40 (:kR Subchapter N. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.01, 1993)

 

14.16.360 Flow control.
     Limitations of the volume and rate of flow discharging into the sewer system to limit and equalize extreme flow and waste concentration. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.02, 1993)

 

14.16.370 Surcharge payment.
     Require a payment, in an amount established by the council to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes. If the city manager or his designee requires pretreatment or equalization of flow, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city and no construction of such facilities shall commence until the approval is obtained in writing. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.03, 1993)

 

14.16.380 Damage caused by discharge.
     When the discharge of a commercial waste causes an obstruction, damage or other impairment to the sewage system, the city manager or his designee may assess a reasonable charge against the discharger for the work required to clean or repair the facility. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.04, 1993)

 

14.16.390 Limitations of discharge quantity and rate of discharge.
     A.    The city manager or his designee may limit the quantity and rate of any waste discharge, when in his judgment, the capacity of any part of the sewerage system would be overtaxed by the discharge, or the quantity or rate of discharge would impose a disproportionate cost to the operation of the sewerage system. In addition to commercial and industrial waste discharges, the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to septic tank pumpages, swimming pool drainage, cooling water, or other discharges from building, heating, cooling or air conditioning systems.

     B.     Discharge of any waste covered by this section shall not be discharged into the sewerage systems until after specific approval of the quantity and procedure proposed has been granted by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.05, 1993)

 

14.16.400 Disposal of unacceptable wastes.
     The disposal of wastes not permitted to be discharged into the. public sewer, including, but not limited to, sludges, spent chemicals, and hazardous materials, shall be done in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances including: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 30 of the California Code of Regulations. A record or manifest of disposal shall be maintained and available for review by the city. The required “waste haulers report” must be completed and a copy furnished within thirty days to the city by the discharger. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 507.06, 1993)

 

14.16.410 Hauled wastes—Septic tank pumpage discharges.
     No septic tank pumpage discharges will be allowed directly or indirectly to the POTW. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 508.01, 1993)

 

14.16.420 Hauled wastes—Holding tank waste.
     No person shall discharge any holding tank wastes or wastes from barrels, storage tanks, or any other such containers into a public sewer unless he has been issued a permit by the city. This permit will state the specific location of discharge, the times of day discharge can occur, the volume of the discharge and the wastewater constituents and characteristics. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste into a city facility, the user shall pay the applicable charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 508.02, 1993)

 

14.16.430 Hauled wastes—RCRA wastes.
     No user may discharge any hazardous waste transported to the POTW by any means including truck, rail, or dedicated pipe (when the waste is not mixed with domestic sewage) that can subject the POTW to any RCRA hazardous waste requirements. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 508.03, 1993)

 

14.16.440 National pretreatment standards—Categorical standards.
     A.    Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Standards and requirements under 40 Code of Federal Regulations 405 through 471 are accepted by reference.

     B.     Category Determination Request. An industrial user or the city may request, in writing, from the state a determination as to which category is most appropriate for the industrial user.

     C.     Application Deadline. All existing industrial users must submit a request to the city manager or his designee for subcategory determination within sixty days after the effective date of a pretreatment standard for a subcategory under which an industrial user may be included or when an industrial user adds or changes a process or operation. A “new source” must request this certification prior to commencing discharge.

     D.    Contents of Application. Each request must include a description of which subcategories might be applicable, evidence and reasons why a particular subcategory may or may not be applicable, and a signed statement of truthfulness as cited in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). (See sample “statement of truthfulness” at the end of this chapter.)

     E.     Deficient Requests. The city manager or his designee will only act on written requests for determination that contain all of the information required. Any requests having deficiencies that are not corrected within thirty days, or an extended period allowed by the city manager, shall be denied.

     F.     Requests for Hearing and/or Legal Decision. The requested industrial user may submit within thirty days of receipt of notice of the final determination, a petition to consider or contest the decision to the regional administrator.

     G.    Deadline for Compliance with Categorical Standards. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date of the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR, Chapter 1, Subpart N. Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the definition of a “new source.” New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall “start up” all pollution control equipment required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed ninety days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.

     H.    Concentration and Mass Limits. Pollutant discharge limits in categorical pretreatment standards will be expressed either as concentration or mass limits. Wherever possible, where concentration limits are specified in standards, equivalent mass limits will be provided so that local, state or federal authorities responsible for enforcement may use either concentration or mass limits. Limits in categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to the effluent of the process regulated by the standard, or as otherwise specified by the standard.

     I.      Dilution Prohibited as Substitute for Treatment. Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.

     J.      Combined Wastestream Formula.

     1.     Where process effluent is mixed prior to treatment with wastewaters other than those generated by the regulated process, fixed alternative discharge limits may be derived by the control authority or the industrial user with the written concurrence of the control authority. These alternative limits shall be applied to the mixed effluent. When deriving alternative categorical limits, the control authority or industrial user shall calculate both an alternative daily maximum value using the daily maximum value(s) specified in the appropriate categorical pretreatment standard(s) and an alternative consecutive sampling day average value using the monthly average value(s) specified in the appropriate categorical pretreatment standard(s).

     2.     The industrial user shall comply with the alternative daily maximum and monthly average limits fixed by the control authority until the control authority modifies the limits or approves an industrial user modification request. Modification is authorized whenever there is a material or significant change in the values used in the calculation to fix alternative limits for the regulated pollutant.

     3.     An industrial user must immediately report any such material or significant change to the control authority. Where appropriate, new alternative categorical limits shall be calculated within thirty days. The calculations for the alternative concentration limit and/or the alternative mass limit, detection limits, and self-monitoring requirements must comply with 40 CFR 403.6(e) (1—4). (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 509.00, 1993)

 

14.16.450 Removal credits.
     Removal credits will not be granted to any indirect dischargers with the city service area. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 510.00, 1993)

 

14.16.460 Procedures—Outlined.
     A.    Identification. Identify and locate all industrial users subject to the POTW pretreatment program. Identify the character and volume of pollutants contributed to the POTW by the industrial users identified under 403.8(f)(2)(i).

     B.     Notification. The city will notify the significant industrial user of applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.

     C.     Self-Monitoring Reports.

     1.     Receive and analyze self-monitoring reports and other notices submitted by industrial users in accordance with the self-monitoring requirements in 40 CFR 403.12.

     2.     Inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once per year. Determine if each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges at least once every two years.

     D.    Accidental Discharges.

     1.     Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials and/or other wastes regulated by this title. Where necessary, or as directed by the city manager, retention basins, dikes, storage tanks or other facilities designed to eliminate, neutralize, offset or otherwise negate the effects of prohibited materials or wastes discharged in violation of this title shall be installed.

     2.     Dischargers shall notify the city immediately when accidental discharges, including slug loads of wastes in violation of this title occur so that counter measures may be taken by the city to minimize damage to the sewer system, treatment plant, treatment process and the receiving waters. Such notification of “interference” will not relieve dischargers of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewer system, judgments imposed on the city on account thereof under Section 13000 et seq., of the California Water Code or for violation of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code.

     3.     In the event of accident discharge in violation of this title, discharger shall furnish the city, within five days of the date of occurrence, a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge and the measure being taken to prevent future occurrence.

     4.     Sewer connections within the discharger’s plumbing or drainage system shall be appropriately labeled to warn operating personnel against discharge of any substance in violation of this title.

     E.     Slug Loading Control Plan. An industrial user must develop and implement a slug loading control plan whenever the city decides that a slug control plan is needed. The slug loading control plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements designed to prevent slug loading:

     1.     Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges.

     2.     The description shall include a list of chemicals that are handled/stored, MSDS reports, volume of each chemical, and capacity of each tank.

     3.     Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharges that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days.

     4.     Procedures to prevent adverse impact from slug loads, including inspection and maintenance of potential spill sources including storage areas, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, working training, building of containment structures or equipment measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents) with a list of measures, equipment, and materials available for spill response activities along with their location. A listing of commercial (or other) suppliers of spill response equipment and materials (indicating the types of equipment available) and their telephone numbers.

     5.     A list of the facility personnel (by name and title) that have an identified role to play in the implementation of a slug load response plan, indicating the responsibilities and authorities of each.

     6.     The plan containing all of the above prescribed elements must be submitted to the city for approval within two months from the date requested to develop and implement a slug loading control plan. Full implementation of an approved slug loading control plan is not to exceed four months.

     7.     The industrial user “permittee” shall notify the city of any proposed changes to the plan by submitting proposed revised plan to the NSD and informing the NSD in advance of the date upon which the proposed revised plan will take effect

(pending approval by NSD). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v).)

     F.     Investigate Noncompliance. Investigate instances of noncompliance with pretreatment standards and requirements including but not limited to reports, notices, sample-taking and analysis, inspections and surveillance activities.

     G.    Public Participation (Significant Noncompliance). The procedures in this section and 40 CFR Part 25 in the enforcement of national pretreatment standards include provision. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:

     1.     Chronic violations (exceeding the daily maximum limit or the average limit sixty-six percent of the time during a six-month period) of the same pollutant parameter;

     2.     Technical review criteria (TRC) violations (thirty-three percent or more of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the applicable limit and the TRC value (1.4 times the limit for a conventional pollutant or 1.2 times the limit for a toxic pollutant));

     3.     A violation of pass through or interference;

     4.     A discharge of imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment, or which required the POTW to use its emergency, authorities under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(b);

     5.     Violations of a compliance schedule milestone by ninety days;

     6.     Failure to accurately report noncompliance;

     7.     Any other violation deemed significant by the control authority. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 511.00, 1993)

 

14.16.470 Other implementing provisions—Outlined.
     A.    Industrial Parks Notification. All owners of industrial parks are required to notify the city, at least annually, of all changes in tenancy and any known changes in industrial operations among their tenants.

     B.     Notice of Violation. Whenever the city manager or his designee finds that discharge of any waste is, or threatens to become, a public nuisance or a violation of established requirements, including but not limited to this title, other ordinances and resolutions, he may issue an order specifying such nuisance, violations, or threatened violations, and ordering compliance within the time schedule specified therein. Noncompliance with such order shall constitute a violation of this title.

     C.     Serious and Immediate Hazards. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other section of this title, whenever in the judgment of the city manager or his designee, it appears that any waste discharge is causing any condition constituting a hazard to the life, health or safety of any person, or the sewage system, the city manager or his designee is empowered to terminate service immediately.

     D.    Sampling Facilities. The discharger of any industrial waste shall, at his own expense, install sampling manhole and other metering and monitoring equipment to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the discharger’s waste. Such sampling facility shall be acceptable to the city manager or his designee for the purposes required, shall be safely located, accessible at all times and constructed in a manner and with materials in conformance with city regulations. These facilities shall be maintained in good condition at all times by the discharger at his expense. Sampling facilities shall be installed within ninety days after notice by the city manager or his designee.

     E.     Maintenance of Pretreatment Facilities. Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense and to the satisfaction of the city.

     F.     Interceptors Required. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city manager or his designee, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes, containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for building used for residential purposes. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager or his designee, and shall be so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Domestic waste from toilets, urinals, wash basins or any fixture receiving fecal material shall not flow through the removal device.

     G.    Maintenance of Interceptors. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. (Emulsifying chemicals may not be used to dissolve grease.)

     H.    Measurements and Tests. All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this title shall be determined in accordance with the test procedures found in 40 (Lit Part 136 and amendments thereto whenever applicable. If the 40 CFR procedures must be approved by the EPA. Analysis shall be determined from samples collected at a predetermined manhole or other sampling location (i.e., control manhole, end of process, end of pipe, or other location) identified and approved by the city manager. In the event that no special sampling location or manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the side sewer is connected.

     I.      Special Agreements. No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial user concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern and subject to such terms and conditions as might be required by city. This agreement of waiver does not preclude any National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or requirement, or local limits.

     J.      Changes in Pretreatment and Waste Discharge Requirements.

     1.     The provisions contained in this chapter relating to pretreatment and to prohibited waste discharges and as to limitations and restrictions on waste discharges are subject to regulations by state and federal authorities and are subject to the terms and conditions of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit heretofore issued to the city and/or American Canyon Napa Wastewater Authority (NAC). Should the state and federal regulations be modified or should amended, the requirements of this title shall be suspended to the extent that such standards shall be immediately applicable upon the effective date of such state or federal regulations or of the amendment to the national pollution discharge elimination system permit.

     2.     Pursuant to Section 307(b) Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), as amended, all pretreatment for incompatible pollutants discharged at each industrial plant site to the public sewer shall be consistent with federal categorical pretreatment standards.

     K.    Notice to Employees. In order that employees of users be informed of city requirements, users shall post in a conspicuous place and make available to their employees, copies of these regulations together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the city from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 512.00, 1993)

 

14.16.480 Reporting requirements—Baseline monitoring report.
     A.    Baseline Monitoring Report.

     1.     A baseline monitoring report must be submitted by existing and new industrial users subject to categorical standards and currently discharging or scheduled to discharge to the sewer system. Existing industrial users must submit the required information in this section within one hundred eighty days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or one hundred eighty days after the final administrative decision made upon a category, determination submission, whichever is later. New source industrial users must submit the required information at least ninety days prior to commencement of discharge.

     2.     The city manager or his designee may require additional information as part of the report if, in his or her opinion, insufficient information has been provided. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(b).)

     B.     Identifying Information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owners.

     C.     Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permit held by or for the facility.

     D.    Description of Operation. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature of the process, average rate of production (flow, volume, substances and concentrations in the waste discharge). Also submit the standard industrial classification (SIC) of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.

     E.     Flow Measurement. Users shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from the regulated process streams and other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula.

     F.     Measurement of Pollutants.

     1.     The industrial user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.

     2.     The industrial user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis from each regulated process to the city. The daily maximum and average concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations.

     3.     The proper and approved method of sampling (grab, flow-proportional composite, or time-proportional composite) will be utilized to obtain representative results.

     4.     A minimum of one representative sample will be taken to comply with the requirements of this section.

     5.     Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. All flows and concentrations must be measured to allow use of combined wastestream formula.

     6.     Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where Part 136 procedures do not include sampling or analytical techniques or where Part 136 methods are deemed (by EPA administrator) to be inappropriate, sampling and analysis shall occur according to procedures approved by EPA.

     7.     The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall clarify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.

     8.     A baseline monitoring report containing historical data may only be used upon approval by the city. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5).)

     G.    Certification. A statement reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to be a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.

     H.    Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.01, 1993)

 

14.16.490 Reporting requirements—Reports on progress in meeting compliance schedules.
     A.    A schedule of events to achieve compliance is required. It shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (i.e., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). No increments shall exceed nine months.

     B.     Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date, and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for the delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the city. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(c).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.02, 1993)

 

14.16.500 Reporting requirements—Report on final compliance (ninety-day report).
     A.    Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report, with the same requirements as for the baseline monitoring report, indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the industrial user which are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements.

     B.     The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user who is a certified, qualified professional. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.03, 1993)

 

14.16.510 Reporting requirements—Periodic reports on continued compliance.
     Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the city during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the city or the CRWQCB, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported, except that the city may require consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc. The city may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(e).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.04, 1993)

 

14.16.520 Reporting requirements—Notice of slug loading.
     The industrial user shall notify the city immediately of any slug loading, as defined in Section 14.08.010 of this division, by the industrial user. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(f).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.05, 1993)

 

14.16.530 Reporting requirements—Monitoring and analysis reports.
     A.    Whenever sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the city within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. Repeat sampling and analysis by the user shall be performed and results submitted to the city within thirty days of becoming aware of the violation. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(g)(2).)

     B.     The city determines the frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Sampling for all significant industrial users for periodic reports must be performed during the period covered by the report. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3).)

     C.     Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard that monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, shall include the results of this monitoring in the periodic reports. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.06, 1993)

 

14.16.540 Reporting requirements—Reports required by noncategorical industries.
     All significant noncategorical industrial users are required to sample their effluent at least once every six months (on dates specified by the city) and submit the results to the city. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto or other approved sampling or analytical techniques as determined by the administrator. All or parts of this report will not be required if the city elects to perform the sampling and analysis. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(h).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.07, 1993)

 

14.16.550 Reporting requirements—Annual POTW reports.
     A.    An annual pretreatment report will be submitted to the approval authority summarizing the activities and effectiveness of the city’s pretreatment program. The goals of the local pretreatment program are to regulate discharges from the industrial users (IUs) into the sewers.

     B.     The annual pretreatment report will include, at a minimum, the following: an updated list of industrial users; a summary of the status of industrial user compliance over the reporting period; a summary of compliance and enforcement activities (including inspections and samplings) conducted by the POTW during the reporting period; and any other relevant information requested by the approval authority. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(i).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.08, 1993)

 

14.16.560 Reporting requirements—Notification of changed discharge.
     All industrial users are required to notify the city in advance of any waste discharge changes, including hazardous wastes. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(j).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.09, 1993)

 

14.16.570 Reporting requirements—Signatory requirements for industrial user reports.
     All required reports shall include the certification statement as set forth at the end of this chapter, and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. An authorized representative may be:

     A.    A responsible corporate officer (president, vice-president, or secretary-treasurer) in charge of a principal business function, etc.

     B.     A general partner or proprietor (if the industrial user submitting the reports is partnership or sole proprietorship).

     C.     A duly authorized representative of the individual in 40 CFR 403.12(l)(1), if:

     1.     The authorization is made in writing;

     2.     The authorization specifies either an individual or position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or environmental matters for the company;

     3.     The written authorization is submitted to the control authority.

     D.    A reauthorized individual that satisfies the requirements in this section. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(1).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.10, 1993)

 

14.16.580 Reporting requirements—Provisions governing fraud and false statements..
     The reports required in 40 CFR 403.12 are subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the provisions of Section 309(c)(2) of the Act governing false statements, representations or certifications in reports required under the Act. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(n).)

(Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.11, 1993)

 

14.16.590 Reporting requirements—Recordkeeping requirements.
     A.    Any industrial user, subject to reporting requirements established in 40 CFR 403.12, shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required in the Code of Federal Regulations, this title, and waste discharge permit. Such records shall include for all samples:

     1.     The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name(s) if the person(s) taking the samples;

     2.     The dates analyses were performed;

     3.     Who performed the analyses;

     4.     The analytical method and detection limit used;

     5.     The results of such analyses;

     6.     Chain of custody, when required.

     B.     Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required in the Code of Federal Regulations, this title, or waste discharge permit) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city manager or his designee, regional administrator and POTW.

     C.     This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user. This period of retention can be extended at the request of the state or the EPA. (Ref. 40 CtR 403.12(o).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.12, 1993)

 

14.16.600 Reporting requirements—Hazardous waste notification.
     All industrial users are required to notify the EPA, the state and the city within one hundred eighty days of the domestic sewage study (DDS) regulations effective date (or within one hundred eighty days for sources commencing discharge after the effective date of the regulations) of discharges of listed and characteristic hazardous wastes, the constituents of these wastes, and anticipated discharges of such wastes. Additionally, notification is not necessary if pollutants are already reported in periodic self-monitoring reports. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.12(p).) (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 514.13, 1993)

 

14.16.610 Variances.
     A request for variances from categorical pretreatment standards for fundamentally different factors must be made in accordance with the criteria set forth in 40 CFR 403.13(a—m). (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 515.00, 1993)

 

14.16.620 Confidentiality.
     A.    EPA Authorities. In accordance with 40 CFR 403.14(a) and 403.14(b), any information submitted to Environmental Protection Agency, the state or to the city, may be claimed as confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be asserted at the time of submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or instructions, or, in the case of other submissions, by stamping the words “Confidential Business Information” on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at the time of submission, EPA, the state or the city may make the information available to the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information will be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR Part 2 (Public Information). (Ref. 40 CFR 403.14(a).)

     B.     Effluent Data. Information and data provided to the control authority or city which is effluent data shall be available to the public without restriction. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.14(b).)

     C.     State or City.

     1.     All other information which is submitted to the state or city shall be available to the public at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302. (Ref. 40 CFR 403.14(c).)

     2.     The city shall not be liable for damages to any permit applicant or user for any disclosure of any secret furnished to the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 516.00, 1993)

 

14.16.630 Net/gross calculation.
     Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the presence of pollutants in the industrial user’s intake water in accordance with the following:

     A.    The industrial user must make application to control authority to obtain credit for intake pollutants calculated on a “net” basis.

     B.     The industrial user must demonstrate that the control system it proposes or uses to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if properly installed and operated, meet the standards in the absence of pollutants in the intake waters.

     1.     Credit for generic pollutants such as BOD, TSS and oil and grease shall not be granted unless the industrial user demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure of the intake water and the user’s effluent are substantially similar.

     2.     Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, up to a maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for credits and compliance with adjusted standard(s) under this section.

     3.     Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the intake of water is drawn from the same body of water as that into which the city discharges or if the user is using reclaimed water supplied by the city. The Napa River is the body of water into which the city discharges.

     C.     The applicable categorical pretreatment standards contained in 40 CFR subchapter N specifically provide that they shall be applied on a net basis. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 517.00, 1993)

 

14.16.640 Statement of truthfulness—Required with all submissions.
     All applications, reports, or information submitted to the city must contain the following certification statement and be signed as required:

 

Statement of Truthfulness

 

        I certify under the penalty of law that document and all attachments were prepared under my direction and supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief true, accurate, and complete.

 

        I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.

 

Company Name       ____________________

 

Address                   _____________________

 

                              _____________________

 

Date:______            _____________________

                              Authorized Representative

 

(Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 518.00, 1993)

 

Chapter 14.20 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
14.20.010 Sewer not available.
     Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 14.12.160 of this title, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system, consisting of a septic tank and leach field complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 401.00, 1993)

 

14.20.020 Permit required.
     Before a commencement of construction of a private disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the health department of the city or county. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 402.00, 1993)

 

14.20.030 Inspection required.
     A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city and/or county. City and/or county shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city and/or county when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 403.00, 1993)

 

14.20.040 Design requirements.
     The type, capacities, locations and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public

Health of the state of California and the health department of county and/or city. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any stream or watercourse. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 404.00, 1993)

 

14.20.050 Abandonment of facilities.
     At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 14.12.160 of this title, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the ordinances, rules and regulations of city, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material as determined by county and/or city health departments. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 405.00, 1993)

 

14.20.060 Cost of maintenance by owner.
     The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 406.00, 1993)

 

14.20.070 Additional requirements.
     No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any law, ordinance, rule or regulation or by the health department of the state or the city or county. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 407.00, 1993)

 

Chapter 14.24 ENFORCEMENT
Article I. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
14.24.010 Notification of violation.
     Whenever the city manager or his designee finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the city manager or his designee may serve upon the user written notice of the violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.1, 1993)

 

14.24.020 Consent orders.
     The city manager or his designee is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the industrial user responsible for the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the industrial user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued pursuant to Section 14.24.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.2, 1993)

 

14.24.030 Show cause hearing.
     The city manager or his designee may order any industrial user which causes or contributes to violation of this chapter a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action and the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any principal executive, general partner or corporate office. Whether or not a duly notified industrial user appears as notified, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.3, 1993)

 

14.24.040 Compliance order.
     When the city manager or his designee finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the industrial user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.4, 1993)

 

14.24.050 Cease and desist orders.
     When the city manager or his designee finds that an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, the city manager or his designee may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to:

     A.    Comply forthwith;

     B.     Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. (Ord. 9807 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.5, 1993)

 

14.24.060 Administrative fines.
     Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any user who is found to have violated any provisions of this chapter, or permits and orders issued hereunder, shall be fined an amount of at least one thousand dollars per day. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user’s next scheduled sewer service charge and the city manager shall have such other collection remedies as he has to collect other service charges. Unpaid charges, fines and penalties shall constitute a lien against the individual user’s property. Industrial users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the city manager to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the city manager or his designee believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within fifteen days of receiving the request from the industrial user. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.6, 1993)

 

14.24.070 Emergency suspensions.
     A.    The city manager or his designee may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit of an industrial user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment.

     B.     Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user’s failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager or his designee shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the individuals. The city manager or his designee shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings, as set forth in Section 14.24.090 of this chapter, are initiated against the user.

     C.     An industrial user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the city manager or his designee prior to the date of the hearing described in subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.7, 1993)

 

14.24.080 Monitoring facilities.
     Any person who intentionally or negligently tampers with, falsifies, or knowingly renders inaccurate, any monitoring device shall be punished by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars or imprisoned in a county jail for not more than six months or both. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.8, 1993)

 

14.24.090 Termination of permit.
     A.    Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW, must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the city. Any user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable state and federal law, is subject to permit termination:

     1.     Violation of permit conditions;

     2.     Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge, including baseline monitoring report, within the required time frame;

     3.     Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics;

     4.     Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling.

     B.     Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and be offered an opportunity to show cause (as set forth in Section 14.24.030 of this chapter) why the proposed action should not be taken. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.9, 1993)

 

14.24.100 Disconnection.
     As an alternative method of enforcing the provisions of this or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city, the city manager or his designee shall have the power to disconnect the user or subdivision sewer system from the sewer mains of the city. Upon disconnection the city manager or his designee shall estimate the cost of disconnection from and reconnection to the system, and such user shall deposit the cost, as estimated, of disconnection and reconnection before such user is reconnected to the system. The city manager or his designee shall refund any part of deposit remaining after payment of all costs of disconnection and reconnection. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.01.10, 1993)

 

14.24.110 Judicial remedies.
     If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, the city manager or his designee, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the courts of Napa County. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.02, 1993)

 

14.24.120 Injunctive relief.
     Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or permit or order issued hereunder, the city manager or his designee, through counsel, may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the industrial user. The city manager or his designee shall have such remedies to collect these fees as it has to collect other sewer service charges. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.02.1, 1993)

 

14.24.130 Civil penalties.
     A.    Any industrial user who has violated or continues to violate this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the city manager or his designee for a civil penalty of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars, but not less than one thousand dollars, plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the city manager or his designee may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses.

     B.     The city manager or his designee shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the industrial user’s violation, corrective actions by the industrial user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.02.2, 1993)

 

14.24.140 Violations—Generally.
     A.    Any industrial user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.

     B.     In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three thousand dollars per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than three years or both. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.02.4, 1993)

 

14.24.150 Falsifying information.
     A.    Any industrial user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or wastewater permit, who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.

     B.     In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punished by a fine not to exceed three thousand dollars per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than three years or both. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.02.5, 1993)

 

Article II. Supplemental Enforcement Remedies
14.24.160 Annual publication of significant violations.
     The city manager or his designee shall publish, at least annually in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a description of those industrial users which are found to be in significant noncompliance, as defined in this chapter, with any provisions of this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder during the period since the previous publications. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.03.1, 1993)

 

14.24.170 Performance bonds.
     The city manager or his designee may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless such user first files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the city manager or his designee to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.03.2, 1993)

 

14.24.180 Liability insurance.
     The city manager or his designee may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.03.3, 1993)

 

14.24.190 Water supply severances.
     Whenever an industrial user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed by the water purveyor upon request by the city and service will only recommence, at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.03.4, 1993)

 

14.24.200 Public nuisances.
     Continued habitation of any building or continued operation of any industrial facility in violation of the provisions of this or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.03.5, 1993)

 

14.24.210 Contractor listing.
     A.    Industrial users which have not achieved consistent compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the city.

     B.     Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the city held by an industrial user found to be in significant violation with pretreatment standards may be terminated at the discretion of the city. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.03.6, 1993)

 

Article III. Affirmative Defense
14.24.220 Treatment upsets.
     A.    Any industrial user which experiences an upset in operations that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance, which is not the result of operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation, shall inform the city manager or his designee thereof immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written report thereof shall be filed by the user within five days. The report shall contain:

     1.     A description of the upset, its cause(s), and impact on the discharger’s compliance status;

     2.     The duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of noncompliance, and if the noncompliance is continuing, the time by which compliance is reasonably expected to be restored;

     3.     All steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of such an upset.

     B.     An industrial user which complies with the notification provisions of this section in a timely manner shall have an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the city manager or his designee for any noncompliance with this chapter, or an order or permit issued hereunder by the user, which arises out of violations attributable to and alleged to have occurred during the period of the documented and verified upset. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.04.1, 1993)

 

14.24.230 Treatment bypasses.
     A.    A bypass of the treatment system is prohibited unless all of the following conditions are met:

     1.     The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;

     2.     There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the use of auxiliary treatment or retention of the wastewater; and

     3.     The industrial user properly notified the city manager as described in subsection (B) of this section.

     B.     Industrial users must provide immediate notices to the city manager or his designee upon discovery of any unanticipated bypass.

     If necessary, the city manager or his designee may require the industrial user to submit a written report explaining the cause(s), nature, and duration of the bypass, and the steps being taken to prevent its recurrence.

     C.     An industrial user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. Industrial users anticipating a bypass must submit notice to the city manager or his designee at least ten days in advance. The city manager or his designee may only approve the anticipated bypass if the circumstances satisfy those set forth in subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.04.2, 1993)

 

14.24.240 Liability for violation.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of the ordinances, rules or regulations of the city shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.05, 1993)

 

14.24.250 Enforcement response plan.
     All users are subject to all the provisions of the city enforcement response plan. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.06, 1993)

 

14.24.260 Means of enforcement only.
     The city declares that the foregoing procedures are established as a means of enforcement of the terms and conditions of its ordinances, rules and regulations and not as a penalty. (Ord. 98-07 § 2, 1998; Ord. 93-01 § 513.07, 1993)

 

Chapter 14.28 STORMWATER AND POLLUTION DISCHARGE CONTROL PROGRAM
14.28.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “city of American Canyon stormwater management and discharge control program” and may be so cited. (Ord. 2003-08 § 1, 2003)

 

14.28.020 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of the city of American Canyon citizens: to secure benefits from the use of stormwater as a resource; and to protect and enhance watercourses, fish, and wildlife habitat by:

     A.    Minimizing discharges other than stormwater to storm drains or watercourses;

     B.     Responding to the discharge of spills, preventing and controlling the discharge of spills, and prohibiting the dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to storm drains or watercourses;

     C.     Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable;

     D.    Requiring operators of construction sites, new or redeveloped land, and industrial and commercial facilities to install, implement, or maintain appropriate best management practices (BMPs); and

     E.     Requiring development projects to maintain or reduce the volume, velocity, peak flow rate, and duration of runoff as compared to pre-development runoff, and preventing stormwater pollution whenever possible, through stormwater management controls and ensuring that these management controls are properly maintained.

     The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality of the state’s and the nation’s watercourses, water bodies and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1951 et seq.), the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.), and the Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001—DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004 (Phase II Stormwater Permit), and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto. (Ord. 2016-02 § 2, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 2, 2003)

 

14.28.030 Definitions and acronyms.
     For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, words and phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     “Authorized enforcement official” means the public works director or designee.

     “BASMAA Post Construction Manual” means the most recent version of the Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies (BASMAA) Post Construction Manual.

     “Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into the waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste recycling or disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon, a municipal corporation, situated in Napa County, California.

     “Construction activity” means any activity that involves soil disturbing activities including, but not limited to, clearing, paving, grading, disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation.

     “Development runoff requirements” mean the provisions in the Phase II Stormwater Permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address both construction and post-construction phase impacts of new and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity.

     “Discharge of a pollutant” means: (a) the addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to receiving waters from any point source; or (b) addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term includes additions of pollutants to receiving waters from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a state, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment works.

     “Erosion and Sediment Control Plan” means a plan prepared to control erosion and sediment discharges from a construction site that meets those criteria identified in the most recent version of the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template and any issued Technical Bulletins.

     “Illicit connection” means any device or method that conveys non-stormwater discharge to a storm drain or receiving water.

     “Illicit discharge” means any discharge to storm drain or receiving water that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge does not include discharges that are regulated by an NPDES permit (other than the Phase II Stormwater Permit) and discharges that are identified under the exceptions to discharge prohibition section of this chapter.

     “Incidental irrigation runoff” means unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the landscaped area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence.

     “Low impact development (LID)” means a sustainable practice that benefits water supply and contributes to water quality protection. LID uses site design and stormwater management to maintain the site’s pre-development runoff rates and volumes. The goal of LID is to mimic a site’s predevelopment hydrology by using design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff close to the source of rainfall.

     “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit” means a permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, State Water Resources Control Board, or the California Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., (CWA) that authorizes discharges to waters of the United States and requires the reduction of pollutants in the discharge.

     “NCSPPP” is the Napa Countywide Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program.

     “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to a storm drain or receiving water that is not entirely composed of stormwater.

     “Phase II Stormwater Permit” means the NPDES general stormwater permit applicable to the City of American Canyon, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001—DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004, and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or successor to this permit.

     “Pollutant” means dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, pet wastes, manure, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, sediment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into a storm drain or receiving water.

     “Post-Construction Measures Requirements” means the provisions in Section E.12 of the Phase II Stormwater Permit that contain design standards or performance criteria to address the post-construction phase impacts of new projects and redeveloped projects on stormwater quality and quantity.

     “Premises” means any building, lot parcel, real estate, or land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

     “Receiving waters” means all waters that are “waters of the United States” within the scope of the Federal Clean Water Act or “waters of the state” within the scope of the California Water Code, including, but not limited to, natural streams, creeks, rivers, reservoirs, lakes, ponds, water in vernal pools, lagoons, estuaries, bays, the Pacific Ocean, and groundwater.

     “Storm drains” includes, but is not limited to, those stormwater drainage conveyance facilities within the city, both public and private, by which stormwater may be conveyed to the receiving waters, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains, which are not part of a publicly owned treated works (POTW) as defined at 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) 122.2, or successor regulation.

     “Stormwater” means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.

     “Stormwater Control Plan (SCP)” means a plan that meets those criteria contained in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any issued Technical Bulletins.

     “Stormwater Facilities Operation and Maintenance Plan” means a plan identifying the locations and characteristics of stormwater management facilities on a newly developed or redeveloped site and describing maintenance activities, schedules, and responsibilities to ensure the ongoing proper operation of those facilities.

     “Stormwater management facility” means any device designated to detain, retain, filter, or infiltrate stormwater.

     “Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP)” means a document which describes the best management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business or construction site to eliminate illicit discharges and/or reduce pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system.

     “Technical Bulletin” means a document issued by and under the authority of the director of public works to revise, amend, augment guidance manuals, documents, and templates including but not limited to the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template.

     “Urban runoff” means stormwater from an urbanized area including streets and adjacent domestic and commercial properties that carries pollutants of various types into the storm drainage system and receiving waters.

     “Watercourse” means a stream of water usually flowing in a definite channel having a bed and sides, or banks, and discharging itself into some other stream or body of water. It is unnecessary for a watercourse be exclusively the work of nature.

     All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined in the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.), as amended, the regulations for the stormwater discharge program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on November 16, 1991, as amended, and the Phase II Stormwater Permit. (Ord. 2016-02 § 3, 2016; Ord. 2005-06 § 1, 2005; Ord. 2003-08 § 3, 2003)

 

14.28.040 Discharge of pollutants.
     A.    The discharge of nonstormwater discharges to storm drains is prohibited. All discharges of material other than stormwater must be made in compliance with a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued for the discharge. A discharger operating under an NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency must comply with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations.

     B.     Exception to Discharge of Pollutants. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection A of this section:

     1.     Discharges regulated under an NPDES permit (other than the Phase II Permit) issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws or regulations.

     2.     Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities unless they are identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States.

     3.     Discharges from the following activities, provided any pollutants in the discharges are identified and appropriate control measures to minimize the impacts of such discharges are developed and implemented:

     a.     Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources;

     b.     Diverted stream flows;

     c.     Rising groundwater;

     d.     Uncontaminated infiltration to storm drains;

     e.     Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. Section 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;

     f.      Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

     g.     Foundation and footing drains;

     h.     Water from crawl space pumps;

     i.      Air conditioning condensation;

     j.      Springs;

     k.     Individual residential car washing;

     l.      Footing drains;

     m.    Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

     n.     Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and

     o.     Incidental irrigation runoff from landscaped areas provided the conditions in subsection (B)(4) of this section are met.

     4.     Incidental irrigation runoff is the unintended amounts of runoff that leave the area of application such as minimal overspray. Water leaving the intended area of application is not incidental if it is due to the design, excessive application, or intentional overflow or application. Irrigation systems must be designed to conserve water and prevent water leaving the area of application. Persons responsible for controlling irrigation systems shall prevent excessive irrigation runoff by:

     a.     Detecting and correcting leaks within seventy-two hours of discovering the leak.

     b.     Properly designing and aiming sprinkler heads to only irrigate the planned application area.

     c.     Not irrigating during precipitation events.

     d.     Where recycled water is used for irrigation, designing and managing holding ponds to such that no discharge occurs unless it is the result of the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm event. Any releases from holding ponds must be reported to the Regional Water Board and the city within twenty-four hours of the discharge. (Ord. 2016-02 § 4, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 4, 2003)

 

14.28.050 Discharge in violation of permit.
     A.    No person shall cause a discharge that would result in, or contribute to, a violation of Phase II Stormwater either separately considered or when combined with other discharges. Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) so causing or responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) or entities shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city in any administrative or judicial enforcement action relating to such discharge.

     B.     The establishment, use, maintenance, or continuance of illicit connections to a city storm drain or watercourse, and/or commencement or continuance of any illicit discharges to a city storm drain or watercourse is prohibited. This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.

     1.     Any person responsible for a discharge, spill, or pollutant release shall promptly cease and desist discharging and/or cleanup and abate such a discharge as directed by the authorized enforcement official.

     2.     Any person responsible for an illicit connection shall promptly remove the connection as directed by the authorized enforcement official.

     The city may perform clean-up and abatement work and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Section 14.28.170. (Ord. 2016-02 § 5, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 5, 2003)

 

14.28.060 Reduction of pollutants in urban runoff.
     A.    Any person engaged in activities which will, or may result in, pollutants entering the storm drains, shall undertake all practicable measures to cease such activities, and/or eliminate or reduce such pollutants through the implementation of BMPs, consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association BMPs.

     B.     Littering. Except for pollutants lawfully disposed of by way of containers or at lawfully established dumping grounds, no person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, business place, or upon any public or private lot of land in the city, such that, in the opinion of the authorized enforcement official, the same might be or become a pollutant discharged to the receiving waters.

     The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain said sidewalk free of dirt and/or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from said sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on said real property as required for the recycling or disposal of garbage. (Ord. 2016-02 § 6, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 6, 2003)

 

14.28.070 Parking lots and similar structures.
     Persons owning or operating a parking lot, gas station tarmac, or similar structure shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the city storm drains. (Ord. 2003-08 § 7, 2003)

 

14.28.080 Construction.
     A.    All construction plans and applications for building permits shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls. Appropriate controls shall be determined in accordance with the guidance provided in the “Standards for Erosion and Sedimentation Control” and the “Erosion and Sedimentation Control Handbook” published by the Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG), and may include site planning considerations, construction staging and timing, and installation of temporary detention ponds or other treatment facilities.

     B.     Prior to and/or during construction, the director of public works may establish controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from new developments and redevelopment as may be appropriate to minimize peak flows or total runoff volume. These controls may include limits on impervious area or provisions for detention and retention of runoff on-site.

     C.     The director of public works may require, as a condition of project approval, permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other pollutants. The selection and design of such controls shall be in accordance with criteria established or recommended by state and federal agencies. (Ord. 2003-08 § 8, 2003)

 

14.28.081 Best management practices for ground-disturbing activities.
     Any person performing construction activities in the city shall implement appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge of sediment, construction wastes or contaminants from construction materials, tools and equipment from entering a city storm drain or watercourse.

     A.    Construction-phase BMPs include erosion and sediment controls and pollution prevention practices. Erosion control BMPs may include, but are not limited to, scheduling and timing of grading activities, timely revegetation of graded areas, the use of hydroseed and hydraulic mulches, and installation of erosion control blankets. Sediment control may include properly sized detention basins, dams, or filters to reduce entry of suspended sediment into the storm drain system and watercourses, and installation of construction entrances to prevent tracking of sediment onto adjacent streets. Pollution prevention practices may include designated washout areas or facilities, control of trash and recycled materials, tarping of materials stored on-site, and proper location of and maintenance of temporary sanitary facilities. The combination of BMPs used, and their execution in the field, must be customized to the site using up-to-date standards and practices. The city will provide references to current guidance manuals and BMP information on request.

     B.     Financial security may be required to insure that temporary measures to control stormwater pollution are implemented and maintained during construction and after construction for a period determined by the city. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the city.

     C.     When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done. Such work shall stop until the authorized enforcement official authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal provided in the city municipal code.

     D.    The city has the authority to review designs and proposals for construction activities and new development and redevelopment sites to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed, implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization (post-construction).

     E.     All construction plans and applications for construction activity submitted to the city shall consider the potential for erosion and sedimentation at the construction site, and shall include appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls.

     F.     An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (ESCP) shall be required for:

     1.     Any project subject to a grading permit under Appendix J of the California Building Code;

     2.     Any project subject to building permit that has the potential for significant erosion and/or significant non-stormwater discharges of sediment and/or construction site waste including:

     a.     Projects within fifty feet of the storm drain system, or

     b.     Project disturbing ten thousand square feet (sf) of soil or more, or

     c.     Projects installing new storm drains that discharge to the city’s storm drainage system or watercourse, or

     d.     Projects on slopes of five percent or more;

     3.     Any other project as required by the authorized enforcement official considering factors such as whether the project involves hillside soil disturbance, rainy season construction, construction near a watercourse, or any other condition or construction site activity that could lead to a non-stormwater discharge to a storm drain if not managed by effective implementation of an ESCP.

     G.    The ESCP shall be submitted for review and approval by the authorized enforcement official. The project applicant shall follow the most recent version of the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template and any issued Technical Bulletins to prepare the ESCP. At a minimum, the ESCP shall include:

     1.     Description of the proposed project and soil disturbing activity.

     2.     Site specific construction-phase BMPs.

     3.     Rationale for selecting the BMPs, including if needed, soil loss calculations.

     4.     List of applicable permits associated with the soil disturbing activity, including but not limited to: Construction General Permit (CGP); Clean Water Act Section 404 Permit; Clean Water Act Section 401 Water Quality Certification; Streambed/Lake Alteration Agreement (1600 Agreements).

     5.     Proof that the applicant has obtained the applicable permits associated with the soil disturbing activity must be submitted prior to approval of the ESCP.

     6.     Project information as required by the ESCP applicant checklist provided in the Napa Countywide Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Model Template and any issued Technical Bulletins.

     7.     For projects subject to the State’s General Construction Activity Stormwater Permit (CGP), project applicants may submit a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) developed pursuant to the CGP in lieu of submitting an ESCP.

     8.     Implementation of an approved ESCP shall be a condition of the issuance of a building permit, a grading permit, or other permit issued by the city for a project subject to this section. The ESCP shall be implemented year round and must be updated to reflect changing conditions on the project site. Any modifications to the ESCP shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. (Ord. 2016-02 § 7, 2016)

 

14.28.082 Best management practices for new development and redevelopment.
     A.    Prior to and/or during construction, the authorized enforcement official may establish volume and rate of stormwater controls from new developments and redevelopment as may be appropriate to minimize peak flows or total runoff volume, and to mimic the pre-development site hydrology. These controls may include limits on impervious area or provisions for detention and retention of runoff on-site.

     B.     The authorized enforcement official may require, as a condition of approval, permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other pollutants and for volume and rate of stormwater controls from the project’s added or replaced impervious surfaces. The selection and design of such controls shall be in accordance with criteria established or recommended by federal, state, local agencies, and where required, the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any issued Technical Bulletins.

     C.     Stormwater Control Plan Requirements.

     1.     For each new development and redevelopment project subject to post construction measures requirements, or where required by the nature and extent of a proposed project and where deemed appropriate by the city, applicants shall submit a Stormwater Control Plan (SCP) that meets the criteria in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.

     2.     Applicants shall implement the controls identified in the SCP and required by conditions of approval that reduce stormwater pollutant discharges through the construction, operation and maintenance of source control measures, low impact development design, site design measures, stormwater treatment measures and hydromodification management measures. Increases in runoff shall be managed in accordance with the post construction requirements.

     3.     The SCP is separate and distinct from the ESCP requirements described in Section 14.28.080.

     4.     Where projects are required to have a SCP, project applicants shall follow the appropriate SCP template, based on the project type, in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any issued Technical Bulletins.

     5.     Implementation of an approved SCP and submittal of an approved Stormwater Facilities Operation and Maintenance Plan by the applicant shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for a project subject to this section.

     6.     When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done. Such work shall stop until the authorized enforcement official authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal provided in the city municipal code.

     7.     Financial security may be required to ensure that stormwater management facilities operate and are maintained following construction for a period which may be determined by the city. Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as determined by the city.

     8.     All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure. Design guidelines are outlined in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual and any issued Technical Bulletins.

     9.     All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained according to the approved Stormwater Facilities Operation and Maintenance Plan. The person(s) or organization(s) responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the plan. Unless a different time period is provided for in the plan, those responsible for maintenance shall inspect the stormwater management facilities at least annually. The Stormwater Facilities Operation and Maintenance Plan shall describe how the maintenance costs will be funded. If the responsible person fails to maintain the stormwater management facilities in accordance with this chapter or the plan, the city may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible person as provided in Section 14.28.170.

     10.   For each new development and redevelopment project subject to the post construction measures requirements, or where deemed appropriate by the city, access by the city to stormwater management facilities for inspections, as provided in Section 14.28.120, and through such means as may be appropriate, including, but not limited to, legal agreements, recorded covenants or easements, shall be provided by the property owner.

     11.   All project proponents and their successors, or successors in fee title, in control of a new development and redevelopment project subject to the post construction measures requirements, shall submit one of the following as a condition prior to final inspection and approval of building permit closure:

     a.     The project proponent’s signed statement accepting responsibility for the operations and maintenance of stormwater management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;

     b.     Written conditions in the sales or lease agreements or deed for the project that requires the buyer or lessee to assume responsibility for the operations and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;

     c.     Written text in project deeds, or conditions, covenants and restrictions for multi-unit residential projects that require the homeowners association or, if there is no association, each individual owner to assume responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity; or

     d.     Any other legally enforceable agreement or mechanism, such as recordation in the property deed, that assigns the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities to the project owner(s). (Ord. 2016-02 § 7, 2016)

 

14.28.090 Notification of intent—Compliance with general permits.
     A.    Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger described in any general stormwater permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state water resources control board or the regional board, shall provide notice of intent, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any general stormwater permit applicable to such discharges.

     B.     Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. (Ord. 2003-08 § 9, 2003)

 

14.28.100 Best management practices.
     Where best management practices, guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal, state of California, regional and/or local agency, for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution for contamination, illicit discharges, and/or discharge of nonstormwater to the storm drains, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such guidelines or requirements as may be identified by the authorized enforcement official. (Ord. 2016-02 § 8, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 10, 2003)

 

14.28.110 Watercourse protection.
     A.    Every person owning, occupying, leasing, renting, or in control of premises through which a watercourse passes, are encouraged to the maximum extent practicable:

     1.     Keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles which would and/or could pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse;

     2.     Maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse; and

     3.     Not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.

     It should be noted that if a property owner does not maintain a portion of a watercourse through their property and damage occurs to other properties as a result of the lack of maintenance, the property owner may be liable for damage resulting from the lack of maintenance of the watercourse. When problems are noted, city personnel shall notify the property owner in writing describing the problem noted and requesting that the property owner take necessary action to fix the problem.

     B.     No person shall commit, or cause to be committed, any of the following acts, unless a written permit has first been obtained from the director of public works:

     1.     Discharge into, or connect, any pipe or channel to a watercourse;

     2.     Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse;

     3.     Deposit in, plant in, or remove any material from a watercourse including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance;

     4.     Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change, or remove any structure in a watercourse; or

     5.     Place any loose or unconsolidated material adjacent to, or within, a watercourse so as to cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material being carried away by stormwater passing through such watercourse. (Ord. 2003-08 § 11, 2003)

 

14.28.120 Authority to inspect.
     The authorized enforcement official has the duty and the responsibility to inspect any and all locations for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. The authorized enforcement official may, within the limitations of applicable state and federal laws, enter any building or premises (including, but not limited to, facilities, equipment, practices, or operations) at reasonable times to inspect the same for any or all of the following situations, as determined by the authorized enforcement official:

     A.    Routine inspections to ensure implementation of BMPs and other requirements of this chapter;

     B.     Active or potential stormwater discharges;

     C.     Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter or the Phase II Stormwater Permit;

     D.    Actual violations of this chapter or the Phase II Stormwater Permit;

     E.     Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter or the Phase II Stormwater Permit; or

     F.     To perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter.

     The authorized enforcement official may demand the production of such records as is necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and for the purpose of examination and copying.

     The authorized enforcement official must present proper credentials to, and obtain consent from the owner or occupant to enter. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the authorized enforcement official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the authorized enforcement official shall request assistance of the city attorney to obtain an administrative warrant for the premises, pursuant to state law. (Ord. 2016-02 § 9, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 13, 2003)

 

14.28.130 Authority to sample and establish sampling devices.
     The authorized enforcement official has the right to and shall conduct routine sampling and monitoring on or adjacent to the premises under review. The cost of such routine sampling and/or monitoring activities, including test reports and results, shall be born by the city. The authorized enforcement official may, within the limitations of law, enter such premises at reasonable times to conduct sampling and monitoring operations, provided that the official presents proper credentials to, and obtains consent from the owner or occupant to enter. In the event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official shall request assistance of the city attorney to obtain an administrative warrant for the premises, pursuant to the provisions of state law. (Ord. 2003-08 § 14, 2003)

 

14.28.140 Notification of spills.
     As soon as any person in charge of a facility, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, has knowledge of any confirmed or unconfirmed release of materials, pollutants or waste which may result in pollutants or nonstormwater discharges entering the city storm sewer system, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of such release and shall notify the city of the occurrence by telephone immediately and confirm the notification by correspondence to the public works director within five days. (Ord. 2003-08 § 15, 2003)

 

14.28.150 Requirement to test or monitor.
     A.    Whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that the owner and/or occupant of a premises is engaged in an activity and/or operating a facility that is causing or contributing to stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges, and/or the discharge of nonstormwater or other unlawful material to the storm drains, the official may require the owner and/or occupant to conduct sampling and/or monitoring activities on the premises and to furnish such test results and reports as the official may determine. The burden and cost of undertaking such sampling and monitoring activities, including test results and reports, shall be born by the owner of the premises under review. The type and method of sampling and monitoring shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for testing and monitoring and to the benefits to be obtained, as determined by the enforcement official.

     B.     Whenever an authorized enforcement official finds a condition that: (1) violates this chapter; (2) presents an immediate and present danger to the public health, safety and welfare; and (3) requires immediate remedial action to prevent injury to persons or property, the authorized enforcement official shall take whatever reasonable and appropriate action is necessary to neutralize the danger, including, but not limited to, entry upon private premises for inspection, sampling and monitoring and abatement. (Ord. 2003-08 § 16, 2003)

 

14.28.160 Violations constituting misdemeanor.
     A.    The violation of any provision of this chapter or failure to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, except that, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor under this chapter may, in the discretion of the enforcing authority, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

     B.     Unless otherwise provided, a person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm, corporation or organization and shall be punishable accordingly, as provided in this chapter.

     C.     Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such provision.

     D.    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalty. Any enforcement action authorized under this chapter shall also include notice to the violator of potential liability. (Ord. 2003-08 § 17, 2003)

 

14.28.170 Civil enforcement action.
     The violation of any provision of this chapter, or the failure to comply with any requirements of this chapter, may be enforced by civil action brought by the city attorney in any court having appropriate jurisdiction. In any such action, the city may seek any or all of the following remedies:

     A.    A temporary or permanent injunction;

     B.     Costs of investigation, inspection, sampling or monitoring activities concerning the violation and costs of suit which includes attorney fees and legal costs;

     C.     Costs of restoration of the premises from its condition resulting from violations back to its original condition;

     D.    Compensatory damages including, but not limited to, loss and/or destruction of water quality, wildlife, fish, aquatic habitat, and other adverse environmental effects.

     Damages recovered under this section shall be paid to the city and shall be exclusively for costs of sampling and monitoring, of establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems, of implementing and/or enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and restoration of aquatic or riparian habitat. (Ord. 2016-02 § 10, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 18, 2003)

 

14.28.180 Administrative enforcement action.
     In addition to any other enforcement powers and/or remedies provided in this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may issue an order to a person to cease and desist from the discharge, practice, operation or other activity causing or likely to cause a violation of this chapter. Such order shall be directed to those persons in violation of the chapter stating clearly and concisely the nature of the violation, the requirements for compliance, a timetable for compliance and such other remedial and/or preventive action as may be necessary. Upon the violator’s failure to comply with such an order, the city shall take further enforcement action as specified in this chapter, or in accordance with any other appropriate provision of local, state or federal law.

     At the discretion of the authorized enforcement official and in accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan, orders to cease and desist may take the following form:

     A.    Verbal warnings, as may be issued during inspections;

     B.     Warning letters and orders to abate pollution;

     C.     Warning letters with requirements to submit written reports;

     D.    Notices of violation.

     Formal violations and legal action as described in this chapter and as authorized by the city municipal code. (Ord. 2016-02 § 11, 2016; Ord. 2003-08 § 19, 2003)

 

14.28.190 Authority to arrest and issue citations.
     A.    The authorized enforcement official shall have the authority to arrest or to cite any person who violates any provision of this chapter in the manner provided by the California Penal Code for the arrest or release on citation of misdemeanors or for citation of infractions and notice to appear, as prescribed by Chapters 5, 5c and 5d of Title 3, Part 2 of the California Penal Code, including Section 853.6 or as the same may be hereinafter amended.

     B.     It is the intent of the city council that the immunities provided in Penal Code Section 836.5 be applicable to public officers or employees acting within the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2003-08 § 20, 2003)

 

14.28.200 Coordination with hazardous materials inventory and response program.
     The first revision of the business plan for any facility subject to the city’s hazardous materials inventory and response ordinance shall include a program for compliance with this chapter, including the prohibitions on nonstormwater discharges and illicit discharges and the requirement to reduce stormwater pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. (Ord. 2003-08 § 21, 2003)

Title 15 PUBLIC SERVICES—OTHER
Chapter 15.04 MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION PROGRAM
Chapter 15.08 PARK AND CIVIC FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Chapter 15.12 TRAFFIC MITIGATION IMPACT FEES

Chapter 15.04 MOBILEHOME PARK RENT STABILIZATION PROGRAM
Note
*       Prior ordinance history; Ord. 94-05.

 

15.04.010 Purpose and findings.
     A.    Residents of mobilehome parks, unlike apartment residents or residents of other rental properties, are in a unique position in that prior to occupation of a mobilehome space they are required to make substantial investments in a mobilehome residence and incur the expense of placing their mobilehome on the rented mobilehome site. In addition, the removal or relocation of a resident’s mobilehome from a given space can be accomplished only at substantial costs, such relocation may cause extensive damage to the mobilehome, and many older mobilehomes cannot, in fact, be relocated to newer mobilehome parks due to permit, landscaping, site preparation requirements, and restrictions that many newer mobilehome parks impose on renters.

     B.     There is presently within the city a shortage of mobilehome spaces on which there are not currently located mobilehomes and which are therefore available for occupancy. This shortage of empty spaces, which currently approximates one percent of all mobilehome spaces within the city, has resulted in an extreme shortage of decent, safe and sanitary mobilehome housing in the city.

     C.     Mobilehomes constitute an important source of housing for persons of low and moderate income. Because of the present shortage of empty mobilehome spaces, there is a low vacancy rate and rents are rapidly rising and have been for several years in mobilehome parks in the city, causing concern, anguish and stress to a substantial number of the mobilehome owners and residents of mobilehome parks within the city, many of whom are retired persons on fixed incomes, elderly persons on fixed incomes, or persons with relatively low incomes.

     D.    Alternative sites for the relocation of mobilehomes within the city and surrounding areas are difficult to find due to the shortage of vacant spaces, restrictions on the age, size or style of mobilehomes permitted in many parks, and requirements related to the installation of mobilehomes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation.

 

     E.     The result of the conditions identified above has been the creation of a captive audience of mobilehome owners. This in turn has contributed to the creation of a great imbalance in the bargaining positions of the park owners and mobilehome owners in favor of the park owners.

     F.     Mobilehome owners are property owners with sizable investments in their homes and appurtenances and would incur significant costs in the event of relocation.

     G.    The continuing possibility of unreasonable space rental increases in mobilehome parks within the city threatens to diminish the value of the investment of the mobilehome owner in his or her mobilehome and contributes to unreasonably suppressed resale rates. Therefore, it is desirable to provide vacancy control in the rent stabilization program.

     H.    Existing state law permits mobilehome park owners to require mobilehome owners to make modifications to their homes for reasons of aesthetics or conformity to park standards that amount to capital improvements which accrue to the benefit of the park owner by potentially increasing the market value of the park itself.

     I.      Because of the low vacancy rate, it is necessary to encourage the development of mobilehome parks within the city to the extent permitted by state and local law by exempting newly constructed mobilehome spaces from the provisions of this chapter.

     J.      It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the owners and occupiers of mobilehomes within the city from unreasonable space rent increases or assessments, while at the same time providing the mobilehome park owners with a just and reasonable rate of return on their property.

     K.    There is no possibility that the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will have a significant effect on the environment in that there will be no deviation from the general plan and no change in the present use of property within the city and therefore its enactment is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.020 Definitions.
     “Administrator” means the administrator of the city’s mobilehome space rent stabilization program. The “administrator” shall be the city manager of the city of American Canyon.

     “Affected residents” mean those mobilehome residents as defined in this section who are subject to a rent increase (as defined in this section). For purposes of providing notice of rent increases and copies of this chapter, and calculating the number of affected residents in support of a rent arbitration petition, each mobilehome space subject to a rent increase shall be deemed to have only one affected resident. Reference to “all affected residents” shall mean one representative resident from each space subject to the proposed rent increase.

     “Arbitrator” means a person: (1) who is neither a resident (as defined in this section) nor has an interest in a mobilehome park of a nature that would require disqualification under the provisions of the Political Reform Act if the person were an elected state official; and (2) who the administrator (as defined in this section) determines meets one of the following criteria:

     1.     Completion of a juris doctor or equivalent degree from a school of law and completion of a formal course of training in arbitration which, in the sole judgment of the administrator, provides that person with the knowledge and skills to conduct a space rent dispute arbitration in a professional and successful manner; or

     2.     Completion of at least three arbitration proceedings for a Superior Court or other public entity that involved issues the administrator finds similar to those raised in space rent dispute arbitrations; or

     3.     Prior service as a California Municipal or Superior Court Pro Tempore Judge; Judge, Court of Appeal or Supreme Court Justice or comparable experience within the Federal Judiciary or service as a neutral evaluator in a Court sponsored alternative dispute resolution program.

     “Arms-length transaction” means a transaction negotiated by unrelated parties, each acting in his or her own self-interest as a willing participant in the transaction.

     “Base rent” means the authorized rent calculated pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.04.040, plus any rent increase allowed under this chapter, unless it is expressly excluded from base rent, plus any rent adjustment attributable to vacancy decontrol as provided in Section 15.04.050.

     “Capital improvements” mean those new improvements or replacements that materially adds to the value of the property and appreciably prolongs its useful life or adapt it to new uses; consist of more than ordinary maintenance and/or repairs, and which may be amortized over the useful remaining life of the improvement to the property. Capital improvement costs shall include all costs reasonably and necessarily related to the planning, engineering and construction of the improvement or replacement and shall include debt service costs, if any, incurred as a direct result of the capital improvement or replacement.

     “Consumer Price Index (CPI)” means the Consumer Price Index as determined on an annual basis up to and including the month of June for all Urban Consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose Area published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.

     “Expert” means an unbiased third party who is recognized as an authority on mobilehome rent issues for purposes of providing an independent analysis as set forth in Section 15.04.100(C).

     “Gross income” has the meaning set forth in Section 15.04.140.

     “Housing service” means a service or facility provided by the park owner related to the use or occupancy of a mobilehome space, which is neither a capital improvement nor substantial rehabilitation as those terms are defined herein. Housing service includes, but is not limited to, repairs, replacement, maintenance, landscaping, painting, lighting, heat, water, utilities, laundry facilities, refuse removal, recreational and meeting facilities, parking, security service, and employee services.

     “In place transfer” means a sale, transfer, or other conveyance of a mobilehome, with the mobilehome remaining in the same mobilehome space it occupied prior to the sale, transfer or other conveyance, except if the sale, transfer, or other conveyance is to the park owner.

     “Lawful space vacancy” means a vacancy occurring due to specific circumstances set forth in Section 15.04.050.

     “Mandatory mediation” means a meeting in which a mobilehome park owner and resident have the opportunity to communicate with a mediation panel and each other in a face-to-face setting at a neutral location in order to resolve a rental housing dispute using ground rules designed to protect the confidentiality and neutrality of the communications.

     “Mediation panel” means a committee consisting of three individuals which will be composed of one individual representing mobilehome park owners from a mobilehome park within the city that is not subject to the mediation; one member who is a resident that resides in a mobilehome park within the city not subject to the mediation; and, one qualified mediator as defined in this chapter selected by the city after consultation with the mobilehome park owner and mobilehome park residents subject to the mediation. All panel members must be free from any conflict of interest under the provisions of Government Code Section 1090 et seq., or a financial interest under the provisions of Government Code Section 87100 et seq.

     Selection of Mediation Panel. The panel members representing residents and the park owner not subject to mediation of the panel may be selected in the following manner:

     The city shall submit three names of mobilehome park residents subject to this chapter but not the mediation and three names of owners or the owners’ representative of a mobilehome park not subject to the mediation. The selected qualified mediator, a representative from Golden State Manufactured Home Owners League (“GSMOL”) who is also a board member or regional manager of GSMOL, and the owner of the park subject to mediation shall select one owner and resident to the mediation panel from the city’s submitted list.

     “Mediator” means a mediator who is experienced in the mediation process both in facilitating communications in conciliation between parties and in mediating disputes. The selected qualified mediator is prohibited from also serving as an arbitrator under this chapter.

     “Mobilehome” means a structure designed for human habitation and for being moved on a street under permit pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 35790. Mobilehome includes a manufactured home, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18007, and a mobilehome, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18008. Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Section 799.24 of the California Civil Code and Section 18010 of the California Health and Safety Code, or a commercial coach, as defined in Section 18001.8 of the California Health and Safety Code, except when such a vehicle has continuously remained within a mobilehome park for a period in excess of nine months.

     “Mobilehome park” means any area of land within the city where two or more mobilehome spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation.

     “Mobilehome park owner” means any park owner, lessor, or sublessor of a mobilehome park in the city who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use or occupancy of any mobilehome space therein and who reports to the Internal Revenue Service any income received or loss of income resulting from such ownership or claims any expenses, credits or deductions because of such ownership, and the representative, agent or successor of such park owner, lessor or sublessor.

     “Mobilehome resident” means a person who has a tenancy in a mobilehome park under a rental agreement that is not otherwise exempt from regulation under this chapter pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17 or 798.45.

     “Mobilehome space” means any site within a mobilehome park located in the city intended, designed or used for the location or accommodation of a mobilehome. Mobilehome space includes any accessory structures or appurtenances attached to the mobilehome or used in conjunction therewith. Mobilehome space does not include: (1) sites rented together and concurrently with a mobilehome provided by the mobilehome park owner; and (2) “new construction” as defined by California Civil Code Section 798.45. Mobilehome space shall also include, for purposes of this chapter, rentable spaces within mobilehome parks which have been occupied by a recreational vehicle as defined by Civil Code Section 799.24 or a commercial coach as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 18001.8 for a period of nine months or more.

     “Net operating income” has the meaning set forth in Section 15.04.130.

     “Operating expenses” has the meaning set forth in Section 15.04.150.

     “Park owner” means a mobilehome park owner.

     “Party” means any affected resident and/or park owner involved in proceedings under this chapter.

     “Percent change in Consumer Price Index” means the annual percent change in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), as determined on an annual basis up to and including the month of June for all Urban Consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose Area published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, calculated to the nearest tenth, published up to and including June and averaged over the preceding twelve months.

     “Prospective resident” means:

     1.     A person who is not currently a resident in a mobilehome park but is a prospective mobilehome resident who desires the use of a mobilehome space as defined in this chapter and has approached the mobilehome park owner as such; or

     2.     A person who is a party to a rental agreement pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17(a) and (b), which has terminated or expired, or is being considered for renewal or extension.

     “Qualified mediator” means a mediator who is experienced in the mediation process both in facilitating communications in conciliation between parties and in mediating disputes. The selected qualified mediator is prohibited from also serving as an arbitrator under this chapter.

     “Rent” means mobilehome space rent.

     “Rent increase” means any additional space rent demanded of or paid by a resident for a mobilehome space. “Rent increase” includes any reduction in housing services without a corresponding reduction in the amount demanded or paid for rent.

     “Rent stabilization administration fee” means the fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.04.200.

     “Resident” means a homeowner or other person who lawfully occupies a mobilehome.

     “Resident representative” means a person appointed in writing by a group of residents to represent the interests of, negotiate on behalf of, and bind the appointing parties.

     “Section,” unless otherwise indicated, means a section of this chapter.

     “Space rent” means the total consideration, including any bonus, benefit or gratuity, demanded or received by a mobilehome park owner for or in connection with the use or occupancy of a mobilehome space or any housing services provided with the mobilehome space. Space rent shall not include any amount paid for the acquisition, use or occupancy of a mobilehome dwelling unit.

     “Substantial rehabilitation” means that work done by a park owner to a mobilehome space or to the common areas of the mobilehome park, exclusive of a capital improvement (as defined in this section), which has a value in excess of two hundred dollars, and is performed either to secure compliance with any state or local law or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake, or other casualty or natural disaster, to the extent such work is not reimbursed by insurance or other benefits. Costs of substantial rehabilitation include all costs reasonably and necessarily related to the planning, engineering and construction of the work. Such costs shall also include debt service costs, if any, incurred as a direct result of the substantial rehabilitation work.

     “Vacancy control” means the prohibition of a park owner on increasing space rent upon the sale of a mobilehome on-site to a prospective resident or a current resident except as provided in Section 15.04.050(A).

     “Vacancy decontrol” means the increase in space rent permitted upon the qualifying sale or other conveyance of a mobilehome described in Section 15.04.050(A). (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 1, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.030 Applicability.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to every mobilehome park within the city, except that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to mobilehome spaces which are subject to a written rental agreement that is for more than a twelve-month duration. Such spaces are exempt from regulation under this chapter pursuant to Civil Code Section 798.17. The provisions of this chapter shall also not apply to a newly constructed space initially held out for rent after January 1, 1990, in accordance with Civil Code Section 798.45.

     B.     The exception provided in subsection A for spaces subject to long term rental agreements shall be effective only until the expiration or other termination of the rental agreement whereupon any provisions of this chapter shall immediately be applicable to the mobilehome space, unless such rental agreement meets the exemption criteria of Civil Code Section 798.17.

     C.     Before any rental agreement or lease in excess of twelve months is executed by a resident or prospective resident, the park owner must:

     1.     Offer any resident or prospective resident the option of a rental agreement or lease for a term of twelve months or less which will permit such person to receive the benefits of the mobilehome space rent stabilization program;

     2.     Provide the resident or prospective resident a copy of this chapter if a copy has not already been provided; and

     3.     Inform the resident or prospective resident orally and in writing that if the resident or prospective resident signs a lease or rental agreement with a term in excess of twelve months, that complies with Civil Code Section 798.17, then the lease or rental agreement is not subject to the terms and protections of this chapter. Such written notification shall contain the following recitation:

 

“UNDER THE CITY OF AMERICAN CANYON MOBILEHOME RENT STABILIZATION ORDINANCE, YOU ARE LEGALLY ENTITLED TO ELECT A MONTH-TO-MONTH TENANCY OVER ANY OTHER LONGER PERIODIC TENANCY. YOU MAY NOT BE ENTITLED TO RENT STABILIZATION (RENT CONTROL) PROGRAM BENEFITS IF YOU ELECT A LEASE OF MORE THAN 12 MONTHS IN DURATION IF THAT LEASE MEETS THE REQUIREMENTS OF CIVIL CODE SECTION 798.17(a) & (b) WHICH HAS BEEN ATTACHED HERETO.”

 

     D.    Any effort to circumvent the requirements of this section is unlawful, as well as an unfair business practice subject to enforcement under California Business and Professions Code Section 17200 et seq. A lease or rental agreement in excess of twelve months, executed by a resident or prospective resident shall not be exempt from this chapter unless it complies with each and every requirement of Civil Code Section 798.17(a) through (c) for such exemptions. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.040 Base rent.
     A.    Initial Calculation.

     1.     Except as provided in this section, a park owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for a mobilehome space exceeding the rent in effect on that space on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If a previously rented mobilehome space was not rented on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the park owner shall not, except as provided in this section, demand, accept or retain rent for that space exceeding the rent in effect during the last month the space was rented prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     2.     If a mobilehome space is exempted from the provisions of this chapter because it is the subject of a rental agreement pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17(a) and (b), and that agreement expires and is not renewed, then the base rent, until the next annual adjustment pursuant to this chapter, shall be the space rent in effect for that space prior to the expiration of the rental agreement, excluding separately billed pass-throughs for capital improvements.

     3.     It shall be presumed that the initial base date rent yields a fair return.

     B.     Adjustment. A park owner may seek an adjustment to the initial base rent where the park owner can clearly establish that circumstances exist which requires an adjustment to assure that the park owner is receiving a fair and reasonable return.

     1.     In seeking an adjustment to the initial base rent under this section, the procedures set forth in Section 15.04.090 and shall be followed.

     2.     The guidelines for determining an adjustment to the initial base rent are set forth in Section 15.04.160. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 2, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.050 Vacancy control—Establishment of new base rent.
     A.    A park owner shall be permitted to charge a new base rent for a mobilehome space whenever a lawful vacancy occurs. For purposes of this chapter, “lawful space vacancy” means:

     1.     A vacancy occurring because of the termination of the tenancy of a mobilehome resident in accordance with the Mobilehome Residency Law, California Civil Code Sections 798.55 through 798.60; or

     2.     A vacancy of the mobilehome space arising from the voluntary removal of a mobilehome from the mobilehome space. A removal of the mobilehome from the space for the purpose of performing rehabilitation or capital improvements to the space or for the purpose of upgrading the mobilehome shall not constitute a voluntary removal of the mobilehome.

     B.     “Lawful space vacancy” shall not include sale or other permitted assignment of a mobilehome by a mobilehome resident where the mobilehome is not removed from its mobilehome space. However, a mobilehome park owner may increase the monthly base rent for a mobilehome space at the time of such sale or assignment by up to twenty-five dollars per month.

     C.     Any alleged violation of this provision shall be subject to the alternative dispute resolution procedures pursuant to Section 15.04.100, as needed. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 3, 1997; Ord. 96-05 § 1, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.060 Anniversary date.
     Each park owner shall, by May 15, 1994, establish an anniversary date for all rent increases in the park owner’s park. Such rent increases, if any, except as specified below, shall be enacted only on the anniversary date of that park. The park owner shall post the anniversary date in the park office or office areas where it can easily be seen by the residents and shall notify the administrator in writing of the anniversary date on or before May 15, 1994. If a park owner wishes to adjust its anniversary date, the park owner may petition the administrator for such change. The administrator shall, in his or her discretion, determine whether the change is acceptable. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.070 Rent increase limitations.
     A.    From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, space rent shall not be increased within twelve months of the anniversary date of the preceding increases unless otherwise determined by a mediation panel or an arbitrator as provided elsewhere in this chapter. The permissible annual increase upon the anniversary date shall be one hundred percent of the annual percentage increase in CPI as defined in this chapter, as long as the annual percentage increase in CPI is no more than six percent. No increase of more than six percent shall be permitted unless otherwise determined by a mediation panel or an arbitrator as provided elsewhere in this chapter.

     B.     If the annual percent change in CPI is negative, there shall not be a rent increase. However, the park owner may decrease the rent by an amount in the park owner’s discretion.

     C.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permissible annual increase may be adjusted based on the mitigating factors set forth in Section 15.04.120(E).

     D.    A park owner may not increase the space rent within twelve months of the effective date of the preceding rent increase period, unless the park owner can clearly establish that the rental increase is necessary to cover costs of operation, maintenance, capital improvements or substantial rehabilitation not reasonably foreseeable at the time notice of the preceding rent increase was given. If a park owner seeks a rent increase pursuant to this subsection, the procedures set forth in Sections 15.04.090 and 15.04.100 shall be followed.

     E.     If a park owner wishes to increase the space rent on the anniversary date or within a twelve-month period more than the amount permitted in subsection A of this section, the procedures set forth in Sections 15.04.090 and 15.04.100 shall be followed.

     F.     If an agreement is not reached by the parties through mandatory mediation, and the matter proceeds to arbitration, the arbitrator may reduce the proposed rent increases pursuant to the provisions of this section to a figure determined upon the evidence submitted by the park owner or the park owner’s representative to be a fair return.

     G.    Any notice of space rent increase given by a park owner pursuant to this section shall be given in writing to the resident affected by the increase at least ninety days before any rent increase is to take effect and if the increase is that of the permissible CPI then the amount of the applicable CPI, as defined in this chapter, shall be set forth in the notice. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 4, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.090 Information to be provided by the park owner.
     A.    Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and upon the re-renting of each mobilehome space thereafter, the park owners shall supply each affected resident or prospective resident with a current copy of this chapter.

     B.     When raising rent pursuant to Section 15.04.070(A) the park owner must provide a minimum ninety-day written notice to the mobilehome resident and the administrator outlining the calculations used to compute the new rent, both as a dollar amount and a percentage.

     C.     Whenever the park owner serves a copy of a rent increase, except where the rent increase is calculated pursuant to Section 15.04.070(A), the park owner shall at the same time and in the same manner serve the affected resident or prospective resident with a notice that sets forth all of the following information:

     1.     The amount of the rent increase, both in dollars and as a percentage of existing rent and documentation supporting the level of increase desired, including at a minimum: a summary of the unavoidable increases in maintenance and operating expenses, a statement of the cost, nature, amortization, and allocation among mobilehome spaces of any substantial rehabilitation or capital improvements; a summary of the increased cost of the park owner’s debt service and the date and nature of the sale or refinancing transaction; a summary of the park owner’s net operating income of the preceding twenty-four months and other relevant information that supports the level of rent increase desired;

     2.     The identity of all other affected residents in the spaces which they rent;

     3.     The address and telephone number of the administrator and a statement that the resident is encouraged to contact the administrator for an explanation of the provisions of this chapter;

     4.     A copy of the petition form prepared and provided by the administrator which initiates the process of mandatory mediation, and if necessary, arbitration, established by this chapter; and

     5.     If applicable, notification that the proposed increase exceeds the annual change in the CPI and that mandatory mediation and, if necessary, arbitration are available as alternative dispute resolution remedies by the provisions of Section 15.04.100. Such notices shall bear the following language in capital letters:

 

“MANDATORY MEDIATION AND, IF NECESSARY, ARBITRATION OF THE PROPOSED INCREASE ARE AVAILABLE AS ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION REMEDIES IN THIS MATTER BY OPERATION OF LAW.”

 

     Erroneous use of this notice should be regarded as a irrevocable stipulation to submit to mandatory mediation and, if necessary, arbitration.

     D.    The park owner shall at the same time file with the administrator two copies of the notice and summary of expenses required by subsection B of this section, along with two copies of all relevant financial records, bills or documents which substantiate the level of increase proposed. This information will be made available at the administrator’s office during normal business hours for inspections and copying by the affected residents.

     E.     Any financial information presented to the park owner pursuant to subsection C of this section, shall be verified in writing by an auditor or certified accountant or certified in writing as true and correct under penalty of perjury by the park owner.

     F.     A park owner failing to provide any information, documents or notices required by this section shall not be entitled to collect any rent increase that might otherwise be agreed upon through mandatory mediation or awarded by an arbitrator. Such failure by the park owner shall be a defense in any action brought by the park owner to recover possession of a mobilehome space or to collect any rent increase from a resident.

     G.    With the exception of rent increases pursuant to Section 15.04.070(A) a rental dispute hearing process may be invoked by written petition of mobilehome owners representing fifty-one percent of the mobilehome spaces affected by a rent increase as provided in Section 15.04.100, regardless of whether the park owner has failed to provide the affected residents with all the information, documents, and notices required by this chapter, except in the case of an increase allowed per Section 15.04.070(A). (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 §§ 5, 6, 1997; Ord. 96-05 § 2, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.100 The rent dispute resolution process.
     A.    The resident may contact the administrator for an explanation of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Settlement Offers. At any time after residents file a petition for mandatory mediation in response to a proposed rent increase, the park owner and the residents may tender settlement offers to each other to stipulate to a compromised amount for the proposed rent increase. The party tendering the settlement offer shall also file a copy of the written settlement offer with the administrator in a separately sealed envelope and with a statement written on the outside of the envelope that it is a written settlement offer pursuant to this subsection. The sealed copy of the written settlement offer that is filed with the city is not to be opened by the administrator until it is either accepted by the other party or if the dispute subsequently enters into mediation and/or arbitration and the mediation panel or arbitrator deems it necessary to open it. Upon receiving such offer to compromise, the receiving party has seven days to accept the offer by filing a written acceptance with the administrator.

     C.     Mandatory Mediation.

     1.     A petition signed by fifty-one percent of the mobilehome spaces affected by a rent increase may request mandatory discussion of disputes under this chapter by filing a written request for dispute resolution within twenty-one days of learning the facts that give rise to the dispute. The request must be filed with the administrator, and provide enough factual information to outline the basic issue or issues being raised.

     In the petition, the mobilehome residents shall designate an individual to serve as the mobilehome resident representative for the purposes of receipt of all notices, correspondence decisions and findings of fact. Service of notice upon the designated mobilehome resident representative will constitute adequate and sufficient notice of the mobilehome owners who signed the petition.

     Failure to designate a mobilehome resident representative will render the petition incomplete and the petition will not be accepted for filing.

     For the purpose of counting petition signatures only, each mobilehome space for which a rent increase was noticed shall count as one unit, regardless of the number of persons living in the mobilehome unit on said space.

     For the purpose of counting petition signatures only, any person over the age of eighteen living in a given mobilehome may sign a petition on behalf of that mobilehome unit.

     2.     Within seven days of receiving a written request for dispute resolution, the administrator will notify both the resident representative and park owner that a case has been opened involving all of the spaces affected by the rent increase and will provide a copy of the request to the responding party and a copy of the request shall be received and filed with the city clerk on behalf of the city council.

     3.     The administrator will not open dispute resolution, or will order dispute resolution closed, when it is clear from the written request that there is no substantial factual basis for the dispute, or when the dispute involves the actions or behavior of persons, or conditions, that are not within the control or responsibility of the parties; or when the dispute is frivolous, malicious or vexatious; or when further proceedings are not, in the sole judgment of the administrator, likely to be productive. Both parties will be notified of the administrator’s action and shall have access to the case summary forms used by the administrator, which will not contain any confidential communications from the parties.

     4.     The administrator will promptly assign the request to a mediation panel who will contact all relevant parties to conciliate and mediate the dispute. The administrator shall have the authority to combine different disputes or different parties in the interest of efficiently addressing the disputes, provided that any party may, for reasons of confidentiality or otherwise, opt out of a combined mediation involving more than one resident or park owner by notifying the administrator. All communications between the administrator and the parties as well as between the mediation panel and the parties shall be confidential and subject to the confidentiality guarantees set forth in California Evidence Code Sections 703.5 and 1115 through 1128, as they may be amended or superseded. The mediation panel assigned to the case will promptly investigate and if necessary disclose any conflict of interest or potential conflict of interest to the parties as soon as the conflict or potential conflict becomes known to a member of the mediation panel. At the time of disclosure, the parties will have the option of waiving any such conflict as long as the waiver is in writing.

     5.     The mediation panel shall be selected consistent with Section 15.04.020 (Mediation panel) and the city shall bear the cost of the mediation panel. The city may utilize a volunteer mediator, if such person is a qualified mediator under this subsection. The qualified mediator on the mediation panel shall be experienced in the mediation process both in facilitating communications in conciliation between parties and in mediating disputes. The selected qualified mediator is prohibited from also serving as an arbitrator under subsection D of this section.

     6.     Unless all parties agree in writing to waive the time limit, the initial mediation session will be conducted within twenty-eight days of the date the written request for dispute resolution is filed. The park owner’s business location shall be considered so that the mediation will be scheduled at a reasonably convenient time taking into account the distance that the park owner must travel to attend the mediation.

     If a mediation session is held, the mediation panel shall provide the parties with an opening statement explaining the nature of the process and the ground rules. Thereafter the mediation panel will determine the manner and course of the session, including whether to meet with the parties in caucus, provided that the general guiding principle will always be to provide the parties with a full opportunity to air the concerns giving rise to the dispute.

     a.     Independent Expert Analysis.

     i.      The mediation panel, through the administrator, shall arrange for the employment of an independent expert to perform an independent analysis of the application and prepare an independent determination regarding the subject matter of the application. Any expert hired pursuant to this section shall be instructed to give an unbiased analysis.

     ii.     Cost of Expert. The mediation panel, through the administrator, shall also determine the anticipated cost of employing such expert. The determined cost of the independent expert shall be paid by the park owner to the administrator prior to commencement of the expert’s analysis. Any unused portion of the payment collected from the park owner by the administrator shall be refunded to the park owner.

     iii.    At the conclusion of the independent expert analysis, the mediation panel shall communicate the results of the analysis to the park owner and the residents. The decision rendered through the independent expert analysis shall be utilized as a tool by the mediation panel to assist the parties in negotiations.

     7.     The parties involved in the dispute, including any resident representative, shall be obligated to personally appear at a mediation session scheduled by a mediation panel. No attorneys are permitted to be utilized in the mediation process. However, a party who is a licensed attorney may represent him or herself. All parties must participate in the mediation session until completion of the mediation panel’s opening statement. All parties, including any representative acting on behalf of any resident(s), appearing must have the legal authority to resolve disputes arising under this chapter. Participation in mediation shall be voluntary in all respects after the opening statement. The mediation panel may, with the consent of all parties, schedule additional sessions as needed.

     8.     Pursuant to Section 15.04.200, the administrator shall have the power to impose monetary sanctions on any party not appearing in person at a mediation session.

     9.     No party shall be obligated to reach any specific agreement, or to reach any agreement at all, as a result of participating in conciliation or mediation communications. If an agreement is reached, it will be stated in writing by the mediation panel or by the parties. Any such agreement shall be confidential and will not be enforceable or usable for any purpose outside the dispute resolution process unless all signatories agree that the document can be disclosed or used in other proceedings.

     10.   In the event the parties do not come to an agreement through mediation, either party may file a petition for arbitration consistent with the procedures set forth in subsection D. In the event the parties do come to an agreement through mediation, a copy of that agreement shall be received and filed with the city clerk on behalf of the city council.

     D.    Arbitration.

     1.     If mediation between the park owner and the affected residents pursuant to the mandatory mediation process outlined above in subsection C does not resolve the dispute, the park owner, the affected residents, or their representative(s), may file with the administrator a petition requesting arbitration. Any petition requesting arbitration must comply with the provisions of this section, except that a petition filed by a park owner need not be signed by the affected residents. Pursuant to subsection (E)(3), no petition shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by the requisite number of signatures and is received in the office of the administrator within thirty days of the last session of mandatory mediation. The administrator shall provide a copy of the completed petition to the park owner and the arbitrator.

     2.     As soon as possible after a petition has been filed with the administrator with respect to mobilehome spaces which are within a single park, the administrator shall, to the extent possible, and consistent with the time limitations provided herein, consolidate requests for arbitration involving similarly situated affected residents who have already participated in mandatory mediation.

     3.     Upon the filing of petition with the administrator, the rent increase at issue is not effective and may not be collected until and to the extent it is awarded by an arbitrator or until the request for arbitration is abandoned by the affected residents or their representative(s). “Abandoned” as used in this section means a failure to actively pursue the necessary steps to prepare the residents’ case for the arbitration.

     E.     Contents of Petition for Arbitration.

     1.     The administrator shall not accept a petition for arbitration of a rent increase from any resident(s) unless it has been signed by at least fifty-one percent of all affected residents.

     a.     For the purpose of counting petition signatures only, each mobilehome space for which a rent increase was noticed shall count as one unit, regardless of the number of persons living in the mobilehome unit on said space.

     b.     For the purpose of counting petition signatures only, any person over the age of eighteen living in a given mobilehome may sign a petition on behalf of that mobilehome unit.

     2.     The petition for arbitration shall set forth the total number of affected rented spaces in the mobilehome park, and shall identify the name of the resident(s) who occupies each such space. A petition filed by any resident(s) shall state the date upon which the notice of the rent increase was received by the resident(s). A petition filed by a park owner shall state the date upon which the notice of the rent increase was served on the resident(s). Neither a park owner nor any resident(s) may participate in arbitration unless the park owner or resident(s) participated in all portions of mandatory mediation (personally or through a designated representative).

     3.     In the case of residents filing a petition for arbitration, after obtaining the signature(s) of affected resident(s), the resident representative must personally deliver the petition or mail it by certified mail to the administrator at the following address: City Manager, City of American Canyon, 4381 Broadway St., Suite 201, American Canyon, CA 94503 (or successor address or agency). No resident petition shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by the requisite number of signatures and is received in the office of the administrator within thirty days of the last session of mandatory mediation. The administrator shall provide a copy of the completed petition to the park owner and the arbitrator.

     4.     In the case of a park owner filing a petition, the park owner must personally deliver the petition or mail it by certified mail to the administrator at the following address: City Manager, City of American Canyon, 4381 Broadway St., Suite 201, American Canyon, CA 94503 (or successor address or agency). No petition shall be accepted unless it is received in the office of the administrator within thirty days of the last session of mandatory mediation. The administrator shall provide a copy of the completed petition to the affected park residents or their representative(s) and the arbitrator.

     F.     Information Questionnaire. After the administrator has accepted a petition for arbitration, the administrator shall remit to the park owner and petitioning residents or the resident representative an information questionnaire in such form as the administrator may prescribe. The completed information questionnaire must be returned to the administrator at least five business days prior to the date scheduled for hearing of the petition by the arbitrator. The administrator shall provide copies of the completed information questionnaire to the arbitrator, the mobilehome park owner, and the affected residents or the resident representative.

     G.    Assignment of Arbitrator and Hearing Date/Service of Documents. The administrator shall assign an arbitrator within fifteen business days after receipt of the arbitration petition.

     Additional documents to be presented at the hearing by either the park owner or the affected resident(s), other than those previously submitted pursuant to Section 15.04.090(B) and (C) or subsection C of this section, shall be served on the other party, the administrator, and the arbitrator at least ten working days before the hearing by mail or in-person delivery. All financial documents submitted must be verified in writing by an auditor or certified public accountant or certified in writing as true and correct under penalty of perjury by the park owner.

     H.    Arbitration Fees.

     1.     Once the arbitrator has been selected, the administrator will contact the arbitrator to determine the estimated hearing fee, which shall include an estimate of all fees generated by the arbitrator relative to reviewing submittals by the parties, conducting the hearing, and engaging in any activities related to the determination of whether the proposed special rent increase shall be permitted. The administrator shall notify the park owner in writing of the estimated arbitrator fees no less than fifty days prior to the first date set for the hearing.

     2.     No later than thirty-five days prior to the first date set for the hearing, the park owner shall submit to the administrator payment in full of the estimated arbitrator fees. If payment is not timely received, the hearing shall be postponed, and the hearing shall not be re-scheduled until such time as payment is received.

     3.     Upon completion of the hearing and the issuance of a decision, the arbitrator shall submit to the administrator a final invoice for all services. To the extent that the invoice amount exceeds the fees paid by the park owner pursuant to this section, the park owner shall issue payment of the difference to the administrator. In the event that the total fee is less than the original estimate paid by the park owner, such amount will be refunded to the park owner.

     4.     Except for the refunds provided for in subsection (H)(3) of this section, a park owner may only recover from the affected residents arbitration costs only when an arbitrator’s statement of decision, required by subsection (I)(4), specifically awards such costs to the park owner. An arbitrator’s statement of decision may award a park owner no more than twenty-five percent of arbitration costs.

     5.     Commencing no sooner than thirty-five days after the final arbitration award, and subject to the provisions of subsection (H)(4) of this section, the park owner may pass through, as hereinafter described, the arbitration costs awarded to all of the mobilehome residents occupying spaces in the affected park subject to mobilehome rent stabilization under this chapter. The awarded costs shall be prorated by the number of spaces subject to mobilehome rent stabilization under this chapter, and shall further be amortized, interest free, over a period of twelve months. To the extent that a mobilehome is sold prior to payment by the resident of the arbitrator fees described in this section, the purchaser of the mobilehome shall be responsible for any remaining amount.

     This chapter makes no provision for the recovery of attorney fees and costs by park owners or mobilehome owners with respect to special rent increase hearings or any hearings described in this section, regardless of which party prevails.

     I.      Arbitration Hearing.

     1.     The park owner and any affected resident(s) may appear at the hearing and offer oral and documentary evidence. Both the park owner and resident(s) may designate a representative or representatives to appear for them at the hearing. The arbitrator may grant or order one or more continuances to each party for a period to be determined by the arbitrator upon a showing of good cause. A further continuance may be granted if stipulated to by all the parties. The burden of providing that the amount of rent increase is reasonable shall be on the park owner by a preponderance of the evidence. The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. The rules of evidence and manner of producing evidence shall be those rules set forth in California Government Code Section 11513 for the conduct of hearings under the Administrative Procedure Act. These rules may be relaxed at the discretion of the arbitrator in the interests of justice.

     2.     Any party may have electronic recording equipment or a court reporter present to record and prepare a transcript of the hearing before the arbitrator. Such equipment or reporter shall be provided at that party’s own expense.

     3.     Any jurisdictional or procedural dispute regarding the process set forth herein may be decided by the arbitrator.

     4.     The arbitrator shall, within fourteen days of the conclusion of the hearing, submit by mail a written statement of decision and the reasons for the decision to the administrator. The administrator shall forthwith mail copies of the decision to the park owner and affected resident(s).

     5.     The decision of the arbitrator, rendered in accordance with this section, shall be final and binding upon the park owner and all affected residents. The decision of the arbitrator will be subject to the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5.

     6.     It is the intent of the city council to have a final decision rendered within one hundred fifty days of the initial notice of the rent increase. The administrator or the arbitrator may, however, modify the time periods set forth in this section at his or her discretion to promote the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 §§ 7—9, 1997; Ord. 96-05 §§ 3—5, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.110 Subpoena power.
     Subpoenas, including subpoenas duces tecum, requiring a person to attend at a particular time and place to testify as a witness, may be issued in connection with any dispute pending before an arbitrator. Subpoenas shall be issued at the request of the administrator, an arbitrator, the resident(s) or a park owner. Subpoenas shall be issued and attested by the city attorney. A subpoena duces tecum shall be issued only upon the filing with the city attorney of an affidavit showing good cause for the production of the matters or things desired to be produced, setting forth in full detail the materiality thereof to the issues involved in the proceedings, and stating that the witness has the desired matters or things in his or her possession or under his or her control. A copy of such affidavit shall be served with the subpoena. Any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be served in person or by certified mail, before the hearing for which attendance is sought. Any subpoena or subpoena duces tecum issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed issued by and in the name of the city council. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 10, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.120 Standards of review.
     A.    The arbitrator shall determine whether space rent increases proposed or imposed by the park owner are reasonable based upon the circumstances and all the provisions of this chapter. The arbitrator shall take into consideration that the purpose of this chapter is to permit park owners a just and reasonable return, while protecting residents from unnecessary or unreasonable rent increases.

     B.     The arbitrator shall not allow more than one rent increase per mobilehome space per twelve-month period, unless a park owner can clearly establish that the rent increase is necessary to cover costs of operation, maintenance, capital improvements or substantial rehabilitation not reasonably foreseeable at the time notice of the preceding rent increase was given.

     C.     Maintenance of Net Operating Income (“NOI”).

     1.     It shall be presumed that the base year NOI adjusted by seventy-five percent of the increase or decrease in the CPI since the base year yields a fair return. Park owners shall be entitled to maintain and increase their NOI in accordance with this section. The arbitrator shall make a determination of whether the park owner’s NOI yields a fair return under this standard.

     2.     The formula for calculating the fair NOI return shall be as follows:

 

Fair NOI =

 

base year NOI × (1 +.75 % change CPI)

 

     3.     Except as provided in this section, it shall be presumed that the NOI produced by the park during the base year provided a fair return.

     4.     Calendar year 2010 shall be established as the base year for purposes of determining whether a park owner’s NOI provides a fair return. If a satisfactory base year is, in the arbitrator’s opinion, not otherwise available, such as where a park owner did not own the subject property in the base year and/or the 2010 operating expenses are not available, the arbitrator may take evidence of historical factors to construct a base year.

     5.     The base year CPI shall be the CPI level in June 2010.

     6.     The percentage change in the CPI shall be calculated by using the CPI as of the month prior to the noticed increase.

     7.     The comparison NOI year shall be the most recent calendar or fiscal year, unless another period is found by the arbitrator to be more appropriate.

     D.    New Capital Improvements. A park owner may seek a rent increase based on the cost of a completed new capital improvement (as defined in Section 15.04.020), together with a reasonable return upon the capital improvement investment, only if the park owner has:

     1.     Obtained the written consent of fifty-one percent of the spaces in the park (one vote per space); and

     2.     Established by written verification or other competent evidence to the satisfaction of the arbitrator that the costs of the new capital improvement are factually correct as claimed; and

     3.     Cost factored and amortized the costs of the capital improvement over the good faith estimate of the remaining life of the improvement, but in no event for a period of less than sixty months; and

     4.     Allocated the increase among affected residents on a per space basis and separately itemized such increase on the rent bill. Such increases shall not be considered included in the base rent for purposes of the annual permissible rent increases pursuant to Section 15.04.070(A).

     E.     Mitigating Factors. In evaluating a space rent increase, the arbitrator should also consider the following factors in addition to any other factors the arbitrator deems relevant in order to determine whether there are any circumstances that may justify a reduction in a proposed rent increase:

     1.     In the event the park owner reduces or eliminates any housing services, a proportionate share of the cost savings due to such reduction or elimination shall be passed on in the form of a decrease in existing rent or a decrease in the amount of a rent increase otherwise proposed or permitted by this chapter.

     2.     The physical condition of the mobilehome space or park of which it is a part, including the quantity and quality of maintenance and repairs performed during the preceding twelve months or since the last rent increase. In order to justify the denial or reduction of a rent increase, the arbitrator must find that there are substantial maintenance problems or code violations in the mobilehome space and/or park, and that the owner has had adequate previous notice of these problems and a reasonable opportunity to correct them. If a reduction in the proposed rent increase is justified pursuant to this section, the arbitrator shall make a reasonable effort to quantify the approximate cost of the repairs or maintenance work needed or the amount of the rent increase that would be appropriate after the completion of the repairs or maintenance work, in order to ensure that there is some proportionality between the reduction in the proposed rent increase and the condition of the premises.

     F.     Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no provision of this chapter shall be applied to prohibit the granting of a rent increase that is demonstrated to be necessary to provide a park owner with a fair and reasonable return. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 11, 1997; Ord. 96-05 §§ 6, 7, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.130 Net operating income (“NOI”).
     In evaluating a space rent increase imposed by a park owner to maintain the park owner’s NOI from a mobilehome park, “NOI” means the “gross income” (as defined in Section 15.04.140) of the mobilehome park less the “operating expenses” (as defined in Section 15.04.150) of the mobilehome park. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 12, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.140 Gross income.
     For purposes of calculating NOI pursuant to Section 15.04.130, “gross income” means the sum of the following:

     A.    Gross space rents, computed as gross space rental income at one hundred percent occupancy; plus

     B.     Other income generated as a result of the operation of the mobilehome park, including, but not limited to, fees for services actually rendered; plus

     C.     Revenue received by a park owner from the sale of gas and electricity to residents where such utilities are billed individually to the residents by the mobilehome park owner. Such revenue shall equal the total cost of the utilities to the residents minus the amount paid by the park owner for such utilities to the utility provider; minus

     D.    Uncollected space rents due to vacancy and bad debts to the extent that the same are beyond a park owner’s control. Uncollected space rents in excess of three percent of gross space rent shall be presumed to be unreasonable unless established otherwise and shall not be included in computing gross income. If uncollected space rents must be estimated, then the average of the preceding three years’ experience shall be used. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 13, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.150 Operating expenses.
     A.    For purposes of calculating NOI pursuant to Section 15.04.130, “operating expenses” may include:

     1.     Real property taxes and assessments;

     2.     Utility costs to the extent that they represent costs to the park owner which are not passed through to residents of the mobilehome park;

     3.     Management expenses (including the compensation of administrative personnel, including the value of any mobilehome space offered as part of compensation for such services), reasonable and necessary advertising to ensure occupancy, legal and accounting services as permitted herein, and other managerial expenses. Management expenses are presumed to be not more than five percent gross income, unless established otherwise;

     4.     In addition to the management expenses listed above, if the park owner performs managerial or maintenance services which are uncompensated, the park owner may include the reasonable value of such services or operating expenses. Park owner performed labor shall be limited to five percent of gross income unless the arbitrator finds that such a limitation would be substantially unfair in a given case. A mobilehome park owner must devote substantially all of the park owner’s time, that is, at least forty hours per week, to performing such managerial or maintenance services in order to warrant the full five percent credit as an operating expense. No credit for such services shall be authorized unless a park owner documents the hours utilized in performing such services and the nature of the services provided;

     5.     Normal repair and maintenance expenses for the grounds and common facilities including, but not limited to, landscaping, cleaning and repair of equipment and facilities;

     6.     Operating supplies such as janitorial supplies, gardening supplies and stationery;

     7.     Insurance premiums prorated over the life of the policy;

     8.     Other taxes, fees, and permits, except as provided in Section 15.04.200;

     9.     Reserves for replacement of long term improvements or facilities, provided that accumulated reserves shall not exceed five percent of gross income;

     10.   Costs of necessary capital improvements or substantial rehabilitation which exceeds existing reserves for replacement. A necessary capital improvement shall be an improvement required to maintain the common facilities and areas of the mobilehome park in a decent, safe and sanitary condition or to maintain the existing level of mobilehome park amenities and services. In the event that the capital improvement or substantial rehabilitation expenditure is necessitated as the result of an accident, disaster, or other event for which the park owner received insurance or other benefits, only those costs otherwise allowable and exceeding such benefits may be calculated as operating expenses.

     Expenditures for necessary capital improvements to upgrade existing facilities, together with a reasonable return upon the capital improvement investment made by the park owner, shall be an allowable operating expense only if the park owner has:

     a.     Consulted with the affected residents prior to initiating construction or implementation of the capital improvement regarding the nature, purpose and estimated cost of the improvement, and

     b.     Established by written verification or other competent evidence to the satisfaction of the arbitrator that the costs of the necessary capital improvements are factually correct as claimed, and

     c.     Cost-factored and amortized the costs of the improvement over the good faith estimate of the remaining life of the improvement, but in no event for a period of less than sixty months, and

     d.     Allocated the increase among affected residents on a per space basis and separately itemized such increase on the rent bill. Such increases shall not be considered included in the base rent for purposes of the annual permissible rent increases pursuant to Section 15.04.070(A);

     11.   Increases in interest payments which result from one of the following situations or the equivalent thereof:

     a.     Refinancing of the outstanding principal owed for the acquisition of a park where such refinancing is mandated by the terms of a financing transaction entered into prior to July 1, 2010, for instance, termination of a loan with a balloon payment, or

     b.     Increased interest costs incurred as a result of a variable interest rate loan used to finance the acquisition of the park and entered into prior to July 1, 2010.

     In refinancing, increased interest shall be permitted to be considered as an operating expense only where the park owner can show that the terms of the refinancing were reasonable and consistent with prudent business practices under the circumstances.

     B.     “Operating expenses” shall not include the following:

     1.     Debt service expenses, except as provided in subsection (A)(11) of this section and as permitted in connection with the computation of costs of a capital improvement or substantial rehabilitation;

     2.     Depreciation;

     3.     Any expense for which the park owner is reimbursed;

     4.     Arbitration fees; or

     5.     Attorneys’ fees and costs (except printing costs and documentation as required by Section 15.04.090) incurred in proceedings before an arbitrator or in connection with legal proceedings challenging the decision of an arbitrator or the validity or applicability of this chapter.

     C.     All operating expenses must be reasonable. Whenever a particular expense exceeds the normal industry or other comparable standard, the park owner shall bear the burden of proving the reasonableness of the expense. To the extent that the arbitrator finds any such expense to be unreasonable, the arbitrator shall adjust the expense to reflect the normal industry or other comparable standard. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 14, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.160 Special base year NOI/base rent adjustments.
     A.    Park owners may obtain a one-time special adjustment to the base year NOI and/or base date rent(s), if the park owner rebuts the presumption that the base year NOI and/or base date rent(s) yielded a fair return. The arbitrator shall not make such a determination unless the arbitrator has first made at least one of the following findings:

     1.     That the park owner’s operating expenses in the base year were unusually high or low in comparison to the three years prior to the base year. The average expenses for this period shall be presumed to reflect reasonable average annual expenses and the average of such expenses shall be used to calculate and adjust the base year NOI.

     In determining whether the park owner’s operating expenses were unusually high or low, the arbitrator shall consider whether:

     a.     The park owner made substantial capital improvements during the base year, which were not reflected in the rent levels on the base date,

     b.     Substantial repairs were made due to uninsured damage caused by fire, natural disaster or vandalism,

     c.     Maintenance and repair were below accepted standards so as to cause significant deterioration in the quality of housing services, or

     d.     Other expenses were unreasonably high or low notwithstanding the following of prudent business practice;

     2.     That the rent was disproportionate due to one of the enumerated factors below:

     a.     The rent on the base date was exceptionally high or low due to the fact that the rent was not established in an arms-length transaction, or

     b.     The rent on the base date was substantially higher or lower than at other times of the year by reason of premiums being charged or rebates given for reasons unique to particular spaces.

     B.     If the circumstances specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section are demonstrated, the base date rent shall be adjusted to reflect the rent that would have been received if the base date rent had been set under general market conditions. In making this adjustment, the arbitrator shall utilize the median rent in effect on the base date, or a good faith estimate of such median rent, for comparable spaces within the park or, if necessary, other comparable parks. Comparability shall be judged based on the location of the park, services, amenities provided, and other relevant factors. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 15, 1997; Ord. 96-05 § 8, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.170 Obligations of the parties.
     A.    If, after the park owner’s proposed effective date of a noticed rent increase, the arbitrator finds that the proposed increase or any portion thereof that was previously inoperative is justified, all affected residents shall pay the amount found justified to the park owner within sixty days after the decision is made, unless the arbitrator sets a different time frame for payment.

     B.     If the arbitrator finds that an increase or any portion thereof is not justified, the park owner shall refund any amount found to be unjustified, but that had been paid, to all affected residents within sixty days of the arbitrator’s decision unless the arbitrator sets a different time frame for payment. If such refund is not made within the sixty-day period, the resident(s) may withhold the amount from the next space rent(s) due until the full amount of the refund has been made. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the tenancy of an affected resident is terminated for any reason prior to full credit of the refund against rent, the balance of the credit due the resident shall be paid by the park owner within sixty days from the date of termination of the tenancy.

     C.     Any sum of money that under the provisions of this section is the obligation of the park owner or resident to pay, as the case may be, shall constitute a debt and, subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, may be collected in any manner provided by law for the collection of debts. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 15, 1997; Ord. 96-05 § 9, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.180 Resident’s right of refusal.
     An affected resident may refuse to pay any increase in rent which is in violation of this chapter, provided the resident has participated in mandatory mediation and a petition for arbitration has been filed and either no final decision has been reached by an arbitrator or the increase has been determined to violate the provisions of this chapter. Such right of refusal to pay shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobilehome space or to collect the rent increase. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 15, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.190 Retaliatory acts—Resident’s right to organize.
     No park owner may retaliate against a resident or prospective resident for the resident’s or prospective resident’s assertion or exercise of rights under this chapter in any manner. This includes, but is not limited to, threatening to bring or bringing an action to recover possession of a mobilehome space; engaging in any form of harassment that causes a resident to quit the premises; dissuading a prospective resident from freely exercising the resident’s legal option to choose a month-to-month rental; decreasing housing services; increasing the space rent; or imposing or increasing a security deposit or any other charge payable by a resident. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 15, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.200 Fees and sanctions.
     A.    The costs of administration of this chapter, including the costs of mediation, shall be borne by the city, subject to reimbursement by imposition of a rent stabilization administration fee chargeable against each mobilehome space in the city not otherwise exempt from the fee. The cost of the independent expert review shall be paid by the park owner. The cost for arbitration shall be borne by the parties as set forth in Section 15.04.100(H).

     B.     The administrator shall recommend to the city council the amount of such fee and the city council shall adopt such fee by resolution. The fee may be reviewed by the city council annually, but in any event, must be reviewed every two years and increased based on any increase in city administration costs. Sanctions will be recorded as revenue and will be taken into account when computing the annual administration fee.

     C.     On or before October 31st of each year, each park owner of a mobilehome park in the city shall register with the administrator. The park owner shall provide in writing, the name and address of such park owner, a statement of the number of mobilehome spaces, including both occupied and unoccupied spaces, contained in that park owner’s mobilehome park, and the number of recreational and commercial coach spaces, both occupied and unoccupied, in the mobilehome park. Re-registration and provision of this information must also be made upon change of ownership of the mobilehome park or an increase or a decrease in the number of spaces.

     D.    On or before October 31st of each year, each mobilehome park owner shall pay to the administrator the mobilehome park rent stabilization program administration fee then in effect for each occupied mobilehome space in the park owner’s mobilehome park, except for those spaces subject to a rental agreement in full compliance with the requirements of California Civil Code Section 798.17(a) and (b) or which qualify as new construction under California Civil Code Section 798.45. The administrator shall issue to each park owner a receipt for payment of the fees required by this section.

     E.     Allocation of Fee.

     1.     A park owner who pays the fees may allocate fifty percent of the fees assessed against a mobilehome space to the resident pursuant to the provisions set forth below. This allocation shall be passed on, if at all, no later than the next park anniversary date or within twelve months from the date of payment to the city, and shall be prorated over a twelve-month period. The remaining fifty percent of the fees assessed against a mobilehome space shall not be passed on in any way to residents. Sanctions assessed to a mobilehome park owner may not be passed through to the residents, as the administration fee is.

     2.     The park owner shall provide to all affected residents documentation supporting the allowable amount to be collected in order to recover a portion of rent stabilization administration fees. At a minimum, such documentation shall include: (1) billing notices or other equivalent documents from the city imposing the rent stabilization administration fee; (2) a copy of this section; (3) the calculations used by the park owner to apportion the cost of the allowable percentage among the affected residents; (4) the address and telephone number of the administrator; and (5) notice to the affected resident that such resident is encouraged to contact the administrator for an explanation of the provisions of this chapter.

     F.     The fee allocation shall not be considered part of the base rent upon which future rent increases can be made.

     G.    The fee allocation shall be separately listed on any monthly or other periodic billing statement to the resident.

     H.    A service fee equal to one and one-half percent per month will be charged on all late payments of administration fees under this chapter. The service fee may not be passed on to residents.

     I.      The administrator shall have the power to impose monetary sanctions on any party violating this chapter. Any sanctions imposed shall not be subject to a claim for reimbursement or allocation of a fee. The administrator shall establish from time to time a schedule of the amount of sanctions to ensure chapter compliance subject to confirmation by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 16, 1997; Ord. 96-05 § 10, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.210 Exemption from fees.
     A.    Any park owner who believes that the park owner may be entitled to a space fee exemption pursuant to California Civil Code Section 798.17 or 798.45 or any provision of this chapter, shall provide the administrator with the following documentation, as appropriate:

     1.     The executed lease for each exempt space claimed and any amendments thereto;

     2.     For a newly constructed space, proof that the space was constructed and initially held out for rent after January 1, 1990;

     3.     For a recreational vehicle or commercial coach space, adequate documentation of a change in space tenancy within the preceding nine months;

     4.     A statement of the basis for the exemption.

     B.     The administrator’s decision as to an exemption shall be final. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 17, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.220 When recreational vehicle/ commercial coach space residents are to be treated as prospective residents.
     Any recreational vehicle space that is occupied by a recreational vehicle as defined in Civil Code Section 799.24, and any commercial coach space that is occupied by a commercial coach as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18001.8, for a period in excess of nine months on or after the effective date hereof shall be regarded as a “mobilehome space” for purposes of this chapter, and a resident upon such a space shall be entitled to all the rights, protections and obligations of this chapter. Such a space resident shall be counted as a “prospective resident” upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and said space shall be subject to the fees authorized by the city for mobilehome spaces. The space resident and the park owner shall apportion the fee in the manner authorized for mobilehome spaces subject to this chapter generally. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 17, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.230 Nonwaivable obligations.
     Any provision, whether oral or written, in or pertaining to a rental agreement, whereby any provision of this chapter is waived or modified, is against public policy and void, except with respect to any rental agreement complying with all of the terms and conditions set forth in California Civil Code Section 798.17. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 17, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.240 Penalties and remedies.
     In addition to those penalties and remedies set forth elsewhere in this chapter, any park owner who demands, accepts, receives or retains any money as rent from a resident to which the park owner is not entitled under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the resident for any actual damages, attorney’s fees, and costs incurred by the resident as a consequence thereof plus a penalty in the sum of three times the amount of money the park owner accepted, received or retained in violation of the provisions of this chapter or five hundred dollars, whichever is greater. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 17, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.250 Rights of affected residents reserved.
     This chapter shall not be construed to limit or curtail any other action or proceeding which may be pursued by an affected resident against a park owner before any court or other body having jurisdiction thereof. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 17, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

 

15.04.260 Review by the city council.
     The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the city council which contains an overview of actions taken during the previous year to administer the provisions of this chapter and shall include a summary of staff time spent on tasks to administer the provisions of this chapter. Beginning no later than July 1, 2011, city staff shall track actual time spent on administration of this chapter.

     The city council may review the effectiveness of the ordinance codified in this chapter annually, but in any event, must review it no later than two years from its enactment and every two years thereafter, and shall use the information contained in the administrator’s annual report in its review. Notice of the time and place of the council’s review shall be posted as required by law. (Ord. 2011-04 § 1, 2011; Ord. 97-03 § 17, 1997; Ord. 95-20 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 15.08 PARK AND CIVIC FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
15.08.010 Purpose.
     This chapter has been enacted for the purpose of establishing development impact fees for parks and civic facilities fees to defray the actual costs of constructing improvements to mitigate impacts resulting from proposed new development identified in the American Canyon general plan. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.020 Findings.
     A.    The American Canyon general plan land use element identifies projected build out for the city of American Canyon; and

     B.     The parks and recreation element of the general plan identifies the park facility needs of the community at build-out; and

     C.     A portion of the land necessary will be dedicated by developers as conditions of subdivision approval while other developers may not have land of sufficient size, configuration, or quality for dedication. Where the payment of a fee is proposed in lieu of dedicating land, it is necessary to have an equitable fee structure in place; and

     D.    The public services and facilities element of the general plan identifies the need for a police station, library, and other public facilities necessary to provide the range of services desired by existing and future residents; and

     E.     It is the intent of the city council to adopt by this chapter a fair and equitable method of securing the revenues necessary to fund the construction and implementation of necessary parks, civic facilities, and the future general plan update. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     A.    “Civic facilities” include, but are not necessarily limited to, a City Hall, a police station, a corporation yard, a public library, or similar facilities desired to serve the public as more fully described in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     B.     “Civic facilities fee” means the fee contributed by each land use category as more fully described in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     C.     “Construction” means the original construction of a new single-family residence, duplex, condominium, townhouse, apartment, restaurant, motel or hotel, industrial use, retail use, commercial use, office use, institutional use, or any other use allowed under the general plan or zoning ordinance.

     D.    “Parks” include active and passive public recreation facilities, and can include land, trails, and or buildings or other similar and related improvements. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.040 Exemptions.
     The following projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     A.    Development for which a vesting tentative map application has been accepted as complete or has been approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

     B.     Capital improvements/buildings related to the operation of the city of American Canyon governmental operations;

     C.     Temporary uses less than twelve months in duration;

 

     D.    Replacement development on a one to one basis for residential construction;

     E.     Additions to residential units unless a new bedroom is constructed or created as a part of the proposed addition, in which case the fee shall be twenty percent of the adopted fee;

     F.     Replacement of commercial units destroyed by fire or natural disaster provided the floor area is not increased. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.050 Development impact fees.
     A.    A parks and civic facilities fee is imposed on new construction as set forth in this chapter. The fee shall be in accordance with the cost per unit (e.g., dwelling unit, square feet, hotel/motel rooms, etc.) as identified in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter and defined in this section.

     B.     The city at its sole discretion may adopt revised parks and civic facilities impact fees based on the proportionate effects of inflation or changes to the cost of living. For purposes of calculation, the Engineering News Record 20-City Construction Cost Index shall be used for adjusting said fees. Said adjustments in accordance with this section may be approved by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2004-03 § 1, 2004; Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.060 Collection of fees.
     The development impact fees set forth in this chapter shall be collected from new construction prior to issuance of a building permit, and for subdivisions prior to approval of a final map, unless other provisions are adopted as a part of an approved development agreement, or the city council authorizes an alternative to the timing of such fees by resolution. (Ord. 2012-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.070 In lieu contributions.
     A.    The parks fee set forth by this chapter may be reduced by a credit given for construction by a developer of all or a portion of the improvements identified in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter and/or other on-site and/or off-site park lands dedicated in excess of the requirements of the city’s subdivision ordinance, subject to the approval by the city council in each case.

     B.     The amount of the credit for parks fees shall be approved by the city council on recommendation by the community services director.

     C.     The civic facilities fee set forth by this chapter may be reduced by a credit given for construction by a developer of all or a portion of the improvements identified in Exhibit A to the ordinance codified in this chapter and/or other on-site and/or off-site civic facilities, subject to the approval by the city council in each case.

     D.    The amount of the credit for civic facilities fees shall be approved by the city council, based upon the recommendation of the city manager. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.080 Change of use.
     In the event of change of use in a development for which parks and civic facilities fees were paid in accordance with this chapter, the city council may require the payment of the difference between the parks and civic facilities fees originally paid and the amount required by this chapter for the new use. The community development director and city engineer shall forward a recommendation to the city council in each case. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.090 Disposition of revenues.
     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be held in separate accounts as deemed appropriate by the finance director and expended solely on the parks and civic facilities identified in this chapter and the future general plan update. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.100 Refunds.
     Where a building permit has expired and no extension has been granted, a refund of fees paid may be given, provided the claim for refund is made within one year after the expiration date of the building permit. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

 

15.08.110 Supplementary provisions.
     The fees required by this chapter shall be supplementary to the fees, dedications or conditions imposed on a development of new construction pursuant to city approval, or as may be imposed by existing state or local law. (Ord. 98-03, 1998)

Chapter 15.12 TRAFFIC MITIGATION IMPACT FEES
15.12.010 Purpose.
     This chapter has been enacted for the purpose of establishing development impact fees to defray the actual costs of constructing traffic improvements to mitigate impacts resulting from proposed new development identified in the American Canyon general plan. (Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.020 Findings.
     A.    The American Canyon general plan land use element identifies projected build-out for the city of American Canyon;

     B.     Each new land development project in the city of American Canyon will generate additional traffic within the city limits of American Canyon, which will cumulatively cause adverse environmental effects if improvements for traffic circulation are not made;

     C.     The American Canyon general plan circulation element identifies the roadway and intersection improvements necessary to accommodate the anticipated levels of development;

     D.    Without a traffic mitigation fee, existing and future sources of revenue will be inadequate to fund a substantial portion of the improvements for traffic circulation which are necessary to avoid the unacceptable level of congestion and related adverse impacts created by expected development within the city of American Canyon; and

     E.     It is the intent of the city council to adopt by the ordinance codified in this chapter a fair and equitable method of securing the revenues necessary to fund the construction and implementation of necessary traffic circulation improvements. (Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter:

     A.    “Construction” means the original construction of a new single-family residence, townhouse, apartment, restaurant, motel or hotel, industrial use, retail use, office use, or institutional use.

     B.     “Traffic improvements” mean those roadway and intersection improvements identified in the Circulation Element of the General Plan, the current City Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee Nexus Study, and the City Capital Improvement Program.

     C.     “Traffic mitigation fee” or “traffic impact fee” or “traffic development impact fee” means that fee for traffic mitigation identified in the most recent traffic impact fee nexus study.

     D.    “Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee Nexus Study” or “Traffic Development Impact Fee Study” or “Fee Study” means the most recent study, adopted by resolution of the city council pursuant to Government Code Section 66000 et seq. (Mitigation Fee Act), of the nexus between traffic impact mitigation fees and traffic improvements needed to serve new development in American Canyon. (Ord. 2015-02 §§ 1—3, 2015; Ord. 2006-10 § 2, 2006; Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.040 Exemptions.
     The following projects are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     A.    Development for which a vesting tentative map application has been accepted as complete or has been approved prior to the effective date of the amended ordinance codified in this chapter. In such cases, an agreed-upon fee as part of the conditions of approval for said application shall remain in effect;

     B.     Capital improvements/buildings related to the operation of the city of American Canyon governmental operations;

     C.     Temporary uses less than twelve months in duration;

     D.    Replacement development on a one-to-one basis for residential, industrial and commercial construction;

     E.     Replacement of commercial units destroyed by fire or natural disaster, provided the floor area is not increased. (Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.050 Development impact fees.
     A.    A traffic impact fee is imposed on new construction as set forth in this chapter. The fee shall be in accordance with the most recent Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee Nexus Study.

     B.     The city at its sole discretion may adopt revised traffic mitigation impact fees based on the proportionate effects of inflation or changes to the cost of living. For purposes of calculation, the Engineering News Record 20-City Construction Cost Index shall be used for adjusting said fees. Said adjustments in accordance with this section may be approved by a resolution of the city council.

     C.     The city, at its sole discretion, may adopt revised traffic mitigation impact fees based on a revised Traffic Impact Mitigation Fee Nexus Study adopted by resolution of the City Council pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act. (Ord. 2015-02 §§ 4, 5, 2015; Ord. 2011-05 § 1, 2011; Ord. 2004-02 § 1, 2004; Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.060 Collection of fees.
     The development impact fees set forth in this chapter shall be collected from new construction prior to issuance of a building permit, and for subdivisions prior to approval of a final map, unless other provisions are adopted as a part of an approved development agreement, or the city council authorizes an alternative to the timing of such fees by resolution. (Ord. 2012-02 § 2, 2012; Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.070 In lieu contributions.
     The traffic impact fee set forth in this chapter may be reduced by a credit given for construction by a developer of all or a portion of the traffic improvement identified in this chapter subject to recommendation by the city engineer and approval by the city council. (Ord. 2015-02 §§ 6, 7, 2015; Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.090 Alternative commercial rate program.
     The alternative commercial rate program recognizes the diversity of commercial uses and the potential differences in traffic generation rates and peak hour characteristics. The city council may consider the findings of an independent traffic study, prepared under the direction of the city engineer and funded by the applicant, justifying a lesser traffic impact fee. (Ord. 2015-02 § 8, 2015; Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.100 Change of use.
     In the event of change of use in a development for which traffic impact fees were paid in accordance with this chapter, particularly those projects benefiting from either the special industrial incentive program or the alternative commercial rate program, the city council may require the payment of the difference between the traffic impact fees originally paid and the amount required by this chapter for new use. The community development director and city engineer shall forward a recommendation to the city council in each case. (Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.110 Disposition of revenues.
     The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be held in separate accounts as deemed appropriate by the city manager and expended solely on the traffic improvements identified in this chapter. (Ord. 2015-02 § 9, 2015; Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.120 Refunds.
     Where a building permit has expired with no notable progress and no extension has been granted, a refund of fees paid may be given, provided the claim for refund is made within one year after the expiration date of the building permit. (Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

 

15.12.130 Supplementary provisions.
     The fees required by this chapter shall be supplementary to the fees, dedications or conditions imposed on a development of new construction pursuant to city approval, or as is imposed by existing state or local law. (Ord. 99-18 § 1, 1999)

Title 16 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CODES
Chapter 16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.02 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
Chapter 16.03 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 16.04 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 16.05 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 16.06 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 16.07 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
Chapter 16.08 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Chapter 16.09 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 16.10 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Chapter 16.11 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 16.12 SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
Chapter 16.13 REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
Chapter 16.14 WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
Chapter 16.15 STREAMLINED RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY PERMIT
Chapter 16.16 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Chapter 16.17 CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 16.18 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE

Chapter 16.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.01.010 Title.
     The title of Title 16 shall be “Building and Construction Codes.” (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

 

16.01.020 Purpose.
     Building Codes are adopted as a means of regulating the construction, alteration, and maintenance of buildings. This Building and Construction Code is intended to:

     A.    Promote the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of American Canyon and other persons visiting the city; and

     B.     Ensure compliance with local, state, and nationally adopted standards and methods of building construction; and

     C.     Enable the building official to enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

 

16.01.030 Administration of title.
     The provisions of this title shall be administered by the building official, who is the enforcement officer for all provisions, unless otherwise specified in a particular section, and authorized representatives. All other officers and employees of the city shall assist and cooperate in the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

 

16.01.040 Applicability of certain terms.
     The term “building official” means the chief building official or designee.

     The term “authority having jurisdiction” means the chief building official or designee.

     The term “fire marshal” is used, it means the fire chief of the American Canyon fire protection district or designee.

     The term “health officer” means the authorized representative of the Napa County environmental health department. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

Chapter 16.02 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE
16.02.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the California Building Code of the city and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Building Code applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Building Code, 2019 Edition,” published and copyrighted by the International Code Council. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety excepting additions, revisions and omissions listed in Sections 16.02.030 through 16.02.260 of this chapter. A copy of the adopted California Building Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.030 Appendices.
     The Building Code as adopted by Section 16.02.020 is amended and adopted with the following appendices:

     Appendix Chapter C, Group U – Agricultural Buildings

     Appendix Chapter F, Rodent Proofing

     Appendix Chapter G, Flood Resistant Construction

     Appendix Chapter H, Signs

     Appendix Chapter I, Patio Covers

     Appendix Chapter J, Grading

     Appendix Chapter O, Emergency Housing

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.040 Findings and determination.
     As permitted in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, the city of American Canyon finds and determines the local amendments to 2019 California Building Code are either administrative in nature or reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public due to local climatic, geological or topographical conditions. Those findings are as follows:

     Express Finding Number 1: Climatic. The city is located in a climatic zone with precipitation ranging from fifteen to twenty-six inches per year. Ninety-five percent of precipitation falls during the months of November through April, leaving a dry period of approximately six months each year. Relative humidity remains moderate most of the time. High temperatures in the summer average in the mid-eighty degrees Fahrenheit and in the winter in the mid-fifty degrees Fahrenheit. Prevailing winds in the area are common with gusts up to thirty-five miles per hour. These climatic conditions, along with our topography, necessitate a greater requirement for fire-sprinklers in residential construction, a minimum Class A roof covering and adequate spark arrestors.

     Express Finding Number 2: Geological. The city is located in Seismic Design Category D, which is indicative of high seismic vulnerability. The West Napa fault is documented to be present in our city. The area includes various soil conditions and areas with significant movement potential. Buildings and other structures in Seismic Design Category D can experience major seismic damage. These geological conditions necessitate the prohibition of gypsum as a lateral-resisting building element, and the restriction of Portland cement plaster as a lateral-resisting building element to one-story structures of R-3 and U-1 occupancies.

     Express Finding Number 3: Topographical. Areas of highly combustible dry grasses, weeds, brush and trees adjacent to structures are common throughout the city. Above ground electrical power transmission lines are suspended through trees and above large areas of dry vegetation. The arrangement of man-made features around many buildings greatly limits any approach to all but one side of a building. The area immediately adjacent to the eastern border of the city has been classified as high and very high fire severity zones under the Fire and Resource Assessment Program of the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection. These topographical conditions, along with our climate, necessitate a greater requirement for fire-sprinklers in residential construction, a minimum Class A roof covering and adequate spark arrestors. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 5, 2019)

 

16.02.060 Amend Section 101.4.1 Gas.
     Section 101.4.1 first sentence is amended to read as follows:

 

101.4.1 Gas. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code and California Mechanical Codes shall apply in the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code.

 

     The remainder of the paragraph is retained as published. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.070 Amend Section 101.4.2 Mechanical.
     Section 101.4.2 is deleted and replaced to read as follows:

 

101.4.2 Mechanical. The provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall apply in the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.080 Amend Section 105.5 Expiration.
        Section 105.5. is hereby deleted and amended to read as follows:

 

105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such permit, or if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days.

 

Before such work can recommence, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the recommence fee shall be one half the amount required for a new permit (i.e. building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical fees only) for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew a permit after expiration for over one year, the permittee shall pay new full permit fee. The maximum life of any permit is three (3) years.

 

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the timeframe required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.090 Amend Section 107.1.2 Electric vehicle charging stations.
     Section 107.1.2 of Chapter 1 of Division II of the California Building Code is hereby added to read:

 

107.1.2 Electric vehicle charging stations. Applications for electric vehicle charging stations may be processed utilizing the City of American Canyon Electric Vehicle Charging Station Expedited/Streamlined Process.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.095 Amend Section 202 General definitions.
     Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to add or modify the following definitions to read:

 

City of American Canyon Electric Vehicle Charging Station Expedited/Streamlined Permitting Process: A ministerial permitting process for electric vehicle charging station installations that utilizes an application checklist to expedite review of an electric vehicle charging station permit. For such installations, the process, including permit issuance, may be conducted entirely online utilizing digital forms or may be conducted at the City’s Building Permit Counter utilizing printed forms.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.100 Amend Section 109.2 Schedule of permit fees.
Section 109.2 is deleted and replaced as follows:

 

109.2 Permit fees. Each building, structure, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing system or alteration that requires a permit shall include a fee payment in accordance with a schedule established by City Council Resolution.

 

The Building Official shall collect fees for permits and services specified in this title. Where the Building Official Director finds that the fees prescribed in this title do not cover the cost of providing the service which is the subject of the fee, the Building Official may charge a supplemental fee for the unpaid cost of the services provided.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.110 Amend Section 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance.
     Section 109.4 is deleted and replaced as follows:

109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee establish by the building official that shall be in addition to the required permit fees. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall not exceed five times the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee set forth in the fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction or a lesser fee than the fee resolution may be permitted on the merits of each individual case by the Building Official. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.120 Amend Section 901.2 Fire protection systems.
     Chapter 9, Section 901.2 is hereby amended by repealing the first two sentences of Section 901.2 (thus, the provisions of Section 902.2.1 remain in effect) and replacing it with the following:

 

901.2 Construction documents. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to require construction documents and calculations for all fire protection systems and to require permits be issued for the installation, rehabilitation or modification of any fire protection system. Construction documents for fire protection systems shall be submitted for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.130 Amend Section 903.2 Where required.
     Section 903.2 of Chapter 9 is deleted in its entirety based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.02.040, and replaced with the following section:

 

903.2: Item 1, Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be installed throughout all existing commercial or multi-family residential building when the floor area of an addition (including mezzanines) exceeds 50% of the existing floor area of the building or when an additional story is added.

 

903.2: Item 2, Any change of occupancy when the proposed new occupancy classification is more hazardous based on a fire and life safety evaluation by the Fire Code Official and Building Code Official, including conversion of buildings to single-family residences, accessory dwelling units, bed and breakfast, inns, lodging houses or congregate residences for 10 or less persons or other similar uses an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout.

 

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be provided in new and existing buildings in the locations described in this section.

 

903.2.1 New Construction.

 

Regardless of any exception listed above or in the remainder of this code or the California Building Code, all buildings shall be equipped throughout with an approved fully automatic fire sprinkler system.

 

Fire Sprinklers shall not be required if one or more of the following exceptions are met:

1.     Must comply with the American Canyon General Building Standards for residential, multi-family residential, commercial and industrial occupancies.

2.     When approved by the Fire Code Official spaces or areas in telecommunications buildings used exclusively for telecommunications equipment, associated electrical power distribution equipment, batteries and standby engines, provided those spaces or areas are equipped throughout with an automatic fire alarm system and are separated from the remainder of the building by fire barriers consisting of no less than 1-hour fire-resistance-rated wall and 2-hour fire-resistance-rate floor/ceiling assemblies.

3.     Automatic fire sprinkler protection for fixed guideway transit systems shall be as per Section 903.2.17.

4.     Detached Group U private garages and carports accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy and less than 1,000 square feet and with non-habitable space above.

5.     Detached pool houses, workshops, barns and similar structures, built in conjunction with existing non-sprinkled single-family residences and provided the new structure is less than 1,000 square feet and is not intended for use as a dwelling unit.

6.     Detached non-combustible canopies less than 3,000 square feet in roof area used exclusively for vehicle washing facilities or vehicle fuel dispensing stations.

7.     Group B or M occupancies less than 600 square feet.

8.     Detached, unenclosed gazebos, solar trellises or shade structures less than 1,000 square feet.

9.     Detached restroom facilities associated with golf courses, parks and similar uses.

 

903.2.2 Additions. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout any existing commercial or multi-family residential building when the floor area of an addition (including mezzanines) within any three year period exceeds 50% of the existing floor area of the building or when an additional story is added.

 

903.2.3 Change of occupancy. Any change of occupancy when the proposed new occupancy classification is more hazardous based on a fire and life safety evaluation by the Fire Code Official and Building Code Official, including conversion of buildings to single-family residences, accessory dwelling units, bed and breakfast, inns, lodging houses or congregate residences for 10 or less persons or other similar uses an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout.

 

903.2.4 Floor control valves. Approved supervised indicating control valves and flow switches shall be provided at the point of connection to the riser on each floor in buildings two or more stories in height.

 

903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area.

 

An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or Group R-4 Occupancies.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.140 Amend Section 905.3.1 Height.
     Item 2 of Section 905.3.1 is deleted based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.02.040, and replaced with the following section:

 

905.3.1 Height.

2.     Class I standpipes shall be installed in buildings three or more stories in height with approved outlets provided at each level including the roof when required by the Fire Code Official.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.150 Amend California Building Code Table 1505.1 Minimum roof covering classification.
     Table 1505.1 is to be deleted and based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.02.040, and replaced with the following:

Table 1505.1

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING
CLASSIFICATION

FOR TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.160 Amend Section 1511 Reroofing.
     Section 1511 is amended and based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.02.040, to add the following section:

 

1511.7 Spark arrestor. Whenever a permit has been issued for reroofing a spark arrestor conforming to Section 2802 shall be installed (or the existing replaced if not in conformance with Section 2802) on all fireplace chimneys before final inspection and approval.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.180 Reserved.
 

16.02.190 Amend Section 1809.8 Plain concrete footings.
     Delete Section 1809.8 and replace as follows:

 

1809.8 Plain concrete footings. The edge thickness of plain concrete footings supporting walls of other than light-frame construction shall not be less than 8 inches (203 mm) where placed on soil and in all cases, as a minimum, one ½″ (51 mm) continuous rebar shall be placed at the top and at the bottom of all grade beams and spread footings.

 

Exception: For plain concrete footings supporting Groups R-3 and one story Group U occupancies the edge thickness is permitted to be 6 inches (152 mm), provided that the footing does not extend beyond a distance greater than the thickness of the footing on either side of the supported wall. In all cases, as a minimum, one ½″ (51 mm) continuous rebar shall be placed at the top and at the bottom of all grade beams and spread footings.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.210 Amend Section 1905.1.8 ACI 318, Section 22.10.
     Section 1905.1.8 is deleted and based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.02.040 is amended to read as follows:

     1905.1.8 ACI 318, Section 22.10. Delete ACI 318, Section 22.10, and replace with the following:

 

22.10 - Plain concrete in structures assigned to seismic design category C, D, E or F.

22.10.1 - Structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F shall not have elements of structural plain concrete, except as follows:

 

(a)    Isolated footings of plain concrete supporting pedestals or columns are permitted, provided the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.

 

Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwelling three stories or less in height, the projection of the footing beyond the face of the supported member does not exceed the footing thickness.

 

(b)    Plain concrete footing supporting walls are permitted, provided the footings have at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars. Bars shall not be smaller than No. 4 and shall have a total area of not less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing. A minimum of one bar shall be provided at the top and bottom of the footing. Continuity of reinforcement shall be provided at corners and intersections.

 

Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwellings three stories or less in height and constructed with stud bearing walls, plain concrete footings with at least two continuous longitudinal reinforcing bars not smaller than No. 4 are permitted to have a total area of less than 0.002 times the gross cross-sectional area of the footing.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.220 Amend Section 1907.1 General.
     Section 1907.1 General is deleted and based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.02.040 is amended to read as follows:

 

1907.1 General. The thickness of concrete floor slabs supported directly on the ground shall not be less than 3 1/2 inches (89 mm). A 6-mil (0.006 inch; 0.15 mm) polyethylene retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches (152 mm) shall be placed between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or other approved equivalent methods or materials shall be used to retard vapor transmission through the floor slab. As a minimum and in all cases where a slab is to be placed inside of a building, the slab shall be reinforced with not less than six inches by six inches ten gauge welded wire mesh or an approved alternate installed at mid height of the slab.

 

Exception: A vapor retarder is not required for:

1.     Detached structures accessory to occupancies in Group R-3, such as garages, utility buildings or other unheated facilities.

2.     Unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and carports attached to occupancies in Group R-3.

3.     Buildings of other occupancies where migration of moisture through the slab from below will not be detrimental to the intended occupancy of the building.

4.     Driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork which will not be enclosed at a later date.

5.     Local site condition locations approved by the Building Official.

 

In all slabs under habitable spaces, a 4-inch (10 mm) crushed rock capillary water barrier shall be provided under the minimum 6 mil vapor retarder.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.02.260 Amend Appendix H Section H101.2 Signs exempt from permits.
     Appendix Chapter H Section H101.2 is deleted and replaced as follows:

 

H101.2 Signs exempt from building and/or electrical permits. The following signs are exempt from the requirements to obtain a building and/or electrical permit before erection:

1.     Painted non-illuminated signs not exceeding 9 square feet (2.74 m2).

2.     Temporary signs announcing the sale or rent of property not exceeding 9 square feet (2.74 m2).

3.     Signs erected by transportation authorities.

4.     Projecting signs not exceeding 2.5 square feet (0.23 m2).

5.     The changing of moveable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, or the repainting or repositioning of display matter shall not be deemed an alteration.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.03 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE
16.03.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the California Residential Code of the city and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Residential Code applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon adopts all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Residential Code, 2019 Edition,” together with Appendices H and V published and copyrighted by the International Code Council. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety excepting additions, revisions and omissions listed in Sections 16.03.030 through 16.03.080 of this chapter. A copy of the adopted California Residential Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.030 Appendices.
     The Residential Code as adopted by Section 16.03.020 is amended and adopted with the following appendices:

 

Appendix Chapter H, Patio Covers

Appendix Chapter V, Swimming Pool Safety Act

 

Section AV100.2 is hereby deleted and amended to read as follows:

 

Except as provided in Section AV100.5, when a building permit is issued for construction of a new swimming pool or spa or the remodeling of an existing swimming pool or spa at a private single-family home, the respective swimming pool or spa shall be equipped with all three of the following drowning prevention safety features:

1.     An enclosure that meets the requirements of Section AV100.3 and isolates the swimming pool or spa from the private single-family home.

2.     A self-closing, self-latching device with a release mechanism placed no lower than 54 inches above the floor on the private single-family’s home doors providing direct access to the swimming pool or spa.

3.     Exit alarms on the private single-family home’s doors that provide direct access to the swimming pool or spa shall be equipped with audible alarm that a sound of sufficient volume can be heard throughout the dwelling. The exit alarm may cause either an alarm noise or a verbal warning, such as a repeating notification that “the door to the pool is open”. The alarm device shall be approved by the Chief Building Official; Or

4.     A safety pool cover complying with the ASTM International, in compliance with Standard F1346-91 or approved by the Chief Building Official may be used in lieu of alarm devices that are required for doors and sliding doors.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.040 Section R105.2 Work exempt from permits.
     Item 1 of Section R105.2 is hereby deleted and amended to read as follows:

 

Item 1. One-story detached accessory structure, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet, (11.15 m2). The height of the one story detached accessory structure shall not exceed 15 feet (4.75 m) at any point or as specified by local Zoning Ordinance.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.045 Amend Section R105.5 Expiration.
     Section R105.5 is hereby deleted and amended to read as follows:

 

Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building, structure, equipment or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee therefore shall be one half the amount required for a new permit (i.e. building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical fees only) for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay new full permit fee.

 

Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which work may commence under that permit when the permittee is unable to commence work within the time frame required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days on written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.050 Section R108.7 Re-inspection fee.
     Section R108.7 is hereby added to read as follows:

 

R108.7 Re-inspection Fee. A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or when corrections called for are not made.

 

This section is not to be interpreted as requiring re-inspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of this code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection.

 

Re-inspection fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector. For failure to provide access on the date for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the building official.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.060 Section R108.7 Violation penalties.
     Section R108.7 is hereby added to read as follows:

 

108.7 Violation penalties. Any persons who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall not exceed five times the permit fee required by this code. The minimum investigation fee set forth in the fee schedule adopted by this jurisdiction or a lesser fee than the fee resolution may be permitted on the merits of each individual case by the Building Official. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this code nor from any penalty prescribed by law.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.065 Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire systems, Exception.
     Section R313.2, Exception number 1 is hereby deleted and replaced by the following sentence:

 

An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout any existing one- or two-family dwelling when the floor area of the addition (including mezzanines) exceeds 50% of the existing floor area of the building or when an additional story is added.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.070 Amend Section R506.2.4 Reinforcement support.
     Section R506.2.4 is deleted and based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.03.030 is amended to read as follows:

 

R506.2.4 Reinforcement support. Where provided in slabs on ground, reinforcement shall be supported to remain in place from the center to upper one third of the slab for the duration of the concrete placement. As a minimum, and in all cases where a slab is to be placed inside of a building, the slab shall be reinforced with not less than six inches by six inches ten gauge welded wire mesh, or an approved alternate.

 

In all slabs under habitable spaces, a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) of crushed rock capillary water barrier shall be provided under a minimum 10 mil vapor retarder. The vapor barrier shall be protected by a minimum of 2 inches (51 mm) of sand or equivalent protection.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.080 Amend Section R907 Rooftop mounted photovoltaic panel systems.
     Section R907 is hereby amended based upon Express Findings 1 and 3 in Section 16.03.030 to read as follows:

 

R907.1.2 Solar photovoltaic panels/modules. Solar photovoltaic panels/modules installed upon a roof or as an integral part of a roof assembly shall comply with the requirements of this code and the California Fire Code as amended by the City of American Canyon.

 

R907.1.3 Structural fire-resistance. The structural frame and roof construction supporting the load imposed upon the roof by the photovoltaic panels/modules shall comply with the requirements of the California Building Code Sections 1510 and 1511.

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.03.090 Amend Section R202 General definitions.
     Section R202 of Chapter 2 of the California Residential Code is hereby amended to add the following definitions to read:

 

City of American Canyon Electric Vehicle Charging Station Expedited/Streamlined Permitting Process: A ministerial permitting process for electric vehicle charging station installations that utilizes an application checklist to expedite review of an electric vehicle charging station permit. For such installations, the process, including permit issuance, may be conducted entirely online utilizing digital forms or may be conducted at the City’s Building Permit Counter utilizing printed forms.

(Ord. 2019-02 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.04 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE
16.04.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Electrical Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Electrical Code, CEC, or Electrical Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.04.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition,” published by BNI Publications, Inc., and copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association and the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Electrical Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.05 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE
16.05.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Mechanical Code” of the city and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Mechanical Code, CMC or Mechanical Code refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.05.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition,” published by International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and copyrighted by International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Mechanical Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.06 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE
16.06.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Plumbing Code” of the city and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the Uniform Plumbing Code, CPC or Plumbing Code refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.06.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition,” published by International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and copyrighted by International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety excepting additions, revisions and omissions listed in Sections 16.06.030 and 16.06.040 of this chapter. A copy of the adopted California Plumbing Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.06.030 Appendices.
     The Plumbing Code as adopted by Section 16.04.020 is amended and adopted with the following appendices sections:

 

Appendix C Alternate Plumbing Systems

Appendix D Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems

Appendix I Installation Standards

(Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.06.040 Adopt Chapter 16A, Part II Non-potable water reuse systems.
     Chapter 16A, Part II is adopted in its entirety. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.07 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE
16.07.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Energy Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Energy Code, or Energy Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.07.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Energy Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Energy Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.08 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
16.08.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Historical Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Historical Building Code, or Historical Building Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

 

16.08.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Historical Building Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 16.09 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE
16.09.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Existing Building Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Existing Building Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

 

16.09.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Existing Building Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 16.10 UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
16.10.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings” of the city and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or Dangerous Building Code refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

 

16.10.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition,” published and copyrighted by the International Council of Building Officials. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety excepting additions, revisions and omissions listed in Sections 16.10.030 through 16.10.040 of this chapter. A copy of the adopted Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

 

16.10.030 Amend Section 203 Violations.
     Section 203 is amended by adding the following:

 

It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublease or occupy, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the incorporated territory of the City of American Canyon, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of this code.

 

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Article is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. California Health and Safety Code 17995.

(Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

 

16.10.040 Amend Section 205 Board of appeals.
     Section 205 is deleted and replaced as follows:

 

205.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business.

 

Alternatively, the City may use five (5) Building Official members of the Napa-Solano Chapter of the International Code Council (NSICC), chosen on a case-by-case basis, to serve as the Board of Appeals for the City of American Canyon. The NSICC, an organization of Building Officials, Building Inspectors, and Construction Industry personnel, was formed in 1978 to help maintain consistent and uniform code enforcement and code interpretation within the jurisdictions of Napa and Solano counties. Building Officials from jurisdictions within Napa and Solano counties and neighboring counties are members of the NSICC.

 

Building Official members of the NSICC are well versed in the technical and administrative provisions of construction codes.

 

205.2 Limitations of Authority. The board shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this code nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of this code. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. Appeals from any findings by the Board of Appeals may be made by the applicant, a member of the City Council or the Building Official upon request in writing to the City Council within ten (10) days from the date of the Board’s action.

 

205.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.

(Ord. 2013-06 § 3, 2013)

Chapter 16.11 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
16.11.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Green Building Standards Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Green Building Standards Code, or CALGreen, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

 

16.11.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Green Building Standards Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

 
Chapter 16.12 SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS
16.12.010 Intent.
     This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the building official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. (Ord. 2008-12, 2008)

 

16.12.020 Application of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of American Canyon. The council may extend the provisions as necessary. (Ord. 2008-12, 2008)

 

16.12.030 Definitions.
     “Safety assessment” means a visual, nondestructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. (Ord. 2008-12, 2008)

 

16.12.040 Placards.
     A.    The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     1.     “INSPECTED – Lawful Occupancy Permitted” is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

     2.     “RESTRICTED USE” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

     3.     “UNSAFE – Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstances except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will not in general terms the type of damage encountered.

     B.     The ordinance number of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.

     C.     Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2008-12, 2008)

Chapter 16.13 REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION
16.13.010 Adoption and intent.
     This chapter establishes regulations as amendments to the building code for the expeditious repair of damaged structures. In the event an amendment to the California Building Standards Code results in differences between these building standards and the California Building Standards Code, the text of these building standards shall govern. In accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, express findings that modifications to the California Building Standards Code are reasonably necessary because of local climatic, geological or topographical conditions are either already on file with the California Building Standards Commission prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. In accordance with California Government Code Section 50022.6, at least one true copy of the California Building Code has been on file with the chief building official since fifteen days prior to enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter. While this chapter is in force, a true copy of this chapter shall be kept for public inspection in the office of the chief building official. (Ord. 2008-13, 2008)

 

16.13.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies and is hereby added to Section 3402.1 Definitions of the 2007 California Building Code (CBC):

 

        Substantial Structural Damage. A condition where:

        1. In any story, the vertical elements of the lateral-force-resisting system, have suffered damage such that the lateral load-carrying capacity of the structure in any direction has been reduced by more than 20 percent from its pre-damaged condition, or

        2. The capacity of any vertical gravity load-carrying component, or any group of such components, that supports more than 30 percent of the total area of the structure’s floor(s) and roof(s) has been reduced more than 20 percent from its pre-damaged condition, and the remaining capacity of such affected elements with respect to all dead and live loads is less than 75 percent of that required by the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

 

(Ord. 2008-13, 2008)

 

16.13.030 Repairs.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following repair requirements are hereby added as a new Subsection 3403.5 to Section 3403 Additions, Alterations or Repair in the 2007 California Building Code (CBC):

 

3403.5.1 Repairs. Repairs of structural elements shall comply with this section.

 

3403.5.1.1 Seismic Evaluation and Design. Seismic evaluation and design of an existing building and its components shall be based on the following criteria.

 

3403.5.1.1.1 Evaluation and Design Procedures. The seismic evaluation and design shall be based on the procedures specified in the building code, ASCE 31 Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings (for evaluation only) or ASCE 41 Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings. The procedures contained in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code shall be permitted to be used as specified in Section 3403.5.1.1.3.

 

3403.5.1.1.2 CBC Level Seismic Forces. When seismic forces are required to meet the building code level, they shall be one of the following:

        1. 100 percent of the values in the building code. The R factor used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the building code shall be the R factor specified for structural systems classified as “Ordinary” unless it can be demonstrated that the structural system satisfies the proportioning and detailing requirements for systems classified as “Intermediate” or “Special.”

        2. Forces corresponding to BSE-1 and BSE-2 Earthquake Hazard Levels defined in ASCE 41. Where ASCE 41 is used, the corresponding performance levels shall be those shown in Table 3403.5.1.1.2.

 

Table 3403.5.1.1.2

ASCE 41 and ASCE 31
Performance Levels

Occupancy Category (Based on IBC Table 1604.5)

Performance Level for Use With ASCE 31 and With ASCE 41 BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level

Performance Level for Use With ASCE 41 BSE-2 Earthquake Hazard Level

I

Life Safety (LS)

Collapse Prevention (CP)

II

Life Safety (LS)

Collapse Prevention (CP)

III

Note (a)

Note (a)

IV

Immediate Occupancy (IO)

Life Safety (LS)

 

a.          Performance Levels for Occupancy Category III shall be taken as halfway between the performance levels specified for Occupancy Category II and Occupancy Category IV.

 

3403.6.1.1.3 Reduced CBC Level Seismic Forces. When seismic forces are permitted to meet reduced building code levels, they shall be one of the following:

        1. 75 percent of the forces prescribed in the building code. The R factor used for analysis in accordance with Chapter 16 of the building code shall be the R factor as specified in Section 3403.6.1.1.2.

        2. In accordance with the applicable chapters in Appendix A of the International Existing Building Code as specified in Items 2.1 through 2.5 below. Structures or portions of structures that comply with the requirements of the applicable chapter in Appendix A shall be deemed to comply with the requirements for reduced building code force levels.

        2.1. The seismic evaluation and design of unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A1.

        2.2. Seismic evaluation and design of the wall anchorage system in reinforced concrete and reinforced masonry wall buildings with flexible diaphragms in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A2.

        2.3. Seismic evaluation and design of cripple walls and sill plate anchorage in residential buildings of light-frame wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A3.

        2.4. Seismic evaluation and design of soft, weak, or open-front wall conditions in multiunit residential buildings of wood construction in Occupancy Category I or II are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A4.

        2.5. Seismic evaluation and design of concrete buildings and concrete with masonry infill buildings in all Occupancy Categories are permitted to be based on the procedures specified in Appendix Chapter A5.

        3. In accordance with ASCE 31 based on the applicable performance level as shown in Table 3403.6.1.1.2.

        4. Those associated with the BSE-1 Earthquake Hazard Level defined in ASCE 41 and the performance level as shown in Table 3403.6.1.1.2. Where ASCE 41 is used, the design spectral response acceleration parameters Sxs and Sx1 shall not be taken less than 75 percent of the respective design seismic coefficients 2.5Ca and Cv as defined in Tables 16-Q and 16-R of the International Building Code.

 

3403.6.1.2 Wind Design. Wind design of existing buildings shall be based on the procedures specified in the building code.

 

3403.6.2 Repairs to Damaged Buildings. Repairs to damaged buildings shall comply with this section.

 

3403.6.2.1 Unsafe Conditions. Regardless of the extent of structural damage, unsafe conditions shall be eliminated.

 

3403.6.2.2 Substantial Structural Damage to Vertical Elements of the Lateral–Force-Resisting System. A building that has sustained substantial structural damage to the vertical elements of its lateral-force-resisting system shall be evaluated and repaired in accordance with the applicable provisions of Section 3403.6.2.2.1 through 3403.6.2.2.3.

 

3403.6.2.2.1 Evaluation. The building shall be evaluated by a registered design professional, and the evaluation findings shall be submitted to the code official. The evaluation shall establish whether the damaged building, if repaired to its pre-damage state, would comply with the provisions of the building code. Wind forces for this evaluation shall be those prescribed in the building code. Seismic forces for this evaluation are permitted to be the reduced level seismic forces specified in Code Section 3403.6.1.1.3.

 

3403.6.2.2.2 Extent of Repair for Compliant Buildings. If the evaluation establishes compliance of the pre-damage building in accordance with Section 3403.6.2.2.1, then repairs shall be permitted that restore the building to its pre-damage state, using materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage.

 

3403.6.2.2.3 Extent of Repair for Non-Compliant Buildings. If the evaluation does not establish compliance of the pre-damage building in accordance with Section 3403.6.2.2.1, then the building shall be rehabilitated to comply with applicable provisions of the building code for load combinations including wind or seismic forces. The wind design level for the repair shall be as required by the building code in effect at the time of original construction unless the damage was caused by wind, in which case the design level shall be as required by the code in effect at the time of original construction or as required by the building code, whichever is greater. Seismic forces for this rehabilitation design shall be those required for the design of the predamaged building, but not less than the reduced level seismic forces specified in Section 3403.6.1.1.3. New structural members and connections required by this rehabilitation design shall comply with the detailing provisions of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

 

3403.6.2.3 Substantial Structural Damage to Vertical Load-Carrying Components. Vertical load-carrying components that have sustained substantial structural damage shall be rehabilitated to comply with the applicable provisions for dead and live loads in the building code. Undamaged vertical load-carrying components that receive dead or live loads from rehabilitated components shall also be rehabilitated to carry the design loads of the rehabilitation design. New structural members and connections required by this rehabilitation design shall comply with the detailing provisions of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

 

3403.6.2.3.1 Lateral Force-Resisting Elements. Regardless of the level of damage to vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system, if substantial structural damage to vertical load-carrying components was caused primarily by wind or seismic effects, then the building shall be evaluated in accordance with Section 3403.6.2.2.1 and, if non-compliant, rehabilitated in accordance with Section 3403.6.2.2.3.

 

3403.6.2.4 Less than Substantial Structural Damage. For damage less than substantial structural damage, repairs shall be allowed that restore the building to its pre-damage state, using materials and strengths that existed prior to the damage. New structural members and connections used for this repair shall comply with the detailing provisions of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose, and location.

 

3403.6.3 Referenced Standards.

Standard Referenced

Reference In Code

Number Title Section Number

ASCE 31-03 Seismic Evaluation of Existing Buildings 3403.6.1.1.1

TABLE 3403.6.1.1.2, 3403.6.1.1.3

ASCE 41-06 Seismic Rehabilitation of Existing Buildings 3403.6.1.1.1, 3403.6.1.1.2

TABLE 3403.6.1.1.2, 3403.6.1.1.3

 

(Ord. 2008-13, 2008)

Chapter 16.14 WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
16.14.010 Purpose.
     This chapter defines the requirements for completing water-efficient final landscape plans, in compliance with Chapter 19.22 of the municipal code. The documentation described is intended to implement the landscape efficiency standards set by the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act of 2006 (AB 1881). (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.020 Applicability.
     A.    Applicability. Final landscape plans shall be required for the following landscape projects:

     1.     New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects, private development projects and developer-installed single-family and multifamily projects, requiring a building permit, plan check or design permit;

     2.     Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 16.14.070, 16.14.140 and 16.14.160; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 16.14.160 and 16.14.170.

     B.     This chapter does not apply to:

     1.     Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

     2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

     3.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.030 Review and approval.
     Final landscape plans shall be subject to review and approval by the community development director. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.040 Definitions.
     The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

     “Applied water’’ means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

     “Automatic irrigation controller’’ means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

     “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

     “Bay-Friendly Landscape Guidelines” means the most recent version of the guidelines developed by StopWaste.Org for use in the professional design, construction and maintenance of landscapes.

     “Bay-Friendly Landscaping Scorecard” means the most recent version of the Bay-Friendly Landscaping points system developed by StopWaste.Org.

     “Certificate of completion” means the document required under Section 16.14.180.

     “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Designer Certification Program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer Program.

     “Certified landscape irrigation auditor’’ means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Auditor Certification Program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program.

     “Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon and its representatives.

     “Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.

     “Compost” is the product of controlled biological decomposition of organic materials, often including urban plant debris and food waste. It is an organic matter resource that has the unique ability to improve the chemical, physical and biological characteristics of soils or growing media. It contains plant nutrients but is typically not characterized as a fertilizer. Excerpted from U.S. Compost Council, Field Guide to Compost Use.

     “Conceptual landscape plan” means a preliminary landscape plan submitted to the city for review with a discretionary application.

     “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

     “Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

     “Drought resistant soil” means soil that has been managed, by amending with compost and covering with mulch, for example, to maximize rainfall infiltration, increase the soil’s capacity to hold water, and allow for plant roots to penetrate and proliferate such that the landscape can survive with less than optimal water (i.e., less than MAWA).

     “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

     “Effective precipitation (Eppt)” or “usable rainfall” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

     “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

     “Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

     “Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

     “Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 492.4.

     “ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape.

     “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

     “Final landscape plan” means a landscape plan submitted to the city for review and issuance of building permits and contains the same elements as the conceptual landscape plan.

     “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

     “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).

     “High-flow sensors” or “flow meters” detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction.

     “Homeowner-provided landscaping” means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings.

     “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

     “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

     “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources.

     “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

     “Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices.

     “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

     “Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

     “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code Section 5615.

     “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non­development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

     “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

     “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required under Section 16.14.050.

     “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “Landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 16.14.020.

     “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

     “Lawn” means an area of short, mown grass in a yard, garden, or park.

     “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

     “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

     “Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 16.14.070. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area.

     “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

     “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

     “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, arbor or wood chips, recycled wood waste, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

     “Native species” means plants from the local microclimate or Northern California species.

     “New construction” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

     “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

     “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

     “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

     “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

     “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

     “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor that, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants.

     “Precipitation rate” means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.

     “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 16.14.050, to request a permit, plan check, or design permit from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

     “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

     “Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

     “Recreational area” means publicly owned or publicly accessible areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface.

     “Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

     “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Section 16.14.070, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

     “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design permit, meets the requirements of Section 16.14.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet, is fifty percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year.

     “Runoff’ means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

     “Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

     “Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

     “Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

     “Sprinkler head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

     “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

     “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

     “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

     “Turf” means a species of grass that was developed to be used as a lawn together with the surface layer of earth held together by its roots.

     “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

     “Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a low plant factor.      “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied).

     “Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

     “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2100. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.050 Water-efficient landscape plans.
     A.    Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit a final landscape documentation package to the community development department. The final landscape documentation package, submitted as part of the final landscape plan, shall include the following:

     1.     Project information:

     a.     Date;

     b.     Applicant name, address, telephone, email;

     c.     Property owner name, address, telephone, email;

     d.     Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

     e.     Total landscape area (square feet);

     f.      Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

     g.     Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well);

     h.     Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;

     i.      Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape documentation package.”

     2.     Water-efficient landscape worksheet:

     a.     Hydrozone information table;

     b.     Water budget calculations:

     i.      Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA),

     ii.     Estimated total water use (ETWU),

     iii.    Soil management report,

     iv.    Landscape design plan,

     v.     Irrigation design plan, and

     vi.    Grading design plan. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.060 General requirements and standards.
     A.    General Requirements and Standards.

     1.     The setbacks from streets required by the schedule of zoning district regulations shall be fully landscaped except in single-family districts where parking may be permitted as specified in this title.

     2.     All landscaped areas shall be protected by six-inch concrete curbing.

     3.     Parking and circulation areas shall be landscaped according to the requirements this title.

     4.     The use of turf is limited to rear yards of residential projects.

     5.     Landscaping should be used to separate parking and vehicle circulation areas from buildings, to provide a visual landscaped foreground for buildings, and to enhance the perimeter of a project.

     6.     Live plant materials generally should be used in all landscaped areas.

     7.     Landscape planters abutting parking areas shall be sufficiently large to allow for vehicle overhang without extending into the planting area.

     B.     Trees.

     1.     Landscape plans for sites on major streets should include large-scale street trees, with deep root systems and broad canopies.

     2.     Tree planting shall consider passive solar heating and cooling opportunities related to building orientation.

     3.     Trees shall be provided in parking lot areas in a manner that provides shading of parked vehicles to the maximum extent feasible.

     4.     Trees shall be properly supported. Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functions. Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or branches.

     C.     Hard Surfaces. Required planter or landscaped areas may be combined with pedestrian walks and similar hard surface areas, provided that such hard surface areas do not cover more than thirty percent of any required planter or landscaped areas. Ornamental or landscaping rock and gravel areas, artificial turf, or other areas covered with other artificial materials shall be considered hard surface areas for the purpose of this provision.

     D.    Slopes.

     1.     All manufactured slopes over five feet in height created by grading shall be fully landscaped utilizing a combination of trees, shrubs and groundcover materials.

     2.     Stabilizing jute netting or equivalent netting shall be provided in conjunction with the landscape planting and shall fully cover lower slope areas.

     E.     Installation.

     1.     All landscaping and planter areas shall be installed consistent with an approved water efficient landscape plan prior to final building permit sign-off or granting of an occupancy permit for a project.

     2.     Prior to the installation of landscaping in any public right-of-way, the developer shall provide for continued maintenance until such areas are accepted by the city or as defined in a subdivision improvement agreement.

     F.     Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be continually maintained in good condition and kept clean and weeded. Good maintenance shall be interpreted to include: watering and maintaining water efficiency, weeding, pruning, insect and disease control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.070 Water-efficient landscape worksheet.
     A.    The applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections:

     1.     A hydrozone information table for the landscape project; and

     2.     A water budget calculation for the landscape project. For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the table below:

 

NAPA County

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Annual ETo

Carneros

0.8

1.5

3.1

4.6

5.5

6.6

6.9

6.2

4.7

3.5

1.4

1.0

45.8

*    The values in this table were derived from:

     1.     California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS);

     2.     Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, University of California, Davis - Dept. of Land, Air & Water Resources and California Dept. of Water Resources 1999;

     3.     Reference Evapotranspiration for California, University of California, Davis - Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987) Bulletin 1922;

     4.     Determining Daily Reference Evapotranspiration, Cooperative Extension University of California, Davis - Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987), Publication Leaflet 21426.

 

     B.     Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

     1.     The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

     2.     All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

     3.     All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below.

     4.     ETAF for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

     C.     Maximum Applied Water Allowance. The maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the equation:

 

       MAWA = (ETo) (0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

     D.    Estimated Total Water Use. The estimated total water use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed MAWA.

 

     Where:

       ETWU = Estimated Total Water Use per year (gallons)

       ETo = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches)

       PF = Plant Factor from WUCOLS (see Section 491)

       HA = Hydrozone Area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet)

       SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)

       0.62 = Conversion Factor

       IE = Irrigation Efficiency (minimum 0.71)

 

     1.     Example ETWU calculation: landscape area is fifty thousand square feet; plant water use type, plant factor, and hydrozone area are shown in the table below. The ETo value is 51.1 inches per year. There are no special landscape areas (recreational area, area permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants, and area irrigated with recycled water) in this example.

 

Hydrozone

Plant Water Use Type(s)

Plant Factor (PF)*

Hydrozone Area (HA) (square feet)

PF x HA (square feet)

1

High

0.8

7,000

5,600

2

High

0.7

10,000

7,000

3

Medium

0.5

16,000

8,000

4

Low

0.3

7,000

2,100

5

Low

0.2

10,000

2,000

 

 

 

Sum

24,700

*     Plant Factor from WUCOLS

     ETWU = (51.1)(0.62)(24,700/0.71 + 0)

                   = 1,102,116 gallons per year

 

     Compare ETWU with MAWA: For this example MAWA = (51.1) (0.62) [(0.7 x 50,000) + (0.3 x 0)] = 1,108,870 gallons per year. The ETWU (1,102,116 gallons per year) is less than MAWA (1,108,870 gallons per year). In this example, the water budget complies with the MAWA.

     2.     Example ETWU calculation: total landscape area is fifty thousand square feet, two thousand square feet of which is planted with edible plants. The edible plant area is considered a special landscape area (SLA). The reference evapotranspiration value is 51.1 inches per year. The plant type, plant factor, and hydrozone area are shown in the table below.

 

Hydrozone

Plant Water Use Type(s)

Plant Factor (PF)*

Hydrozone Area (HA) (square feet)

PF x HA (square feet)

1

High

0.8

7,000

5,600

2

High

0.7

9,000

6,300

3

Medium

0.5

15,000

7,500

4

Low

0.3

7,000

2,100

5

Low

0.2

10,000

2,000

 

 

 

Sum

23,500

6

SLA

1.0

2,000

2,000

*     Plant Factor from WUCOLS

 

       ETWU = (51.1)(0.62)(23,500/0.71 + 2,000)

                   = (31.68) (33,099 + 2,000)

                   = 1,111,936 gallons per year

 

     Compare ETWU with MAWA. For this example:

 

       MAWA = (51.1) (0.62) [(0.7 x 50,000) + (0.3 x 2,000)]

                     = 31.68 x [35,000 + 600]

                     = 31.68 x 35,600

                     =1,127,808 gallons per year

 

     The ETWU (1,111,936 gallons per year) is less than MAWA (1,127,808 gallons per year). For this example, the water budget complies with the MAWA. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.080 Irrigation efficiency.
     For the purpose of determining maximum applied water allowance, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation systems shall be designed, maintained, and managed to meet or exceed an average landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.090 Soil management report.
     A.    In order to create drought resistant soil, reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report addressing soil attributes of the project site shall be completed by the applicant, or designee.

     B.     The soil management report shall address the soil attributes of the project site and shall include:

     1.     Identification of areas of quality topsoil to be protected during construction and/or critical soil limitations such as compaction; water logged soils or wetlands; thin, eroded or erosion prone soils.

     2.     A laboratory soil analysis of the soil(s) into which plantings are to be made.

     C.     Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

     D.    At a minimum the soil analysis shall include:

     1.     Soil texture;

     2.     Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

     3.     pH;

     4.     Total soluble salts;

     5.     Sodium;

     6.     Essential nutrients;

     7.     Percent organic matter; and

     8.     Recommendations for soil amendments or nutrient applications to ameliorate the soil limitations identified by the analysis and the amount of compost required to bring the soil organic matter content to a minimum of three and one-half percent by dry weight or a minimum application of at least one inch. The required practice of adding compost is waived if the plant palette primarily includes California native species that are adapted to soils with little or no organic matter as documented by a published plant reference.

     E.     Specifications for protecting topsoil, ameliorating soil limitations, such as ripping the soil to alleviate soil compaction, and incorporating compost and/or amendments as per recommendations in the soil analysis report.

     F.     The applicant, or designee, shall comply with one of the following:

     1.     If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil management report shall be submitted to the city as part of the landscape documentation package; or

     2.     If significant mass grading is planned, the soil management report shall be submitted to the city as part of the certificate of completion.

     3.     The soil management report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

     4.     The applicant, or designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil management report recommendations to the city with the certificate of completion. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.100 Landscape design plan.
     For the efficient use of water, landscaping shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

     A.    Plant Material.

     1.     The estimated total water use of the plant material selected must not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.

     2.     Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 16.14.110(B)(4).

     3.     At least seventy-five percent of the total number of plants in non-turf areas shall require occasional, little or no summer water. All species should be adapted to the climate in which they will be planted, as documented by a published plant reference. If plants are given a range of water needs from “occasional to moderate” for example, the landscape designer must determine if the plant will require either occasional or moderate watering based on site, soil, and climate conditions and categorize the plant appropriately. Sources used to determine climate adaptation and watering requirements may include:

     a.     Bornstein, Carol, David Fross and Bart O’Brien, California Native Plants for the Garden.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “occasional,” “infrequent,” or “drought tolerant.”

     b.     East Bay Municipal Utility District’s publication Plants and Landscapes for Summer Dry Climates.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “occasional,” “infrequent” or “no summer water”

     c.     Sunset Publishing Corporation Sunset Western Garden Book.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “little or no water”

     d.     University of California Cooperative Extension’s Guide to Estimating Irrigation Water Needs of Landscape Plantings in CA.

Qualifying irrigation designation: “Low” or “Very Low”

     4.     Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

     5.     Total irrigated areas specified as turf shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five percent with recreational areas exempted.

     6.     A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per California Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches.

     7.     Those species identified by the California Invasive Plant Council (CAL-IPC) as invasive in the San Francisco Bay Area shall not be specified.

     8.     The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

     9.     Plant species shall be selected and spaced to allow them to grow to their natural size and shape. Pruning for structural integrity and health of plant is permitted. In addition, plants located in a row or adjacent to buildings, sidewalks, or roads will be spaced between their minimum and maximum mature plant spread according to a published reference plant book and still fit into their planting area without significant overhang. Trees must meet the spacing requirements only when adjacent to buildings, in a row or adjacent to other vertical obstructions. Vines are not subject to spacing requirements.

     10.   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site.

     B.     Water Features.

     1.     Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

     2.     Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

     3.     Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

     C.     Mulch and Amendments.

     1.     A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, or direct seeding applications where mulch should not be used because it may be harmful. The use of plastic sheeting as a weed barrier is prohibited.

     2.     Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.

     3.     The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

     4.     Compost and soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 16.14.090).

     5.     Ongoing maintenance shall include regular reapplication of mulch to a minimum of three inches.

     D.    The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

     1.     Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

     2.     Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Areas of the landscape temporarily irrigated to establish drought tolerant plants shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

     3.     Identify recreational areas;

     4.     Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

     5.     Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

     6.     Identify type of mulch and application depth;

     7.     Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

     8.     Identify type and surface area of water features;

     9.     Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

     10.   Identify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater;

     11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies (e.g., rain gardens, cisterns, etc.);

     12.   Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

     13.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.) (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.110 Irrigation design plan.
     For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

     A.    System.

     1.     The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

     a.     If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

     b.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

     2.     Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

     3.     Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions are required for all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

     4.     Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system.

     5.     The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non­irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

     6.     Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

     7.     The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

     8.     The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 16.14.080 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

     9.     In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

     10.   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

     11.   Sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

     12.   Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.

     13.   Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems.

     14.   Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or a low volume irrigation system.

     15.   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

     a.     The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

     b.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

     c.     The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection (A)(8) of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

     16.   Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate exceeding three-fourths inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

     B.     Hydrozone.

     1.     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

     2.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

     3.     Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf.

     4.     Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if the plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

     5.     Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

     6.     On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see City of American Canyon Template Water-Efficient Landscaping Worksheet). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

     7.     The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

     a.     Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

     b.     Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

     c.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

     d.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

     e.     Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 19.22.070;

     f.      The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

     g.     The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.l, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.120 Grading design plan.
     For the efficient use of water, project site grading shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city permits satisfies this requirement.

     A.    The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

     1.     Height of graded slopes;

     2.     Drainage patterns;

     3.     Pad elevations;

     4.     Finish grade; and

     5.     Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

     B.     The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.130 Irrigation scheduling.
     For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

     A.    Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

     B.     Operation of he irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

     C.     For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

     D.    Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

     1.     The plant establishment period;

     2.     The established landscape; and

     3.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

     E.     Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

     1.     Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

     2.     Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

     3.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

     4.     Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

     5.     Application rate setting;

     6.     Root depth setting;

     7.     Plant type setting;

     8.     Soil type and mulch depth;

     9.     Slope factor setting;

     10.   Shade factor setting; and

     11.   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.140 Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
     A.    Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

     B.     A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing and obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

     C.     Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents.

     D.    At least one landscaping staff member or contractor shall be trained in the use of Integrated Pest Management (IPM) or is a “Bay-Friendly Qualified Landscape Professional.” (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.150 Stormwater management.
     All landscape plans shall conform to Chapter 14.28 Stormwater and Pollution Discharge Control Program. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.160 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
     A.    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

     B.     For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2010, as described in Section 16.14.020:

     1.     The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule;

     2.     The city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.170 Effective precipitation.
     A.    The city may consider effective precipitation (twenty-five percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance:

 

       MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)].

 

     Upon approval of the final landscape documentation package by the city, the project applicant shall:

     1.     Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design permit and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion;

     2.     Submit a copy of the approved final landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or designee; and

     3.     Submit a copy of the water-efficient landscape worksheet to the city. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

 

16.14.180 Certificate of completion.
     The certificate of completion shall include the following:

     A.    Project information sheet that contains:

     1.     Date;

     2.     Project name;

     3.     Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;

     4.     Project address and location; and

     5.     Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address.

     B.     Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape Documentation Package:

     1.     Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification.

     C.     Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 16.14.130).

     D.    Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 16.14.140).

     E.     Irrigation audit report (see Section 16.14.160).

     F.     Soil management report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 16.14.090).

     G.    The project applicant shall:

     1.     Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city for review;

     2.     Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the city and property owner or designee. (Ord. 2015-05 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 16.15 STREAMLINED RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY PERMIT
16.15.010 Intent and purpose.
     The intent and purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

 

16.15.020 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

     B.     Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance of like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

 

16.15.030 Definitions.
     “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

     “Building division” means the building and safety division for the city of American Canyon.

     “Building official” means the building official for the city of American Canyon.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “Common interest development” means any of the following:

     1.     A community apartment project.

     2.     A condominium project.

     3.     A planned development.

     4.     A stock cooperative.

     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

     1.     Email;

     2.     The Internet; or

     3.     Facsimile.

     “Expedited permitting,” and “expedited review,” means the process outlined in Section 16.15.070 entitled “Expedited permit review and inspection requirements.”

     A “feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit.

     “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

     “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

     1.     For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed.

     2.     For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the cost of the system as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed.

     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

     1.     A solar energy system that is not larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

     2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city of American Canyon and all state of California health and safety standards.

     3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

     4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city of American Canyon.

     “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

     1.     Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

     2.     Any structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating.

     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

 

16.15.040 Solar energy system requirements.
     A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the state of California.

     B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

     C.     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

 

16.15.050 Aesthetic installation.
     Electrical metallic tubing (EMT) and other forms of conduit is not permitted in exposed exterior locations visible from the public right-of-way. Exposed conduit placed toward the rear of the house out of view of the public right-of-way shall be painted to match the color of the house. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

 

16.15.060 Duties of community development department and building official.
     A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city’s publicly accessible website.

     B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email, the city’s website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

     C.     An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

     D.    The building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

     E.     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

     F.     All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

 

16.15.070 Expedited permit review and inspection requirements.
     A.    The building division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications within thirty days of adoption of this chapter. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the building division shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit within three business days. The building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety.

     B.     Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements.

     C.     If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact.

     D.    Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A) and (B).

     E.     The city shall not condition the approval of an application on the approval of an association as defined in Civil Code Section 4080.

     F.     If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

     G.    Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

     H.    The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request.

     I.      If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 3, 2019; Ord. 2015-09 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 16.16 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
16.16.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Administrative Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Administrative Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

 

16.16.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Administrative Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 16.17 CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
16.17.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “California Referenced Standards Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the California Referenced Standards Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

 

16.17.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the California Building Standards Commission. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted California Referenced Standards Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 16.18 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
16.18.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be cited as the “International Property Maintenance Code” of the city of American Canyon and any reference in the city municipal code or any chapter thereof to the International Property Maintenance Code, refers and applies to this chapter. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

 

16.18.020 Code adoption.
     The city of American Canyon does hereby adopt all those certain documents marked and designated, as “International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition,” published by the International Code Council and copyrighted by the International Code Council. The documents identified in this section are adopted in their entirety. A copy of the adopted International Property Maintenance Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official for use and examination by members of the public. (Ord. 2019-11 § 2, 2019)

Title 17 REDEVELOPMENT (Reserved)

Title 18 SUBDIVISIONS
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 2. DIVISIONS OF LAND
DIVISION 3. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS

DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 18.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.02.010 Purpose and intent.
     This subdivision ordinance serves the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the city of American Canyon by setting standards for the form and content of tentative, final and parcel maps; to adopt standards to regulate the division of land; and to establish procedures for the review of subdivision maps by the planning commission and city council.

     The procedures to be followed in securing official approval of subdivision maps shall be governed by the provisions of the laws adopted by the Legislature of the state of California and the additional provisions of this title. All divisions of land shall comply with the provisions of the city’s general plan and its elements and the municipal code. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this title shall apply to the following:

     A.    When any parcel of land within the city is to be divided into two or more separate lots or parcels; or

     B.     Where the lot lines between contiguous parcels are proposed to be adjusted; or

     C.     Where two or more parcels of land are proposed to be merged into a lesser number of parcels; or

     D.    Where a condominium, community apartment project, stock cooperative project, or other form of common interest project is proposed, including the conversion of existing units into condominium projects as defined in this title; or

     E.     Where a reversion to acreage is proposed. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.030 Advisory agency designated.
     The city planning commission is designated as the advisory agency with respect to subdivisions as provided for in the Subdivision Map Act. The planning commission shall have all the powers and duties with respect to tentative, parcel and subdivision maps and the procedures relating thereto, which are specified by law and by this title, and shall review and recommend approval of any amendment to this title prior to adoption by the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.040 Compliance required.
     A.    It is unlawful for any individual, firm, association, trust, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, or any other legal entity, as a principal, agent, or otherwise to offer to sell, to contract to sell, or to sell any subdivision of land/or any part thereof in the city of American Canyon, unless and until all the requirements of this title have been complied with.

     B.     Any offer to finance, lease, sell or contract to sell, or any financing of a division of land, lease or sale contrary to the provisions of this title shall be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, corporation, partnership or co-partnership, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the city of American Canyon or other political subdivision or person, firm, corporation, partnership or copartnership may otherwise be entitled and the city of American Canyon or any other political subdivision, or person, firm, corporation, partnership or copartnership may file an action in the Superior Court of the state of California, in and for the county of Napa to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of this title.

     C.     Any transfer or conveyance, or purported transfer or conveyance, or agreement to transfer or convey any parcel of land without compliance with the terms of this Title shall be voidable at the option of the transferee in accordance with the provisions of Sections 11540 and 11540.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the State of California, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 9810 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.050 Conformance with general plan and its elements and the zoning code required.
     In all respects, any proposed division of land shall conform to the general plan and its elements, the zoning code, any specific plans, and all policies of the city, or any part thereof, including but not limited to the type, density, and intensity of use established for the site, any phasing requirements, and reservations of utility and infrastructure service capacities.

     The general plan and zoning district designations shall be adhered to in any subdivision application unless applications for amendments thereto are processed concurrently with the subdivision application. In those cases where an amendment to the general plan and/or zoning district designation is processed concurrently with the subdivision application, the parcel map or final map for any division of land may not be recorded with the county recorder until the action on the proposed amendment to the general plan and zoning district designation is final as provided for in the municipal code and state law. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.060 Prerequisite to grading and/or building permit issuance.
     Compliance with the provisions of this title and all conditions of approval are conditions precedent to the issuance of a grading and/or building permit by the city for the use, erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, removal, conversion or demolition of any building or structure on any lot or parcel of land in the city. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.070 Soils test.
     Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, all required soils tests such as compaction tests for individual lots shall be performed no more than thirty days prior to the issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.080 Availability of sewer and water capacity to serve a subdivision pursuant to this title.
     Prior to the approval of any parcel map, tentative map, or vesting tentative map pursuant to this title, proof of sewer and water capacity availability to meet the requirements of all of the proposed uses within the project area shall be submitted to the community development director. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.090 Commencement of construction work.
     Subsequent to the approval of the improvement plans, the developer has two options for commencement of construction work:

     A.    The improvements may be installed per the approved plans and then the final map may be recorded; or

     B.     Prior to installation of the improvements, a bond or other suitable financial security sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements shall be submitted to the city engineer; the developer shall enter into a subdivision agreement to be approved and accepted by the city council; and the final map is recorded. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.100 Final inspections of buildings or improvements.
     There shall be no final building inspections and no certificate of occupancy issued until all applicable conditions of approval are met to the satisfaction of the community development director and the city engineer, and all streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveway approaches, and underground utilities are in place and all required street lights are installed and connected to electrical circuits from the subdivision entrance to the lots.

     For residential subdivisions, buildings may not be occupied until the city council has approved a notice of completion to be filed and recorded for the subject subdivision. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.02.110 Maintenance of improvements.
     The city shall not maintain any streets or areas to be dedicated to the public within any subdivision when the improvements for that subdivision have not been accepted by the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.04 DEFINITIONS
18.04.010 Purpose and applicability.
     The purpose of this chapter is to ensure precision in interpretation of the words and terms used throughout this title. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout this title, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.04.020 Rules for construction and language.
     In addition to the general provisions of the municipal code, the following rules of construction shall apply:

     A.    The particular shall control the general.

     B.     Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

     1.     “And” indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.

     2.     “Or” indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

     “Either... or” indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

     C.     In case of conflict between the text and a diagram, the text shall control.

     D.    All references to departments, commissions, boards, or other public entities are to those of the city of American Canyon, unless otherwise indicated.

     E.     All references to public officials are to those of the city of American Canyon, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

     F.     All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or city holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day.

     G.    Article and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope meaning or intent of any section hereof

     H.    The present tense includes the future, and the future the present.

     I.      The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.

     J.      References in the masculine and feminine genders are interchangeable.

     K.    The words “activities” and “facilities” include any part thereof. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.04.030 Definitions.
     “Advisory agency” means the planning commission of the city of American Canyon and the advisory agency shall be as referred to in the California Subdivision Map Act.

     “Alley” means a secondary access road, typically to the rear of a building site. Alleys shall provide a minimum width of twenty feet, with all new construction set back a minimum of five feet from the right-of-way line.

     “Appeal board” means the city council of the city of American Canyon and the appeal board shall be as referred to in the California Subdivision Map Act.

     Arterial Street. As deemed in the circulation element of the general plan, arterial streets provide the principal network for traffic flow within the community. They connect areas of major activity within the urban area and function primarily as carriers of cross-town traffic. Arterial streets should be designed as four-lane facilities with maximum operating speeds ranging from thirty to forty-five miles per hour. Maximum capacity would be approximately thirty thousand vehicles per day. Arterial streets should have limited access to adjacent land uses with no back-out driveways.

     Collector Street. As defined in the circulation element of the general plan, collector streets provide access and movement between residential, commercial, and industrial areas. Their primary function is to collect and distribute traffic between local streets and the arterial system. Collector streets should be designed as two-lane facilities with maximum operating speeds of thirty miles per hour. Maximum capacity .for standard collectors would be approximately twelve thousand vehicles per day. For new developments, the use of back-out driveways should be prohibited on collector streets.

     “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel in real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

     “Dedicated easement” means an easement dedicated to and accepted by the city or another qualified and responsible agency, to be used for public purposes, including but not limited to pedestrian access ways, vehicular access, and utilities.

     “Design” includes, but is not limited to, street alignments, grades, and widths; the alignment and widths of easements and rights-of-way for drainage, sanitary sewers, water, utilities and other facilities for public use or benefit; the size, configuration, and location of park, open space, and recreation sites; and the lot area, width, depth, shape and pattern as may be required or otherwise provided for in this title, the American Canyon Municipal Code, any specific plans or planned unit development plans, and the general plan and any of its elements.

     “Final map” means a map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map is required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, prepared in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title, which is designed to be recorded with the Napa County recorder.

     “Improvements” include but are not limited to streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, utilities, water facilities, street lights, landscaping, parks, or other improvements to be installed, or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land/or land appurtenant thereto, to be used for public streets, highways, ways, easements, park and recreation facilities or as otherwise may be necessary for the general use or benefit of the lot owners in the subdivision and the surrounding area as a condition precedent to approval and acceptance of the final map, or parcel map thereof.

     Improvement also refers to such specific improvements or types of improvements the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by a combination thereof, are necessary or convenient to ensure conformity with or implementation of the general plan and any of its elements, this title, the American Canyon Municipal Code, or any specific plans or planned unit development plans.

     “Local streets” provide direct access to abutting properties and allow for very localized movement of traffic. Local streets are characterized by low daily volumes of less than two thousand vehicles per day and low operating speeds of twenty-five to thirty miles per hour.

     “Lot or parcel” means a parcel of land established or to be established by procedures as provided for in this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

     “Lot depth” means the horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front to the midpoint of the rear lot line.

     Lot Depth, Average. “Average lot depth” means the sum of the length of the two side lines of the lot divided by two. In the case of irregularly-shaped lots having four or more sides, “average lot depth” shall be the sum of the length of two lines, drawn perpendicular to the front lot line at the widest and narrowest portions of the lot, divided by two.

     Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means:

     In the case of an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street; and in the case of a corner lot, a line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street, except in those cases where the latest recorded tract deed restrictions, approved as part of a subdivision approval, specify another line as the front lot line.

     Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means a lot line which is not a front or side lot line as defined herein, which is parallel or approximately parallel to and opposite the front lot line. In the case of an irregular-shaped lot, a line within the lot most nearly parallel to and at the farthest distance from the front lot line.

     Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot line as defined herein.

     Lot Width, Average. “Average lot width” means the sum of the length of the front and rear lot line divided by two. In the case of irregularly-shaped lots having four or more sides, “average lot width” shall be the sum of the length of two lines, drawn perpendicular to one side line at the widest and narrowest portions of the lot, divided by two.

     “Owner” means the individual(s), or entity(ies), having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided, and to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under the laws of the state of California and this title.

     “Parcel map” means a map showing the division of land as described in the following cases:

     1.     Any parcel or parcels of land which is to be divided into four or fewer parcels; or

     2.     The whole parcel before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a public street and no dedications or improvements are required; or

     3.     Any parcel or parcels of land divided into lots or parcels, each of a gross area of twenty acres or more, and each of which has an approved access to a maintained public street; or

     4.     Any parcel or parcels of land divided into lots or parcels, each of which is forty acres or more; or

     5.     Any parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial development and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths, provided however, that the advisory agency may require the filing of a tentative and final map on such industrially-zoned land where it deems it in the public interest. Each map shall be filed and approved in accordance with the procedures of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

     “Pedestrian way” means an easement exclusively for pedestrian use.

     “Planting strip” means the strip of land adjacent to the back of curb line or sidewalk line, which may be used as a public utilities easement and may be a part of the lot created by the subdivision.

     “Reserve strip” means a strip of land not less than one foot in width deeded or dedicated to the city for the purpose of regulating access to a partially improved or dedicated or dead-end, alley, street or highway, or to any arterial street.

     “Subdivider” means a person(s), or entity(ies), who causes land to be subdivided into any number of parcels.

     “Subdivision” means any real property improved or unimproved, or portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, which is proposed to be divided by a subdivider, including condominiums and community apartment projects, for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or future, by any subdivider within any period. The following, however, are not subdivisions with the meaning of this title:

     1.     Financing or leasing of industrial buildings, stores, offices, apartments or similar space within a building or spaces within a trailer park;

     2.     Mineral, oil or gas leases, cemeteries.

     “Subdivision Map Act” means the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California.

     “Tentative map” means any map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it, prepared in accordance with this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

     “Vesting tentative map” means any tentative map with the words “vesting tentative map” printed conspicuously on its face prepared in accordance with this title and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.06 EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS
18.06.010 Application.
     The planning commission may recommend that the city council authorize conditional exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this title where the size, shape, topography, ownership patterns and title restrictions impose practical difficulties upon the subdivider that conformance with the provisions of this title results in an unreasonable hardship. Application for any such exception shall state fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the parcel map or tentative map of the subdivision. In order for the property referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the planning commission and/or city council shall find the following facts with respect thereto:

     A.    That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property that results in an unusual hardship to the subdivider if strict adherence to the standards of this title is required.

     B.     That the exception(s) is (are) necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the subdivider.

     C.     That the granting of the exception(s) will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity in which said property is situated. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.06.020 Public notice requirements.
     In addition to the requirements for the contents, publication, and distribution of notices of public hearings set forth in this title, the public notice for any public hearing on a subdivision for which an exception is requested shall also include a brief summary of the exception requested. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.06.030 Planning commission and city council action on exceptions.
     A.    Parcel Maps.

     1.     Prior to taking action on a parcel map for which an exception is requested, the planning commission shall hold not less than one public hearing, at which the application for exception and the grounds for granting or denying the request are considered.

     2.     The planning commission shall make the specific findings required by this title in approving, conditionally approving, or denying the exception.

     3.     The planning commission may impose any reasonable conditions deemed necessary and appropriate to secure the goals, objectives, and policies of the city in conjunction with the granting of any exception.

     B.     Tentative Maps.

     1.     Prior to taking action to forward a recommendation to the city council on a tentative map for which an exception is requested, the planning commission shall hold not less than one public hearing, at which the application for exception and the grounds for granting or denying the request are considered.

     2.     The planning commission shall make the specific findings required by this title prior to forwarding a recommendation to the city council to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the exception as a part of the tentative map.

     3.     The city council shall hold not less than one public hearing, at which the application for exception and the grounds for granting, granting with conditions, or denying the request are considered.

     4.     The city council shall make the specific findings required by this title prior to taking action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the exception as a part of the tentative map.

     5.     The city council may impose any reasonable conditions deemed necessary and appropriate to secure the goals, objectives, and policies of the city in conjunction with the granting of any exception. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.08 ENFORCEMENT
18.08.010 Penalty.
     A.    Any offer to finance, lease, sell or contract to sell, or any financing of a division of land, lease or sale contrary to the provisions of this title shall be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, corporation, partnership or co-partnership, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or any other civil penalties, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such penalties, fine, and imprisonment, and the city may seek to recover any administrative costs associated with securing compliance with this title, except that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the city of American Canyon or other political subdivision or person, firm, corporation, partnership or co-partnership may otherwise be entitled and the city of American Canyon or any other political subdivision, or person, firm, corporation, partnership or co-partnership may file an action in the Superior Court of the state of California, in and for the county of Napa to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of this title.

     B.     Any transfer or conveyance, or purported transfer or conveyance, or agreement to transfer or convey any parcel of land without compliance with the terms of this title shall be voidable at the option of the transferee in accordance with the provisions of Sections 11540 and 11540.1 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

DIVISION 2. DIVISIONS OF LAND
Chapter 18.20 TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS
18.20.010 Applicability.
     Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions, parts of subdivisions or any division of land into four or less lots. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.015 Public hearing required.
     A.    Consideration by the planning commission and city council of any tentative parcel map shall be at a duly noticed public hearing.

     B.     Notice of the place, time, and date of the public hearing and a brief description of the proposed subdivision and its location shall be according to the following procedures:

     1.     At least ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of American Canyon.

     2.     Public notice conforming to the requirements of this title shall be mailed to all properly owners within three hundred (300) feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.

     3.     A copy of the public notice shall be conspicuously posted on the site of the proposed subdivision adjacent to every public street or access way at least ten days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.020 Tentative parcel map—Data required and design.
     The preparation of any tentative parcel map shall comply with all applicable provisions of this title and at a minimum shall include the following data:

     A.    Vicinity map that depicts the location of the property from nearest arterial road. This vicinity map is for directional aid only; no scale is required;

     B.     Name and address of record owner and subdivider;

     C.     Name, address and license number of licensed land surveyor, registered civil engineer or other qualified professional who prepared said tentative map;

     D.    Date, north point (generally up on the map) and scale. Minimum scale one inch equals one hundred feet for parcels more than twenty acres and one inch equals fifty feet for parcels less than twenty acres. Minimum map size eighteen inches by twenty-six inches;

     E.     Name or number of proposed subdivision, and of all adjacent subdivisions; locations of, names and width of adjacent streets, highways, alleys and ways, and easements of all kinds, together with the type and location of street improvements including fire hydrants and street light locations;

     F.     The contour of the land at intervals of one foot of elevation up to five percent slope; two-foot intervals up to ten percent slope and five-foot intervals over ten percent slope;

     G.    Sufficient data to define the boundaries of the tract, or a legal description of the tract and border on reverse side of map to indicate tract boundaries. If multiple final maps are proposed, the tentative map shall show the probable boundaries of each final map;

     H.    Width, approximate location and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and adjacent easements adjoining such land;

     I.      The width, approximate grade and name of all streets, highways, alleys and other rights-of-way proposed within the subdivision;

     J.      The approximate radii of all curves;

     K.    All lots and condominium air spaces numbered consecutively by block throughout the entire development; the approximate dimensions of all lots; approximate lot areas should be shown for all lots not rectangular in shape;

     L.     The approximate locations of areas subject to inundation by storm water overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of all water courses existing and proposed;

     M.    The location and outline to scale of each existing building or structure including underground utilities within the subdivision, noting thereon whether or not such building or structure is to be removed from or remain in the development of the subdivision, and its existing and proposed future use;

     N.    Show elevation of street intersections;

     O.    The location, pipe size and grades of proposed sewers, water line and underground storm drains, including the proposed location of fire hydrants, street lights, gas mains, power and communication lines, and TV cables;

     P.     The location of all trees on the site over ten inches in diameter at a height of four feet from the base of the tree. Where stands of trees are located, individual trees need not be shown, but may be shown as a group;

     Q.    The location of existing fences, ditches, wells, pumps, cesspools, reservoirs, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, underground structures, utility lines or sand, gravel or other excavation within two hundred feet of any portion of the subdivision, noting thereon whether they are to be abandoned or used;

     R.     Typical street sections and details;

     S.     All major cross-sections of all cuts and fills before and after grading to determine the scope of the work involved, including estimate of contemplated earth work;

     T.     If the tentative parcel map or the final map indicates any grading which involves a removal of earthen material from the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall show the elevations of the property by contour lines. The subdivider shall file with the tentative map a written application for grading and excavation, if any, in conformity with the provisions of the municipal code. Original elevations shall be indicated by solid lines not greater than five feet, and the proposed elevations shall be shown by broken lines upon completion of the grading and excavation;

     U.    Proposed public areas, if any. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.025 Statements.
     Accompanying the tentative parcel map, or on said map, shall be statements by the subdivider as follows:

     A.    Statement of existing zoning and existing and proposed use or uses;

     B.     Statement and report on soil tests by a registered geotechnical engineer as required by this title;

     C.     Statement as to intention of subdivider to control erosion and improvements to be constructed by him, as required by this title and any other applicable ordinances of the city;

     D.    Statement indicating building setback lines;

     E.     Proposed source of water supply and method of sewage disposal;

     F.     Proposed type of tree planting and landscaping including indication of any existing trees to be removed or left in place;

     G.    Proposed public areas to be dedicated or scenic easements proposed;

     H.    Type and location of street lighting proposed in conformance with the adopted standards of the city of American Canyon;

     I.      Statement as to development of lots whether for sale as lots or fully developed homes and lot lease or financing purposes;

     J.      Preliminary title report prepared by a qualified title insurance firm;

     K.    Justification and reasons for any exceptions to provisions of this title;

     L.     The subdivider shall submit with the tentative parcel map, a copy of a letter to each serving utility and agency requesting submission of utility easement requirements and a copy of the reply of each affected utility and agency;

     M.    A geological report shall be required in any area, so determined by the city engineer, where there are known geological hazards;

     N.    Existing conditions, restrictive reservations or covenants, and any which are proposed shall be attached to the above statement;

     O.    Any additional information as may be deemed necessary by the community development director and/or city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.030 Filing requirements.
     Twenty-two copies of the tentative parcel map and any statements or other information required by this title relating to the proposed subdivision of land shall be presented to the secretary of the planning commission at least sixty days prior to the planning commission meeting, together with a fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.035 Date of filing.
     The community development director shall review all tentative parcel map applications and supporting information to determine whether all necessary information has been submitted. Within thirty days of receipt of any such map, the community development director shall notify the applicant indicating whether the application is complete. Any parts which are incomplete shall be specified and the manner in which they can be made complete shall be indicated. In the case of any subdivision which requires the preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR), negative declaration or is categorically exempt, no application shall be deemed complete until the, final decision maker has certified the EIR or negative declaration to be adequate or the project qualifies for a categorical exemption. The date upon which notice is given to the applicant that the application is complete shall be deemed the date of filing of the application; provided that, if at any stage of processing the Map, a decision maker determines that an EIR or negative declaration is required, the date of filing shall be revised to the date upon which that EIR or negative declaration is certified by the final decision maker. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.040 Distribution of copies.
     Upon the filing with the secretary of the planning commission of a tentative parcel map and the requisite number of copies, copies shall be transmitted to the following departments or officers: city manager, city attorney, city community development director, city engineer, building official, director of parks and recreation, Napa County sheriff, city clerk (seven copies), chief of the American Canyon fire protection district, the Napa County planning department, the regional water quality control board, if affected, and each serving utility. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.045 Reports.
     Each officer or department to which a tentative parcel map has been transmitted shall file with the community development director any written comments on such tentative parcel map showing what changes are recommended to make such map conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, the city of American Canyon general plan and its elements, the zoning ordinance, and this title, coming within the jurisdiction of such officer or department. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.050 Action by planning commission and city council.
     A.    The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on any tentative parcel map within sixty days of the date the application is deemed complete, unless this time period is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director. The planning commission shall be notified of any extension of time agreed upon and the reasons for the extension.

     B.     The planning commission shall determine whether a tentative parcel map is in conformity with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title, the general plan and its elements, and the zoning ordinance and upon that basis approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove said map, and shall report such action directly to the city council and the subdivider.

     C.     The action of the planning commission on a tentative parcel map is final unless appealed to the city council or the city council, at the request of three of its members, desires to review the decision of the planning commission. Any appeal of a planning commission decision must be filed with the city clerk within ten working days of the decision being rendered. The city council must act to review the decision of the planning commission at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council.

     D.    If the action of the planning commission is appealed to the city council or, the city council on the affirmative vote of three of its members desires to review the decision of the planning commission, a public hearing shall be held no later than thirty days after planning commission action on the tentative parcel map unless this time period is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director and/or city manager. The city council shall be notified of any extension of time agreed upon and the reasons for the extension. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.055 Findings for denial of a tentative subdivision map.
     The planning commission shall not approve a tentative parcel map if it makes any of the following findings:

     A.    That the proposed tentative parcel map is not consistent with the city's general plan or its elements or other applicable plans;

     B.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the city's general plan or its elements or any other applicable plans;

     C.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development proposed;

     D.    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development proposed;

     E.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

     F.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     G.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a tentative parcel map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to one previously acquired by the public.

     This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to the city council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

     H.    That the discharge of waste water, including sewage and stormwater runoff, from the proposed subdivision would result in a violation of existing water quality requirements prescribed by the regional water quality control board. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.20.060 Expiration and extensions of time.
     A.    Except as may be provided for herein, a final parcel map shall be submitted for processing within twenty-four months from the date of final action by the city council to approve or conditionally approve a tentative map.

     B.     Where the city engineer determines that a subdivider is required to expend one hundred twenty-five or more to construct or improve public facilities outside the boundaries of the tentative parcel map that are reasonably related to the proposed development on said site, a final parcel map shall be submitted for processing within thirty-six months from the date of final action by the city council to approve or conditionally approve a tentative parcel map.

 

     C.     The city council may extend the expiration date of any tentative parcel map for not more than twelve months at any one time.

     D.    A maximum of three such extensions permitted by subsection C of this section may be granted.

     E.     All actions of the city council to extend a tentative parcel map shall be at a duly noticed public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.22 TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS
18.22.010 Applicability.
     Except as otherwise provided for in this title, the procedures set forth in this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions, parts of subdivisions or any division of land into five or more lots. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.015 Public hearing required.
     A.    Consideration by the planning commission and city council of any tentative subdivision map shall be at a duly noticed public hearing.

     B.     Notice of the place, time, and date of the public hearing and a brief description of the proposed subdivision and its location shall be according to the following procedures:

     1.     At least ten days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city of American Canyon.

     2.     Public notice conforming to the requirements of this title shall be mailed to all property owners within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the proposed subdivision.

     3.     A copy of the public notice shall be conspicuously posted on the site of the proposed subdivision adjacent to every public street or access way at least ten days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.020 Tentative subdivision map—Data required and design.
     The preparation of a tentative subdivision map or maps shall comply with all applicable provision of this title and at a minimum shall include the following data:

     A.    Vicinity map that depicts the location of the property from nearest arterial road. This vicinity map is for directional aid only; no scale is required;

     B.     Name and address of record owner and subdivider;

     C.     Name, address and license number of licensed land surveyor, registered civil engineer or other qualified professionals who prepared said tentative map;

     D.    Date, north point (generally up on the map) and scale. Minimum scale one inch equals one hundred feet for parcels more than twenty acres and one inch equals fifty feet for parcels less than twenty acres. Minimum map size eighteen inches by twenty-six inches;

     E.     Name or number of proposed subdivision, and of all adjacent subdivisions; locations of, names and width of adjacent streets, highways, alleys and ways, and easements of all kinds, together with the type and location of street improvements including fire hydrants and street light locations;

     F.     The contour of the land at intervals of one foot of elevation up to five percent slope; two-foot intervals up to ten percent slope and five-foot intervals over ten percent slope;

     G.    Sufficient data to define the boundaries of the tract, or a legal description of the tract and border on reverse side of map to indicate tract boundaries. If multiple final maps are proposed, the tentative map shall show the probable boundaries of each final map;

     H.    Width, approximate location and purpose of all existing and proposed easements and adjacent easements adjoining such land;

     I.      The width, approximate grade and name of all streets, highways, alleys and other rights-of-way proposed within the subdivision;

     J.      The approximate radii of all curves;

     K.    All lots and condominium air spaces numbered consecutively by block throughout the entire development; the approximate dimensions of all lots; approximate lot areas should be shown for all lots not rectangular in shape;

     L.     The approximate locations of areas subject to inundation by storm water overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of all water courses existing and proposed;

     M.    The location and outline to scale of each existing building or structure including underground utilities within the subdivision, noting thereon whether or not such building or structure is to be removed from or remain in the development of the subdivision, and its existing and proposed future use;

     N.    Show elevation of street intersections;

     O.    The location, pipe size and grades of proposed sewers, water line and underground storm drains, including the proposed location of fire hydrants, street lights, gas mains, power and communication lines, and TV cables;

     P.     The location of all trees on the site over ten inches in diameter at a height of four feet from the base of the tree. Where stands of trees are located, individual trees need not be shown, but may be shown as a group;

     Q.    The location of existing fences, ditches, wells, pumps, cesspools, reservoirs, sewers, culverts, drain pipes, underground structures, utility lines or sand, gravel or other excavation within two hundred feet of any portion of the subdivision, noting thereon whether they are to be abandoned or used;

     R.     Typical street sections and details;

     S.     All major cross-sections of all cuts and fills before and after grading to determine the scope of the work involved, including estimate of contemplated earth work;

     T.     If the tentative subdivision map or the final map indicates any grading which involves a removal of earthen material from the proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall show the elevations of the property by contour lines. The subdivider shall file with the tentative subdivision map a written application for grading and excavation, if any, in conformity with the provisions of the municipal code. Original elevations shall be indicated by solid lines not greater than five feet, and the proposed elevations shall be shown by broken lines upon completion of the grading and excavation;

     U.    Proposed public areas, if any. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.025 Statements.
     Accompanying the tentative subdivision map, or on said map, shall be statements by the subdivider as follows:

     A.    Statement of existing zoning and existing and proposed use or uses;

     B.     Statement and report on soil tests by a registered geotechnical engineer as required by this title;

     C.     Statement as to intention of subdivider to control erosion and improvements to be constructed by him, as required by this title and any other applicable ordinances of the city;

     D.    Statement indicating building setback lines;

     E.     Proposed source of water supply and method of sewage disposal;

     F.     Proposed type of tree planting and landscaping including indication of any existing trees to be removed or left in place;

     G.    Proposed public areas to be dedicated or scenic easements proposed;

     H.    Type and location of street lighting proposed in conformance with the adopted standards of the city of American Canyon;

     I.      Statement as to development of lots whether for sale as lots or fully developed homes and lot lease or financing purposes;

     J.      Preliminary title report prepared by a qualified title insurance firm;

     K.    Justification and reasons for any exceptions to provisions of this title;

     L.     The subdivider shall submit with the tentative subdivision map, a copy of a letter to each serving utility and agency requesting submission of utility easement requirements and a copy of the reply of each affected utility and agency;

     M.    A geological report shall be required in any area, so determined by the city engineer, where there are known geological hazards;

     N.    Existing conditions, restrictive reservations or covenants and any which are proposed shall be attached to the above statement;

     O.    Any additional information as may be deemed necessary by the community development director. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.030 Filing requirements.
     Twenty-two copies of the tentative subdivision map and any statements or other information required by this title relating to the proposed subdivision of land shall be presented to the secretary of the planning commission at least sixty days prior to the planning commission meeting, together with a fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.035 Date of filing.
     The community development director shall review all tentative subdivision map applications and supporting information to determine whether all necessary information has been submitted. Within thirty days of receipt of any such map, the community development director shall notify the applicant indicating whether the application is complete. Any parts which are incomplete shall be specified and the manner in which they can be made complete shall be indicated. In the case of any subdivision which requires the preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR), negative declaration or is categorically exempt, no application shall be deemed complete until the final decision maker has certified the EIR or negative declaration to be adequate or the project qualifies for a categorical exemption. The date upon which notice is given to the applicant that the application is complete shall be deemed the date of filing of the application; provided that, if at any stage of processing the map, a decision maker determines that an EIR or negative declaration is required, the date of filing shall be revised to the date upon which that EIR or negative declaration is certified by the final decision maker. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.040 Distribution of copies.
     Upon the filing with the secretary of the planning commission of a tentative subdivision map and the requisite number of copies, copies shall be transmitted to the following departments or officers: city manager, city attorney, city community development director, city engineer, building official, director of parks and recreation, Napa County sheriff, city clerk (seven copies), chief of the American Canyon fire protection district, the regional water quality control board, if affected, and each serving utility. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.045 Reports.
     Each officer or department to which a tentative subdivision map has been transmitted shall file with the community development director any written comments on such tentative parcel map showing what changes are recommended to make such map conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, the city of American Canyon general plan and its elements, the zoning ordinance, and this title, coming within the jurisdiction of such officer or department. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.050 Action by planning commission and city council.
     A.    The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on any tentative parcel map within fifty days of the date the application is deemed complete and either an EIR has been certified, a negative declaration has been adopted, a determination has been made by the community development director that the project is exempt from CEQA or unless this time period is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director. The planning commission shall be notified of any extension of time agreed upon and the reasons for the extension.

     B.     The planning commission shall determine whether a tentative parcel map is in conformity with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title, the general plan and its elements, and the zoning ordinance and upon that basis adopt a resolution forwarding its recommendation to the city council that the tentative subdivision map be approved, conditionally approved or denied, and shall forward the resolution directly to the city council and the subdivider.

     C.     The city council shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative parcel map no later than thirty days after planning commission action on the tentative parcel map unless this time period is extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director and/or city manager. The city council shall be notified of any extension of time agreed upon and the reasons for the extension. (Ord. 99-08 § 1, 1999; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.055 Findings for denial of a tentative subdivision map.
     The planning commission shall not recommend approval and the city council shall not approve a tentative subdivision map if any of the following findings are made:

     A.    That the proposed tentative subdivision map is not consistent with the city’s general plan or its elements or other applicable plans;

     B.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the city’s general plan or its elements or any other applicable plans;

     C.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development proposed;

     D.    That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development proposed;

     E.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

     F.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     G.    That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the city council may approve a tentative subdivision map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to one previously acquired by the public.

     This subsection shall apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted to the city council to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision;

     H.    That the discharge of waste water, including sewage and stormwater runoff, from the proposed subdivision would result in a violation of existing water quality requirements prescribed by the regional water quality control board. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.22.060 Expiration and extensions of time.
     A.    Except as may be provided for herein, a final map shall be submitted for processing within twenty-four months from the date of final action by the city council to approve or conditionally approve a tentative map.

     B.     Where the city engineer determines that a subdivider is required to expend one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct or improve public facilities outside the boundaries of the tentative subdivision map that are reasonably related to the proposed development on said site, a final map shall be submitted for processing within thirty-six months from the date of final action by the city council to approve or conditionally approve a tentative subdivision map.

     C.     The city council may extend the expiration date of any tentative subdivision map for not more than twelve months at any one time.

     D.    A maximum of three such extensions permitted by subsection (C) of this section may be granted.

     E.     All actions of the city council to extend a tentative subdivision map shall be at a duly noticed public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.24 VESTING TENTATIVE PARCEL AND SUBDIVISION MAPS
18.24.010 Citation and authority.
     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map statute) and may be cited as the vesting tentative map ordinance. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.015 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and the Subdivision Ordinance. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the subdivision ordinance shall apply to the vesting tentative map ordinance. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.020 Consistency.
     No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or any of its elements, any applicable specific plan or planned unit development, the zoning ordinance, or any other applicable provisions of this title or the city municipal code. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.025 Definitions.
     A.    A “vesting tentative map” means a tentative map for a residential subdivision that has printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed in accordance with this title and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions hereof.

     B.     All other definitions set forth in the subdivision ordinance are applicable. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.030 Application.
     A.    This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and supplemented by this title requires the filing of a tentative parcel map or a tentative subdivision map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may be filed instead in accordance with the provisions hereof.

     B.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.035 Filing and processing.
     A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map except it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words, “vesting tentative map.” (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.040 Fees.
     Upon the filing of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees required for the filing and processing of a tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.045 Public hearing required.
     Consideration by the planning commission and city council of any tentative parcel or subdivision map shall be at a duly noticed public hearing. Notice of the place, time, and date of the public hearing and a brief description of the proposed subdivision and its location shall be according to the applicable procedures of tentative subdivision maps or tentative parcel maps as set forth in this title. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.050 Expiration and extensions of time.
     A.    Except as may be provided for herein, a final map shall be submitted for processing within twenty-four months from the date of final action by the planning commission and/or city council to approve or conditionally approve a vesting tentative map.

     B.     Where the city engineer determines that a subdivider is required to expend one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct or improve public facilities outside the boundaries of the vesting tentative map that are reasonably related to the proposed development on said vesting tentative map site, a final map shall be submitted for processing within thirty-six months from the date of final action by the planning commission and/or city council to approve or conditionally approve a vesting tentative map.

     C.     The city council may extend the expiration date of any vesting tentative map for not more than allowed under the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

     D.    All actions of the city council to extend a vesting tentative map shall be at a duly noticed public hearing in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.24.055 Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map.
     A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

     1.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both;

     2.     The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.

     C.     The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided for in this title and the Subdivision Map Act. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:

     1.     An initial time period of one year from the date of recording the final map. Where final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded;

     2.     The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section, shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty days, from the date a complete application is filed;

     3.     A subdivider may apply to the city council for a one-year extension at any time before the expiration of the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section;

     4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.26 FINAL MAPS
18.26.010 Filing.
     A.    Within twenty-four months after approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map or vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall cause the subdivision or any substantial part thereof, to be surveyed and a final map prepared in conformance with the tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map as approved or conditionally approved, otherwise all approvals of the tentative map shall expire.

     B.     The tracing and two blue line or black line prints of the final map shall be filed with the city engineer together with a map checking fee set by resolution of the city council to be paid to the city engineer. A permanent, reproducible copy of the final map shall also be submitted. Prior to the recording of the final map with the county recorder, this permanent reproducible final map shall bear all required signatures and the civil engineers wet stamp.

     C.     An extension of time, up to three additional years, for the filing of a final map may be granted by the city council, provided that written application for such extension is made by the subdivider prior to expiration of the tentative map or vesting tentative map.

     D.    At the time of the filing of the final map with the city engineer, the subdivider shall also file therewith the following:

     1.     A recordable instrument prohibiting traffic over the side lines of a major highway, parkway, street or freeway, when and if required under the provisions of this title. A dedication of a planting strip may be accepted as a satisfactory alternative.

     2.     A copy of the deed restrictions applicable to the subdivision.

     3.     Sheets or drawings showing traverse closures and the computation of all distances, angles and courses shown on the final map, ties to existing and proposed monuments, and adjacent subdivisions, street corners, and/or highway stations.

     4.     Two copies of infrastructure improvement plans.

     5.     Subdivision agreement.

     6.     The resolution of the planning commission and/or city council and all conditions of approval.

     7.     A title report. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.26.015 Form of final map.
     The final map, when submitted, shall comply with the following:

     A.    The final map shall be clearly and legibly drawn upon reproducible mylar. All lines, letters, figures, certifications, acknowledgments and signatures shall be made in black India ink. Typewriting or rubber stamps shall not be used. The map shall be so made and shall be in such condition when filed that good legible blueprints and negatives can be made. The size of the sheets of reproducible mylar shall be eighteen by twenty-six inches leaving a margin of two inches at the left edge and one (1) inch at the other three edges of the sheets. The scale of the final map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.

     B.     When the final map consists of more than two sheets, the relation of sheets shall be indicated by note. Every sheet comprising the map shall bear the scale, north point, legend, sheet number and number of sheets comprising the map.

     C.     The final map shall be tied to the state of California Coordinate System. The final map shall show clearly what stakes, monuments or other evidence found on the ground or were set to determine the boundaries of the subdivision. The corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision name and place of record, and other proper designation.

     D.    Sufficient data must be shown to determine readily the bearing and length of every lot line, block line and boundary line and shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot. No ditto marks shall be used. Lots containing one acre or more shall show total acreage to nearest hundredth. Bearing and lengths of straight lines, and radii and arc length for all curves as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and tangent points shall be shown. No lot shall be dimensioned to contain any part of an existing or proposed public right-of-way.

     E.     The final map shall show the location and description of all monuments found in making the survey of the subdivision.

     F.     In addition, the final map shall be prepared in full compliance with the following requirements:

     1.     The final map shall show the line of high water for the one hundred year flood where the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel or any body of water and shall also show any area subject to periodic inundation by water.

     2.     The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a blue border. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data.

     3.     The final map shall show the lines of all streets, the total width of all streets, the width of the portion being dedicated and the width of existing dedications, also the width of any railroad rights-of-way, appearing on the map. Each street shall be named.

     4.     The final map shall show the side lines of all easements to which the lots are subject. The easements must be clearly labeled and identified and if already of record, its recorded reference given. If any easement is not definitely located of record, a statement of such easement must appear on the title sheet. Easements for storm drain, sewers and other purposes shall be denoted by dashed lines. The width of the easement and sufficient ties thereto to definitely locate the easement with respect to the subdivision must be shown. If the easement is being dedicated by the map, it shall be properly referenced in the owner’s certificates of dedication.

     5.     City boundary lines crossing or bounding the subdivision shall be clearly designated and referenced.

     6.     Lot numbers shall begin with the number “1” in each block and shall be numbered in a clockwise direction from the upper left hand corner; north shall be generally up on the final map.

     7.     Block numbers shall begin with the number “1” continuing consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the subdivision. The numbers or letters shall be solid and of sufficient size and thickness to stand out, shall be so placed as not to obliterate any fixture and shall be enclosed in a circle. Where adjoining blocks appear on separate sheets, the street adjoining both blocks shall be shown on both sheets with complete property line data.

     8.     The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots and condominium air spaces intended for sale or reserved for private purposes, all parcels offered for dedication for any purpose, public or private, with all dimensions, boundaries, and courses clearly shown and defined in every case. Parcels offered for dedication but not accepted shall be designated by letter.

     9.     The final map shall also show all other data that is or may be required by law, and any additional information that may be required by the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.26.020 Certificates and tax bond.
     The following certificates and acknowledgments and all other now or hereafter required by law shall appear on the final map or shall be otherwise made. Such certificates may be combined where appropriate.

     A.    Certification of owner(s) of record. Except as may be noted in subsection (B) of this section, a certificate signed and acknowledged by the owner or owners of record.

     B.     Exceptions to Owners Certification. The signatures of parties owning the following types of interest may be omitted if their names and the nature of their interests are set forth on the map:

     1.     Rights-of-way, easements or other interest none of which can ripen into a fee.

     2.     Rights-of-way, easements or reversions, which by reason of changed conditions, long disuse or laches appear to be no longer of practical use or value and which signature it is impossible or impractical to obtain. In this case, a reasonable statement of the circumstances preventing the procurement of the signature shall be set forth on the map.

     3. Any subdivision map including land/originally patented by the United States or the state of California, under patent reserving interest to either or both of these entities, may be recorded under the provision of this code without the consent of the United States or the state of California thereto, or to dedication made thereon.

     C.     Dedication Certificate. A certificate signed and acknowledged as above irrevocably offering for dedication all parcels of land shown on the final map and intended for any public use, except those parcels other than streets, which are intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants.

     D.    Design Engineer’s Certificate. A certificate by the registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor responsible for the survey and final map. The signature of such civil engineer or surveyor must be accompanied by his seal, and include date of license expiration.

     E.     City Engineer or Surveyor Certification. A certificate for execution by the city engineer including his state license number and date of expiration of the license.

     F.     City Clerk’s Certification. A certificate for execution by the city clerk stating that the governing body approved the final map and accepted, subject to improvement, or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.

     G.    County Recorder’s Certificate. A certificate for execution by the county recorder.

     H.    County Tax Collector and Redemption Officer Certificate. Prior to the filing of the final map with the governing body, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the board of supervisors of Napa County a certificate from the official computing redemptions in Napa County and the city of American Canyon, showing that according to the records of his office, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part thereof for unpaid state, county, municipal, or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments not yet payable. As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable, the subdivider shall file with the clerk of the board of supervisors a certificate by each proper officer giving his estimate of the amount of taxes and assessments which are a lien but which are not yet payable.

     I.      Clerk of the Board of Supervisor’s Tax and Assessment Certificate. Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the board of supervisors of Napa County a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the board and by its terms made to inure to the benefit of the county and conditioned upon the payment of all state, county, municipal and local taxes and all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. In lieu of a bond, a deposit may be made of money or negotiable bonds in the same amount, and of the kind approved for securing deposits of public money.

     J.      Reapportionments. Where any property is encumbered by assessments or similar instruments secured by the property, the subdivider shall prepare or cause to be prepared any assessment reapportionments necessary for the parcel. The reapportionments shall conform to the lots created by the subdivision such that each lot shall be a separate reapportionment. Prior to recording the final map, the subdivider shall submit any and all completed reapportionment diagrams and legal documents to the city engineer for review, distribution, and recording. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.26.025 Action on final map.
     A.    Approval by City Engineer. Upon receipt of the final map and other data, the map and data shall be referred to the city engineer who shall determine whether the subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map or vesting tentative map, with any approved alterations, and that all provisions of the conditions of approval and this title applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map or vesting tentative map have been complied with, and that he is satisfied that the map is technically correct. If the city engineer determines that full conformity has not been made, he shall advise the subdivider of the changes or additions. If the city engineer determines that full conformity has been made, he shall so certify on the map and transmit the map to the city clerk.

     B.     Approval by City Council. At its first regular meeting following the filing of said map with the city clerk as aforesaid, or within thirty days following the filing thereof, the city council shall consider said map, the plan of subdivision and the offers of dedication. The city council may reject any or all offers of dedication.

     1.     If the city council determines that said map is in conformity with the requirements of the conditions of approval and this title and that it is satisfied with the plan of subdivision, it shall approve said map provided it is in conformity with the tentative map. When the subdivider has filed with the city clerk any agreement and bonds or deposits required, and when such agreement and bonds and deposits shall have been approved by the city attorney and the city engineer, the city clerk shall certify the map. When all bonds, money or negotiable bonds required under the provisions of this code to secure the payment of taxes and assessments which are a lien on some part of the subdivision but which are not yet payable have been deposited with and approved by the city clerk, (s)he shall transmit the final map to the subdivider to record it in the office of the county recorder.

     2.     If the city council determines that the map is not in conformity with the requirements of this chapter and the Map Act, it shall disapprove said map specifying its reason or reasons therefor and the city clerk shall, in writing, advise the subdivider of such disapproval and of the reason or reasons for such disapproval.

     3.     Within thirty days after the city council has disapproved any map, the subdivider may file a map altered to meet for approval of the city council. No map shall have any force or effect until the final map has been approved by the city council and recorded in the office of the county recorder, and no title to any property described in any offer of dedication shall pass until the recording of the final map. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.26.030 Subdivision agreement and performance—Payment—Warrantee bond for improvements required.
     A.    Prior to city council consideration of the final map, the subdivider shall execute a subdivision agreement between himself and the city. The agreement shall provide for installation of all improvements as shown on the approved plans and specifications for the project, and specify the period of time within which he or his agent or contractor shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer. In the event the subdivider fails to complete such work within said period, the agreement shall include provisions for the city to complete all improvements and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. Such agreement may also provide the following:

     1.     For the construction of the improvements in phases, if applicable and approved by the city council;

     2.     For an extension of time under conditions therein specified;

     3.     For the termination of the agreement upon the completion of proceedings under an assessment district act for the construction of improvements deemed by the city engineer to be at least the equivalent of the improvements specified in said agreement and required to be constructed by the subdivider.

     B.     The subdivider shall also file with the aforesaid agreement, to assure his full and faithful-performance, a financial security for such sum as is deemed sufficient by the city engineer to cover the cost of said improvements and incidental expenses and to cover replacement and repair of existing streets, other improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision, and to cover fees. A labor and materials bond and a separate warrantee bond in amounts satisfactory to the city engineer are also required. Such bonds shall be executed by a surety company authorized to transact a surety business in the state of California and must be satisfactory to and approved by the city attorney as to form and by the city engineer as to sufficiency. In lieu of said bond, the subdivider may deposit with the city treasurer cash in an amount fixed by the city engineer.

     C.     In the event the subdivider fails to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this title, and the city completes it, or if the subdivider fails to reimburse the city for the cost of inspection, engineering and incidental expenses for the work performed, and to cover the cost of replacement and repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision, the city shall call on the surety for reimbursement, or shall appropriate from any cash deposit funds for reimbursement. If the amount of the surety bond or cash deposit is less than all costs and expenses incurred by the city, the subdivider shall be liable to the city for such difference and applicable attorney’s fees.

     D.    No extension of time, progress payments from cash deposits, or releases of surety bond or cash deposit shall be made except upon certification by the city engineer that work covered thereby has been satisfactorily completed, and upon approval of the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.26.035 Revocation of approvals.
     If no lots in a subdivision for which a final map has been approved and recorded under this title prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title have been sold within five years from the date of recording of the maps or if none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date of recording, the city council may on its own motion hold a public hearing, after notice to all property owners affected to determine whether the approval of such final map should be revoked. If it is determined that such approval should be revoked, the city council shall by resolution revoke such approval without prejudice to the filing of a new map pursuant to this chapter. Such revocation shall be effective upon recording of a certified copy of such resolution in Napa County and thereupon all streets, ways and other easements dedicated or offered for dedication by such map shall be of no further force or effect. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.28 LOT MERGERS AND REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
18.28.010 Merger of parcels.
     Two or more parcels of real property may be merged by the planning commission when the following conditions are met:

     A.    The parcels are contiguous;

     B.     The parcels have the same ownership as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded;

     C.     At least one of the parcels is nonconforming, having an area less than the minimum prescribed area for the zoning district in which they are located;

     D.    At least one of the parcels is either:

     1.     Undeveloped, having no structure on it for which a building permit is required (at the time of notice of intention to determine status), or

     2.     Developed only with an accessory building, or

     3.     Developed with a structure for which a building permit is required at the time of notice of determination of status, located partially on it, and partially on the contiguous parcel;

     E.     At least one or more of the conditions exist with respect to any affected parcel, at the time of notice of determination of status:

     1.     It comprises less than five thousand square feet in area,

     2.     It was not created in conformance with applicable laws and/ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

     3.     It does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

     4.     It does not meet slope stability standards,

     5.     It has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability,

     6.     Its development would create health or safety hazards,

     7.     It is inconsistent with the general plan, and any specific plan for reasons other than minimum parcel size or density standards. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.28.015 Notification of intention to determine status.
     A.    A written notice shall be sent to the owner(s) of the parcels affected, notifying them of the city’s intention to determine status and describing the procedure and standards, as set forth herein, for merger to occur.

     B.     The notice of intention shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested to the owner(s) of the affected parcels.

     C.     A copy of the notice of intention shall be recorded with the county recorder of Napa County on the same date the notice is mailed to the property owner(s).

     D.    The written notice of intention shall advise the owner(s) that a hearing before the planning commission may be requested, within thirty days of the date of said notice, by written application to the city’s community development director to determine the status of the affected parcels, and to present evidence that the said parcels do not meet the standards for merger.

     E.     Upon receiving an application for hearing on determination of status, the community development director shall place the matter within sixty days on the planning commission agenda and shall send the property owner(s) notice of the time and place of hearing, by certified mail, return receipt requested.

 

     F.     All written notices shall be sent to the owner(s) of the affected parcels as they appear on the last tax assessor’s roll in Napa County. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.28.020 Hearing to determine status re merger.
     A.    The planning commission shall receive evidence from the community development director as to the affected property meeting the standards for merger, and shall allow the property owner(s) the opportunity to rebut said evidence, and to present any evidence that the affected property should or should not be merged. At the end of the hearing the planning commission shall make a determination whether the affected parcels do or do not meet the standards for merger and should be merged. The community development director shall, within thirty days of the decision, send written notice thereof to the affected property owners.

     B.     If the planning commission determines the parcels are to be merged, the community development director shall within thirty days of the decision, have recorded with the Napa County recorder a “notice of merger” describing the real property, the owners, and the planning commission action.

     C.     If the planning commission determines that the parcels shall not be merged the community development director shall, within thirty days of the decision have recorded with the Napa County recorder a release of the notice of intention to merge.

     D.    The merger of the affected parcels becomes effective on the recordation of the notice of merger. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.28.025 Determination of status re merger when no hearing requested.
     If within the thirty-day period specified in Section 18.28.020(A) of this chapter the owner(s) of affected parcels do not request a hearing under said section, the community development director shall place the matter on the planning commission agenda and the planning commission shall determine whether the parcels affected shall be merged or not. The community development director shall provide notice of the planning commission action to the property owner(s) affected, and record either a notice of merger, or release of notice of intention to merge, whichever is appropriate, in accordance with the procedures in Section 18.28.020 of this chapter. The notice of merger, or release of notice of intention to merge must be recorded with the Napa County recorder within ninety days of the mailing and recording of the initial notice of intention to merge. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.28.030 Exception to merger.
     Parcels otherwise eligible for merger under the provisions of this title shall be exempt if one of the following conditions exists:

     A.    On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels is enforceably restricted open space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open-space easement, as defined and set forth in Section 421 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

     B.     On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous parcels is timberland as defined in Subdivision (f) of Section 51104 of the Government Code, or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in Section 51201(b) of the Government Code. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.28.035 Reversion to acreage.
     A reversion to acreage shall be accomplished in conformance with Chapter 6 of the Subdivision Map Act. A tentative parcel map may be filed for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four or less contiguous parcels under one ownership. All maps filed for the purpose of reverting land to acreage shall be conspicuously so designated under the title “The purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage.” (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.30 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
18.30.010 Purpose.
     A lot line adjustment is a transfer of land between two or more existing adjacent parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.015 Filing.
     Where permitted by the provisions of this title, a lot line adjustment application shall be prepared and filed with the community development director together on a form supplied by the city and the payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council. The applicant shall submit:

     A.    Name, address, phone number and signatures of the record owners of all lots involved;

     B.     Name, address, phone number and signature of the person filing the lot line adjustment;

     C.     Name, address, phone number and signature of the licensed land surveyor or registered civil engineer who prepared the lot line adjustment;

     D.    Title report, legal description, assessor parcel number, and address of each lot as it exists before adjustment;

     E.     Legal description of each lot as it will exist after adjustment;

     F.     A clear and accurate map, suitable for filing with the county recorder, showing the proposed lot line adjustment which shall include:

     1.     An appropriate scale approved by the city engineer, in black ink, on paper eight and one-half inches by eleven inches or larger,

     2.     Date of preparation, scale, and north arrow,

     3.     Sufficient data to accurately determine the lot boundaries,

     4.     The dimensions of each lot and the area of each lot. Lot areas shall be given in square feet if they are less than one acre, in acres if they are one acre or more,

     5.     Existing property lines shown in solid lines, proposed property lines shown in dashed lines,

     6.     Width, location, and purpose of all existing and proposed easements;

     G.    A clear and accurate supplementary map, showing the lots as they will exist after the lot line adjustment which shall include:

     1.     The locations of areas subject to flood or inundation by a one hundred year flood,

     2.     The location of any water wells or water services,

     3.     The location of any septic tanks, drain or leech fields and expansion areas, or sewer services,

     4.     Contour lines shown at no more than ten-foot intervals,

     5.     The location of driveways or access/egress improvements,

     6.     Any reasonable additional information required by the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.020 CEQA applicability.
     Where the average slope of the land involved in the lot line adjustment exceeds twenty percent, an environmental assessment fee shall also be collected at the time of application. The community development director shall review the application to determine if the lot line adjustment is exempt from the provisions of CEQA. If the project is not exempt, an initial study shall be conducted to determine whether a negative declaration shall be issued or an environmental impact report shall be required. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.025 Responsible staff and agency review required.
     Prior to taking any action on an application for a lot line adjustment, the community development director shall transmit a copy of the lot line adjustment application and maps to the city engineer, building official, American Canyon fire protection district, police chief, city clerk, and to each public utility serving the general area of the proposed lot line adjustment. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.030 Criteria for review and approval.
     A.    Each lot line adjustment application shall be reviewed with regard to the following criteria:

     1.     In residential, commercial, and industrial districts, the application shall be evaluated for the suitability of building sites created by the lot line adjustment.

     2.     All applications shall be evaluated for the provision for adequate pedestrian and vehicle access and emergency vehicle access to each lot that may be effected by the lot line adjustment.

     3.     Existing legal nonconforming lots shall be evaluated to assure that the lot line adjustment does not increase the degree or extent of nonconformity.

     4.     Each effected staff member or agency shall review the proposed lot line adjustment to determine the adequacy of existing easements and if necessary, shall make specific recommendations as to their requirements for additional easements, modifications to any existing easements, or the need for new easements.

     B.     The community development director, with the aid of responsible staff and/or public utility or agency shall review the lot line adjustment and shall enter a written report into the project record. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.035 Limitation on review and approval.
     A.    Except as may be provided for herein, consideration of any lot line adjustment by the community development director shall be a ministerial action, not requiring public notice or a public hearing.

     B.     Review and approval shall be limited to a determination of whether or not the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to local zoning and building ordinances, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.

     C.     Reasonable conditions may be imposed to ensure that the lots subject to the application conform to any applicable zoning and building codes.

     D.    No tentative subdivision map, tentative parcel map, or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. The lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed and a map, which shall be recorded.

     E.     No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.040 Planning commission review option.
     A.    In the case of a complicated or controversial lot line adjustment, the community development director may elect to refer the application to the planning commission for their review and decision making.

     B.     The planning commission shall not consider the lot line adjustment until after the community development director has submitted the proposal to all responsible staff and agencies as provided for herein. The community development director shall make a report and recommendation, and present it to the planning commission.

     C.     Consideration of a lot line adjustment by the planning commission shall be a ministerial action not requiring public notice or a public hearing. However, the item shall appear on the duly posted meeting agenda. The planning commission shall not preclude appropriate and relevant public testimony. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.045 Action on a lot line adjustment.
     The community development director or planning commission shall determine whether the lot line adjustment is in conformity with the general plan and its elements, the local coastal plan, the zoning ordinance, and Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. Upon this basis they shall, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the lot line adjustment. The community development director or planning commission shall report such action, in writing, to the applicant. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.050 Appeal of staff or planning commission action.
     Appeal from the action of staff shall be to the planning commission, and shall be filed within ten calendar days of the decision being rendered. An appeal of a decision of the planning commission shall be to the city council and must be made in writing by the applicant within fifteen days from the date of mailing of notice of action. The payment of fee for the appeal as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.055 City council action on an appeal.
     The city council shall hear any appeal of a decision of the planning commission promptly as provided for in this title. The city council may sustain, overrule, or modify the action of staff or the planning commission. Any action of the city council to overrule or modify the action of the community development director or planning commission shall be based upon the criteria specified in this chapter. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.30.060 Recordation required.
     The deeds, maps, and legal descriptions shall not be recorded until all conditions of approval have been met or bonded for, as appropriate. The lot line adjustment shall be effective when the deeds and legal restrictions have been recorded. No building permit shall be issued for development on any lot which is a part of a lot line adjustment prior to recordation. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.32 CONVERSION PROJECTS—RESIDENTIAL
18.32.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this section is alleviate the adverse impact that condominium conversions will have on the city’s ability to meet its affordable housing requirement; to promote greater individual choice in type, quality, price and location of housing; to provide for the housing needs of all segments of the population; to provide increased homeownership opportunities for all segments of the population; to mitigate the hardship caused by displacement of tenants, particularly those in low to moderate cost housing and those who are elderly, families with minor dependent children, the handicapped and the disabled; to promote the safety of conversion projects and correction of building code violations in such projects; to provide adequate off-street parking; to encourage construction of new rental units to replace units lost due to conversions; to protect the existing rental housing stock by reducing conversions; to provide increased opportunities for the ownership of commercial or industrial real property in the form of condominiums or stock cooperatives; to assure that the continued use of buildings for commercial or industrial purposes is substantially consistent with the city’s general plan (the “general plan”); and to generally regulate projects in accordance with the general plan and with the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all tentative maps and preliminary parcel maps as to which the advisory agency has not rendered a decision on the date the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes effective, except as otherwise expressly stated in this section. For purposes of this section, a decision is rendered on the date of the advisory agency’s public hearing and announced decision, or where no such decision is announced, the date of mailing of the advisory agency’s letter of decision and findings to the applicant. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.030 Definitions.
     The following terms used in this section are defined below.

     “Advisory agency” means the city planning commission.

     “Apartment” means the same as dwelling unit.

     “Apartment hotel” means a residential building designed or used for both two or more dwelling units and six or more guest rooms or suites of rooms.

     “Apartment house” means a residential building designed or used for three or more dwelling units or a combination of three or more dwelling units and not more than five guest rooms or suites of rooms.

     “Community apartment project” means the same as defined by Section 11004 of the California Business and Professions Code.

     “Condominium” means the same as defined by Section 783 of the California Civil Code.

     Conversion Project, Residential. “Residential conversion project” means an existing apartment house, apartment hotel, hotel, multiple dwelling or group dwelling used exclusively for residential purposes, proposed for conversion to a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project to be used exclusively for residential purposes through approval of a tract or parcel map. For purposes of this definition, the term “existing” means that the building was constructed prior to incorporation of the city on June 1, 1992, or, if it was built after incorporation of the city, a certificate of occupancy was issued for the building within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     “Dwelling” means any residential building, other than an apartment house, hotel or apartment hotel.

     “Dwelling group” means two or more one-family, two-family or multiple dwelling, apartment houses or boarding or rooming houses, located on the same lot.

     Dwelling, Multiple. “Multiple dwelling” means a dwelling containing two dwelling units and not more than five guest rooms.

     Dwelling, One-Family. “One-family dwelling” means a detached dwelling containing only one dwelling unit

     Dwelling, Two-Family. “Two-family dwelling” means a dwelling containing two dwelling units.

     “Dwelling unit” means a group of two or more rooms, one of which is a kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes.

     Dwelling Unit, Low Income. “Low income dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit at a rental or at a sales price which is eligible for subsidy under any public program to assist the occupancy of housing by households of low income who meet the current eligibility standards for low rent public housing established for the city by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, (“HUD”) from time to time and as certified by the city’s community development director.

     Dwelling Unit, Moderate Income. “Moderate income dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit at a rental or at a sales price eligible for subsidy under any public program to assist the occupancy of housing by persons or households of lower income who meet the current eligibility standards for such households established for the city by HUD from time to time and as certified to the city’s community development director.

     “Efficiency dwelling unit” means a room located within an apartment house or apartment hotel used or intended to be used for residential purposes which has a kitchen, living and sleeping quarters combined therein.

     “Final Map” means a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 18.26 of the city of American Canyon’s municipal code (the “municipal code.”) and with any applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, designed to be recorded in the office of the county recorder of Napa County.

     Garage Private. “Private garage” means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used for parking or storage of motor vehicles of the occupants of a residential use.

     “General plan” means the general plan adopted by the city council, which is a comprehensive declaration of purposes, policies and programs for the development of the city and which includes, where applicable, diagrams, maps and text setting forth objections, principles, standards and other features.

     “Guest room” means any habitable room except a kitchen, designed or used for occupancy by one or more persons and not in a dwelling unit.

     “Hotel” means a residential building designated or used for or containing six or more guest rooms, or suites of rooms, which may also contain not more than one dwelling unit, but not including any institution in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint.

     Household, Low Income. “Low income household” means a household which meets the current eligibility standards for low-rent public housing established for the city by HUD from time to time and as certified by the city’s community development director.

     Household, Moderate Income. “Moderate income household” means a household which meets the current eligibility standards for such households established for the city by HUD from time to time and as certified to the city’s community development director.

     “Housing development” means the construction pursuant to a building permit of, or the proposed conversion to condominium ownership pursuant to a final subdivision tract map submitted for approval of any apartment house, apartment hotel, multiple dwelling or group dwelling, residential condominium development or cooperative apartment home having five or more dwelling units.

     “Parcel map” means a map showing a division of land other than those divisions which require a final map, as defined by the Subdivision Map Act.

     “Residential building” means a building or portion thereof designed or used for human habitation.

     “Stock cooperative” means the same as defined by Section 11003.2 of the California Business and Professions Code.

     “Tenant” means a person who rents, leases or subleases, through either a written or oral agreement, residential real property from another.

     “Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a proposed subdivision creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums, or five or more units in a community apartment project or stock cooperative, and showing the existing conditions in and around it and that complies with the applicable provisions of Title 18 of the municipal code.

     “Tract Map” means a tract map refers to either a tentative map or final map. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.040 Application requirements.
     A.    A residential conversion project shall comply with all applicable provisions of Title 16, Adoption of Uniform Codes, Title 18, Subdivisions, Title 19, Zoning, the provisions of this section and with all other applicable state laws and local ordinances.

     B.     In addition to the information required by other applicable sections of the municipal code, the following information shall be submitted at the time of filing:

     1.     Building plans or other documents containing the following information pertaining to the project as proposed, certified as to accuracy by a licensed engineer.

     a.     Description of the features of the type of building and project, including age, type of construction, number of dwelling units, number of habitable rooms per dwelling unit; and

     b.     Site plan, including buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, and accessory storage areas and buildings including trash storage areas; and

     c.     Parking plan, including the total number of spaces actually provided and the total number required if different from that actually provided; dimensions of stalls, aisles and driveways; locations of columns, walls and other obstructions; total number of covered and uncovered parking spaces and location and number of guest parking spaces.

     2.     Tenant Information. Name and address of each tenant; total number of project occupants; rent schedule for eighteen months preceding the application and relocation assistance plan, if any.

     3.     Sales Information. Anticipated range of sales prices of individual dwelling units or shares based on information known at the time of application; anticipated terms of sale to existing tenants; and statement as to whether sales will be permitted to families with minor children.

     4.     Floor and elevation plans, including indications of common and private areas, and required exits.

     C.     The following additional information may be required by the advisory agency as a condition of approval:

     1.     Certificate of housing compliance inspection report or equivalent report satisfactory to the advisory agency, which report shall detail any violations of provisions of Title 16, Adoption of Uniform Codes, enacted after such permit was issued and which are explicitly made applicable to existing structures.

     2.     Building inspection reports (if any such report has already been submitted to the California Department of Real Estate, a copy of such report shall be furnished to the city):

     a.     Building component reports indicating conditions and estimated remaining useful life of the roof, foundation, plumbing, electrical, heating, air conditioning, other mechanical and structural systems prepared by a registered civil or structural engineer, licensed general building contractor, licensed general engineering contractor or architect;

     b.     Structural pest control report, prepared by a licensed pest control contractor;

     c.     Acoustical report, indicating (i) the type of construction between dwelling units and the general sound attenuation characteristics of such construction, or indicating the level of sound attenuation between dwelling units, and (ii) the feasibility of various levels of improvement, prepared by a licensed acoustical engineer; and

     d.     Utility metering reports, if the units of the building are not individually metered, indicating the feasibility of individual or submetering, prepared by qualified engineers.

     3.     Any other information, including conditions, covenants and restrictions, articles of incorporation and bylaws, which the advisory agency deems necessary to determine if the proposed project is consistent with the municipal code.

     D.    All Projects. No application for tentative map or preliminary parcel map approval of a residential conversion project shall be accepted without adequate evidence from the applicant that each tenant of the project has received notice of the application as of the date of application and notice of the relocation assistance provisions of Section 18.32.070 of this chapter. Any person who becomes a tenant of a residential rental unit proposed for conversion to a residential condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project after the date of such application shall be given written notice of the pendency of such applications prior to entering into any written or oral rental agreement. This subsection shall only apply to map applications filed on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.050 Tenant notification.
     A.    Notification of Hearing on Tentative Map or Preliminary Parcel Map.

     1.     In addition to other notification requirements of the municipal code, the advisory agency shall give notice of any public hearing on a tentative map or preliminary parcel map to at least one tenant in each dwelling unit of such building or buildings proposed for conversion.

     2.     Such notice shall be in writing and mailed not less than thirty days prior to the public hearing on the tentative map or preliminary parcel map.

     3.     Such notice may include a questionnaire, to be completed at the option of each tenant, regarding the approximate ages and disabilities or handicaps, if any, of the household members, comments concerning the physical condition of the building and its various components and characteristics as outlined in Section 18.32.040(B)(1) of this chapter, and such other information as may be pertinent to the pending proceedings.

     B.     Notification of Proposed Conversion Prior to Termination of Tenancy Due to the Conversion. Each tenant of a conversion project subject to this section shall be given one hundred eighty days written notice of intention to convert prior to termination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion. Each person who becomes a tenant of such conversion project after the date of such one hundred eighty days’ written notice shall be given a copy thereof before entering into any written or oral rental agreement, but shall not be entitled to one hundred eighty days’ written notice prior to termination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion.

     C.     Residential Conversion Project—Notification of Exclusive Right to Purchase.

     1.     The applicant shall give each tenant of any proposed residential conversion project written notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant or purchase of a share in the corporation entitling the shareholder to enjoy exclusive occupancy of the unit upon the same or more favorable terms and conditions than those on which such unit or share will be initially offered to the general public. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the California Business and Professions Code, unless the applicant receives prior written notice of the tenant’s intention not to exercise the right.

     2.     Where two or more units are combined pursuant to conditions of tentative map or preliminary parcel map approval, the notice required by this subsection shall be given to the tenants of the combined units and priority among tenants shall be determined in an equitable manner. A tenant who is prevented from purchasing his or her unit due to combination of units shall be given a right of first refusal with respect to the comparable unit in the same residential conversion project, to the extent possible. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.060 Tentative map and preliminary parcel map approval.
     A.    All tentative maps and preliminary parcel maps filed in connection with residential conversion projects shall be subject to divisions of land regulations contained in Division 2 in Title 18 of the municipal code, except as herein otherwise provided. All such maps shall be subject to the general plan only to the extent that such plan contains a definite statement of policies and objectives explicitly applicable to conversion projects, except as otherwise provided in this subsection.

     B.     The advisory agency shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project, if it finds (1) that the map is not substantially consistent with the applicable density provisions of the general plan in effect at the time the original building permit was issued, and (2) the application for map approval is filed less than ten years from the date the original certificate of occupancy for the building was issued.

     C.     The advisory agency shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project if it finds that any applicable general plan provision contains a definite statement of policies and objectives explicitly applicable to conversion projects and the proposed map is not substantially consistent with such provision.

     D.    The advisory agency shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project if it finds that there are uncorrected violations of Title 16 of the municipal code, and that an adequate plan to correct such violations has not been developed or accomplished. For purposes of this provision, “Title 16 of the city’s municipal code” means the provisions of Title 16 in effect when the building permit was issued and other subsequently enacted regulations explicitly made applicable to existing structures.

     E.     The advisory agency shall disapprove a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project, if it finds that (1) the building permit for the building was issued prior to October 1, 1933, and the building is of unreinforced masonry construction, or (2) the building is more than three stories in height without an elevator. This provision may be waived where the advisory agency finds that any such condition has been corrected in conformity with municipal code standards.

     F.     After considering the following criteria, the advisory agency may approve a tentative map or preliminary parcel map for a residential conversion project, unless it makes both of the following findings:

     1.     The vacancy rate of the planning area in which the property is located is five percent or less; and

     2.     The cumulative effect of the rental housing market in the planning area of successive residential conversion projects (past, present and future) is significant. A finding of significant cumulative effect shall be based on the following factors:

     a.     The number of tenants who are willing and able to purchase a unit in the building,

     b.     The number of units in the existing residential building prior to conversion,

     c.     The number of units which would be eliminated in case conversion occurred in order to satisfy municipal code parking requirements,

     d.     The adequacy of the relocation assistance plan proposed by the subdivider, and

     e.     Any other factors pertinent to the determination.

     “Vacancy rate” shall refer to the most current vacancy rate for multiple-family dwelling units as published by the city’s community development director, or other estimate or survey satisfactory to the advisory agency. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.070 Parking for residential conversion projects.
     A.    The minimum number of resident parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be one and one–quarter parking spaces per dwelling unit having three or less habitable rooms and one and one–half parking spaces per each dwelling unit having more than three habitable rooms. The advisory agency may increase or decrease the required number of parking spaces up to and including three-quarters of a space per dwelling unit, where it finds that such modification is consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

     B.     The minimum number of guest parking spaces shall be one quarter space per dwelling unit for projects containing fifty or fewer units and one–half space per dwelling unit for projects containing more than fifty units. The advisory agency may modify the guest parking requirement up to and including one-half space per unit where it finds such modification consistent with the purposes of this section.

     C.     The advisory agency may require up to one of the required resident parking spaces per dwelling unit to be provided in a private garage or carport where it finds that such is reasonable and feasible and consistent with the purposes of this chapter.

     D.    Where the number of parking spaces required by other provisions of this code in existence on the date of map application exceeds the minimum numbers established by this section, the number of parking spaces shall not be diminished.

     E.     The design and improvement of parking facilities and areas shall substantially conform to the provisions of Chapter 10.32 of Title 10 of the city’s municipal code. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.080 Building reports—Residential conversion projects.
     The advisory agency may require, as a condition of approval, that the applicant notify such person who communicates an interest in purchasing a unit or share that the following reports are available for inspection during normal business hours, and shall take all reasonable steps to assure that such reports fully, fairly and accurately describe the conditions reported:

     A.    Any report submitted pursuant to Section 18.32.040 of this chapter;

     B.     A report concerning compliance with the sound transmission control standards established by the city, if any;

     C.     A report concerning compliance with the residential energy conservation standards established the by Article 1, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Administrative Code;

     D.    A report concerning compliance with the elevator safety standards established by Title 8 of the California Administrative Code;

     E.     A report concerning compliance with any provision of Title 16 the city’s municipal code which the advisory agency and the building officer find appropriate for such reporting purpose. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.090 Low and moderate income housing—Residential conversion projects.
     Each residential conversion project shall comply with any and all affordable income housing provisions in the municipal code, including but not limited to Chapter 19.28. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

18.32.100 Rental housing production.
     A.    As a condition of tentative map or preliminary parcel map approval, the advisory agency shall require that the applicant or successor in interest pay to the city a fee of five thousand dollars for each unit in a residential conversion project, based on the number of units in the project prior to conversion. This fee shall be paid prior to approval of the final map by the city engineer.

     B.     All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited and held in the rental housing production account of the city’s community development department, which account is established to be administered by the city’s community development department separately from all other money expended by the department. Money in this account shall be used exclusively for the development of low and moderate income rental housing in the city, pursuant to guidelines carrying out this purpose prepared by the department and approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2006-06 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 18.34 TENANT RELOCATION ASSISTANCE WHERE APARTMENTS ARE TO BE CONVERTED.
18.34.010 Statement of purposes.
     A.    At the present time, there is a critically short supply of rental housing in the city, and, due to the extreme profitability in the current real estate market, of constructing condominiums or converting existing apartment projects to condominiums, stock cooperatives and to community apartment projects for sale, it is anticipated that the number of applications to construct condominiums or to convert existing apartment projects into condominiums, stock cooperatives and to community apartment projects will increase and will adversely impact the availability of existing rental housing and affordable housing units in the city, and will result in the removal of rental housing units and affordable housing units from the market. Tenants who face eviction due to conversion are experiencing serious difficulties in locating comparable replacement rental housing. These difficulties are particularly acute for elderly tenants and those with physical limitations, particularly the handicapped and disabled. In addition, families with minor dependent children face greater relocation difficulties than families without such children.

     B.     Since the conversion of rental units to condominiums, stock cooperatives, and community apartment projects is a substantial cause of the rental housing and affordable housing shortage, the city council finds and declares that an emergency exists requiring the emergency enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter and it would be just and proper for the subdividers who may enjoy the benefits of such conversions to assist tenants who are displaced by the conversion activity and who otherwise would be forced to bear the burdens of displacement without any assistance. (Ord. 2006-06 § 2, 2006)

 

18.34.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the definitions in Chapter 18.32 of the city’s municipal code (“the municipal code”) and the following definitions shall apply:

     “Landlord” means an owner, lessor or sublessor, (including any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity) who receives or is entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the agent, representative or successor of any of the foregoing.

     “Notice of termination” means the notice of intention to terminate tenancy, whether given by a landlord or by a tenant, provided for by California Civil Code Section 1946.

     “Qualified tenant” means any tenant who satisfies any of the following criteria on the date said tenant gives or receives a notice of termination:

     a.     Has attained age sixty-two;

     b.     Is handicapped as defined in Section 55072 of the California Health and Safety Code;

     c.     Is disabled as defined Title 42 United States Code 423;

     d.     Is a person residing with and on whom is legally dependent (as determined for federal income tax purposes) one or more minor children; or

     e.     Is a person whose income is within the low-income category as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for its Section 8 program as confirmed by the State Department of Housing and Community Development in amendment to Section 6932 of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

     “Rental unit” means each dwelling unit, efficiency dwelling unit, guest room, and suite in the city as defined in Section 19.04.030 of this code, together with the land and buildings appurtenant thereto, and all housing services, privileges, furnishings and facilities supplied in connection with the use or occupancy thereof, including garage and parking facilities. The term rental unit shall not include:

     1.     A one-family dwelling, except where three or more dwelling units are located on the same lot;

     2.     Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns, tourist homes and boarding and rooming houses, provided that, at such time as an accommodation has been occupied by one or more of the same tenants for sixty days or more, such accommodation shall become a rental unit subject to the provisions of this chapter;

     3.     Housing accommodations in any hospital, convent, monastery, extended medical care facility, asylum, nonprofit home for the aged, fraternity or sorority house, or housing accommodations owned, operated or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school or an elementary school for occupancy by its students;

     4.     Housing accommodations which a government unit, agency or authority owns, operates, or manages, or which are specifically exempted from municipal rent regulation by state or federal law or administrative regulation;

     5.     Mobilehome.

     “Tenant” means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit. Tenant does not include any person who:

     1.     Is residing in a conversion project and intends to purchase a unit in such project after conversion has been accomplished, or who intends to reside with such a purchaser; or

     2.     Received actual written notice, prior to entering into a written or oral agreement to become a tenant, that an application to convert the building to a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project was on file with the city or had already been approved, whichever the case may be. (Ord. 2006-06 § 2, 2006)

 

18.34.030 Relocation assistance required.
     In connection with the conversion of a building into a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment as those terms are defined in California Government Code and Business and Professions Code, the landlord shall provide relocation assistance to each tenant in accordance with Section 18.34.040. This section shall not apply where a subdivision map application for condominiums, stock cooperative or community apartment purpose was filed for approval with the city prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. A landlord’s obligation to comply with Section 18.34.040 does not exist prior to the time the landlord gives the notice of intention to convert required by Government Code Section 66427.1. (Ord. 2006-06 § 2, 2006)

 

18.34.040 Relocation assistance.
     Relocation assistance, where required by the preceding subsection, shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions.

     A.    Landlord’s Responsibility. 1. The landlord shall:

     a.     Make available to each tenant, at no cost, a reasonably complete and current list of vacant and available rental units within a one and one-half mile radius of the building being converted, which units are comparable as to size and amenities to the unit occupied by the tenant; and

     b.     Make a reasonable and good faith effort to assure that tenants without cars are driven, at no cost, and tenants with cars are assisted, in order to inspect replacement rental units; and

     c.     Hire an ambulance or similar vehicle, at no cost to the tenant, and otherwise take reasonable steps to assist any disabled or handicapped tenant with relocation-related activities; and

     d. i.  Pay a relocation fee of eight thousand dollars to qualified tenants and a three thousand two hundred dollar fee to all other tenants in order to assist the tenants in meeting costs of relocation, higher rents for replacement housing, and any related expenses. For the year beginning on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and all subsequent years, the fee amounts shall be automatically increased by the cost-of-living increase determined by the United States Labor Department for the San Francisco/Oakland/Bay Area. The adjusted amount shall be rounded to the nearest fifty-dollar increment.

     ii.     This payment shall be made as follows:

     (A)   The entire fee shall be paid to a tenant who is the only tenant in a rental unit,

     (B)   If a rental unit is occupied by two or more tenants, any one of whom is a qualified tenant, then each tenant of the unit shall be paid a pro rata share of the eight thousand dollar fee,

     (C)   If a rental unit is occupied by two or more tenants, none of whom is a qualified tenant, then each tenant of the unit shall be paid a pro rata share of the three thousand two hundred dollar fee.

     iii.    In no event shall the landlord be liable to pay more than eight thousand dollars to all tenants residing in a unit in which at least one qualified tenant lives, or to pay more than three thousand two hundred dollars to all tenants residing in a unit in which no tenant is a qualified tenant. If a tenant is entitled to monetary relocation benefits pursuant to city administrative agency action or any provision of local, state or federal law, then those benefits shall operate as a credit against any fee required to be paid to the tenant under this chapter.

     2.     In lieu of the assistance provided for in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section, the landlord may elect to relocate any tenant into a comparable replacement rental unit satisfactory to the tenant and pay all actual costs of relocating the tenant up to a maximum of eight thousand dollars per household. For the year beginning on this effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and all subsequent years, the fee amounts shall be automatically increased by the cost-of-living increase determined by the United States Labor Department for the San Francisco/Oakland Bay Area. The adjusted amount shall be rounded to the nearest fifty-dollar increment. A tenant may not unreasonably withhold approval of a replacement rental unit offered by the landlord. For purposes of this provision only, comparability shall be determined from the following factors: size; price; location; proximity to medical and recreational facilities, parks, community centers, shops, transportation, schools, churches and synagogues; and amenities.

     3.     In lieu of the assistance provided for in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section, if the tenant chooses, instead of relocating to a rental unit, to purchase a unit or single-family home in Napa County, the tenant may instead choose to receive the amount of fifteen thousand dollars per household from the landlord towards the relocation and costs associated with the purchase of the new unit or single-family home. For the year beginning on this effective date of said ordinance and all subsequent years, the fee amounts shall be automatically increased by the cost-of-living increase determined by the United States Labor Department for the San Francisco/Oakland Bay Area. The adjusted amount shall be rounded to the nearest fifty-dollar increment.

     4.     In lieu of the assistance provided for in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (A)(3) of this section, all tenants shall have the exclusive right to purchase a converted unit for an amount which is ten percent below the market rate listing price for such unit. The exclusive right to purchase must be exercised within thirty days of the recordation of any final map establishing a community apartment project, condominium or stock cooperative.

     B.     When Assistance Shall Be Provided.

     1.     List of Available Rental Units. The landlord shall perform the acts described in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section for the period beginning on or before the service of the one hundred eighty days’ notice of intention to convert, until the date of termination set forth in the notice of termination.

     2.     Transportation. The landlord shall perform the acts described in subsections (A)(1)(b) and (c) of this section for the period beginning on or before the service of the one hundred eighty days’ notice of intention to convert described in Government Code Section 66427.1(c), until the date of termination set forth in the notice of termination.

     3.     Monetary Assistance. The landlord shall perform the acts described in subsection (A)(1)(4) within fifteen days of service of the notice of termination.

     4.     Replacement Housing. In lieu of the acts described in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the landlord may perform the acts described in subsection (A)(2) of this section within thirty days of service of the one hundred eighty days’ notice of intention to convert described in Government Code Section 66427.1(c). (Ord. 2006-06 § 2, 2006)

 

18.34.050 Civil remedies.
     In an action by a landlord to recover possession of a rental unit, a tenant may raise as an affirmative defense the failure of the landlord to comply with Section 18.34.040 of this chapter. In addition, any landlord who fails to provide monetary relocation assistance to a tenant as required by this chapter shall be liable in a civil action to the tenant to whom such assistance is due for damages in the amount the landlord has failed to pay, together with reasonable attorney fees and costs as determined by the court. (Ord. 2006-06 § 2, 2006)

 

18.34.060 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to judicial proceedings to recover possession of a rental unit occupied by a qualified tenant commenced thirty-one days after the effect date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     B.     This chapter, as amended herein, shall apply to judicial proceedings to recover possession of a rental unit occupied by a tenant commenced thirty-one days after the effect date of said ordinance. (Ord. 2006-06 § 2, 2006)

DIVISION 3. DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 18.40 DESIGN STANDARDS
18.40.010 Streets and highways.
     A.    The streets and highways to be provided or improved, within or adjacent to any proposed division of land, shall conform both in width and alignment to the master plan of streets and highways in the circulation element of the general plan or any other specific plans as adopted by the city council. Rights-of-way for any such street or highway indicated on said general plan shall be dedicated for public use.

     B.     New streets and highways not shown in the general plan shall not be of less width than the standards set forth in the circulation element for similar streets and highways to accommodate future traffic volumes unless approved by the city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer.

     C.     Increased widths may be required where probable traffic conditions warrant such. Approval of determination of street or highway classification shall be made by the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.015 Continuation of existing streets.
     All streets shall, as far as practicable, be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuations of the center lines thereof or by adjustments by curves and shall be in general conformity with the adopted general plan for the most advantageous development of the area in which the subdivision lies. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.020 Intersections.
     Streets shall be required to intersect one another at an angle as near to a right angle as is practicable. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.025 Street stubs.
     Where necessary to give access to, or permit a satisfactory future subdivision of adjoining land, streets shall extend to the boundary of the property and the resulting dead-end streets shall have a temporary turn-around. Control of access across such dead-end street shall be vested in the city by dedication of a one-foot nonaccess strip across the entire right-of-way width. In all other cases, a turn-around having a minimum radius of forty-five feet shall be required. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.030 Intersection corner rounding.
     Whenever an arterial street or state highway intersects any other street or highway, the property lines at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of not less than thirty feet. On all other street intersections, the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of not less than twenty feet. In either case, a greater. curve radius may be required if streets intersect other than at right angles. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.035 Curve radius.
     The center line curve radius on all streets and highways shall conform to accepted engineering standards of design and shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.040 Grades of streets and highways.
     No street or highway shall have a grade of more than ten percent unless because of topographical conditions or other exceptional conditions, the city engineer determines that a grade in excess thereof is necessary. The minimum grade shall be one-half percent. Any grade in excess of ten percent shall be reviewed by the American Canyon fire protection district and approved by city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.045 Reserved strips.
     Reserve strips controlling the access to public ways or minimizing values for special improvement assessments will not be approved unless such strips are necessary for the protection of the public welfare or of substantial property rights, or both, and in no case unless the control and disposal of the land comprising such strips is placed definitely within the jurisdiction of the city under conditions approved by the city council.

 

18.40.050 Nonaccess and planting strips.
     When the rear of any lots border any arterial, collector street, or highway, the subdivider may be required to execute and deliver to the city the right of ingress and egress to the rear of such lots across the side lines of such streets or highways. When the rear of any lots border a state highway, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve a planting strip and masonry wall adjacent to such freeway. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.055 Acre or large lot subdivisions.
     Where a parcel is subdivided into lots of one acre or more, the city council may require that the blocks shall be of such size and shape, and be so divided into lots, as to provide for the extension and opening of streets and alleys at such intervals that will not preclude a subsequent division of any parcel into lots. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.060 Street names.
     Prior to the approval of any tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map, the American Canyon chief of police and the American Canyon fire protection district fire chief shall approve all street names. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.065 Public utility easements.
     Unless otherwise approved by the city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer, the subdivider shall grant easements not less than five feet in width for public utilities, including but not limited to sanitary sewer, water, communications, and energy where and when as may be necessary. Such easements may be located along each lot line, parallel to the front property line or the back of sidewalk, in planting strips, in common areas of a subdivision, or within the street rights-of-way. Dedication of easements shall be to the city for the purposes as may be ordered or directed by the city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.070 Storm drain easements.
     Unless otherwise approved by the city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer, the subdivider shall grant storm drain easements of not less than twenty feet in width where and as may be necessary. Dedication of easements shall be to the city for the purposes as may be ordered or directed by the city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.075 Lot design.
     The side lines of all lots, so far as possible, shall be at right angles to the street which the lot faces, or radial or approximately radial if the street is curved. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.080 Divided lots.
     No new lot created subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall be divided by a city boundary line. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.085 Lot frontage on two streets—Through lots.
     Lots, other than corner lots, shall not face on more than one street. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.090 Trails and walkways.
     The subdivider may be required to dedicate and improve trails and walkways at least ten feet wide across long blocks or to provide access to schools, parks, open spaces or other public areas, and where such trails or walkways are shown on any map or diagram in the general plan and any of its elements or on any specific plan of the city of American Canyon. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.095 Watercourses.
     Unless otherwise approved by the city engineer, the subdivider shall dedicate an easement for storm drainage purposes conforming substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse or channel, stream, or creek within or contiguous with any subdivision, or at the option of the subdivider provide by dedication further and sufficient easements or construction, or both, to dispose of such surface and storm water. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.100 Land subject to inundation.
     If any portion of any land within the boundaries shown on any subdivision map is subject to overflow, inundation, or flood hazard by storm waters, such fact and said portion shall be clearly shown on such final map enclosed in a border on each sheet of said map, and further, adequate storm drain system and/or levees, dikes and pumping systems shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.105 Solar requirements.
     All major subdivisions shall provide to the extent feasible for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision, as required by Section 66473.1 of the Government Code. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.110 Trees.
     A.    Existing trees shall be preserved on the site unless otherwise approved by the city council as a part of the site development plans.

     B.     Unless specifically approved by the city council, any tree removed shall be replaced on the site. Replacement trees shall be a minimum size of a twenty-four-inch box of the same species unless specifically approved by the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.115 Special provisions for lands of ten percent or greater slope.
     In the event a subdivision application is filed for any property with slopes of ten percent or greater, the following shall be provided:

     A.    Grading. With the tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map, a grading plan must be submitted showing the following:

     1.     Existing contours at a maximum interval of five feet;

     2.     Proposed finished contours at a maximum interval of five feet. Finished contours shall show the following:

     a.     Tops and toes of all banks,

     b.     All side banks must be benched horizontally ten feet for every vertical twenty-five feet change in elevation,

     c.     Maximum fill slopes two horizontal to one vertical,

     d.     Maximum cut slope two horizontal to one vertical. Special conditions may require flatter slopes, if determined to be necessary by the city engineer,

     e.     Maximum height of a cut bank fifty feet vertical; of a fill bank twenty-five feet vertical;

     3.     Lot drainage shall be so arranged that water from upper lots does not flow across banks unless carried in a storm sewer or similar feature as otherwise may be approved by the city engineer;

     4.     Estimate of the cubic yardage to be imported or exported;

     5.     Earth shall not be exported from the site without specific approval of the city council. Necessity for substantial earth removal from the site must be demonstrated before any radical grading will be permitted. All haul routes and the disposal sites shall be approved by the city council;

     6.     Sufficient topsoil shall be stockpiled and returned to horizontal cut areas to cover a minimum of eight inches;

     7.     Fill must have a certified relative compaction of ninety-five percent state of California, Division of Highways Test Methods 216-9 unless otherwise approved by the city engineer;

     8.     Rear and side lot lines shall occur at tops of banks rather than at center or toe of bank unless otherwise approved by the city engineer;

     9.     Adequate erosion control measures not limited to seeding;

     10.   Driveway to garage or carport shall not exceed ten percent grade unless specifically approved by the city engineer.

     B.     Streets.

     1.     Maximum street grade shall for all streets shall be ten percent unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

     2.     Vertical curbs shall be required on slopes of over five percent grade, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

     3.     Cul-de-sacs:

     a.     Property line radius at bulb of cul-de-sac: forty-foot minimum unless otherwise approved by the city engineer;

     b.     Minimum lot frontage at property line in bulb of cul-de-sac: forty feet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer;

     c.     Minimum lot width measured along setback line of lots in bulb of cul-de-sac: sixty feet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer;

     d.     Overall cul-de-sac maximum length: three hundred feet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.120 Underground utilities.
     All utilities shall be installed underground in accordance with the provisions of the American Canyon Municipal Code. All underground utilities shall be installed before preparation of subgrade for paving or any other site improvements that may effect the orderly installation of the underground utilities. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.40.125 Street lights.
     Street lighting shall be installed throughout the subdivision in accordance with the engineering standards. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.42 IMPROVEMENTS
18.42.010 Standard specification conformance.
     All improvements mentioned in this title shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and to the requirements of the “City of American Canyon Public Works Department Engineering Standard Plans and Specifications for Public Improvements (Engineering Standards),” copies of which are on file in the office of the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.015 Improvement plans, all subdivisions.
     A.    After approval by the city of any tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map, the subdivider shall furnish the following improvement plans to the city engineer as a part of the final map submitted:

     1.     Three sets of improvement plans, signed and wet-stamped by a licensed civil engineer, including but not limited to plans and profile drawings of all streets, and sewer, water, and drainage improvements. Utility distribution lines may be shown in plan only;

     2.     Two sets of signed engineer’s estimate of all proposed public improvements;

     3.     Two sets of signed engineer’s estimate of all proposed private improvements;

     4.     Plan check and inspection fee as set by resolution of the city council;

     5.     Two copies of soils report;

     6.     Two sets of hydraulic and hydrologic calculations for the proposed drainage system;

     7.     Two sets of calculations for the proposed sanitary sewer system;

     8.     Two copies of the clerk’s notice of approval, tentative map, and the list of conditions of approval;

     9.     Three copies of a grading plan consisting of typical cross-sections and finished grades of all lots, roads, streets, and highways in the proposed new subdivision;

     10.   All tracings or duplicate tracings shall be filed with the city engineer. Scale of plans shall be one inch equals forty feet horizontally; one inch equals four feet vertical in profile, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer;

     11.   Any other pertinent information required by the conditions of approval of the planning commission, city council, or city engineer.

     B.     Improvement work shall not commence until plans and profiles for such work have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. Approval of such plans is required before approval of the final map unless otherwise approved by the city council upon the positive recommendation of the city engineer. All such plans shall be prepared on reproducible mylar in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer.

     C.     No final map shall be submitted for consideration of the city council until the improvement plans have been approved by the city engineer. No improvement plans shall be considered finally approved until approval of the final map by the city council. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.020 Notification of city engineer.
     Improvement work shall not be commenced until the city engineer has been notified by writing at least twenty-four hours in advance, and if work has been discontinued for more than seventy-two hours for any reason, it shall not be resumed until the city engineer has been notified. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.025 City engineer inspection and approval.
     All required improvements shall be constructed under the inspection of and to the approval of the city engineer. Cost of inspection shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.030 Utility construction.
     All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, water lines, and storm drains installed in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to the surfacing of such street, service roads, alleys, or highways. Service connections for all underground facilities shall be placed to such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or alley improvements, when service connections are made thereto. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.035 Completion of improvements.
     The subdivider, his engineer and his contractor shall develop plans and complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this title and to the approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.040 Changes.
     The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the general requirements set forth in this title provided that the subdivider may apply to the city council for changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arise during construction to warrant such change in the interests of the city. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.045 Record drawings.
     A reproducible mylar showing all improvements as built shall be filed with the city engineer upon completion of said improvements. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.050 Improvements to be installed.
     Improvements to be installed by each subdivider shall include the following:

     A.    Streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and walkways as may be shown on the tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map as approved by the planning commission and/or city council;

     B.     Water lines to serve each lot and stubbed to property line prior to paving. A “W” shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked on the curb to identify stub locations;

     C.     Sanitary sewers and laterals to serve each lot and stubbed to property line prior to paving. An “S” shall be stamped or otherwise permanently marked on the curb to identify stub location;

     D.    Fire hydrants of a type and size approved by the American Canyon fire protection district. Fire flows shall be as approved by the fire district;

     E.     Storm drain lines, catch basins, inlets, and channel improvements;

     F.     Silt basins or other forms of erosion control when necessary;

     G.    Ornamental and safety street lights as required by this title and the city engineer;

     H.    Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission and/or city council, street trees shall be installed to the following standards:

     1.     Not less than one tree per lot with an average spacing of fifty feet on center,

     2.     The type, size and location shall be approved by the city engineer and indicated on the final map,

     3.     Said trees shall be maintained by the developer for a period of one year, to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     I.      Street signs at locations approved by the city engineer;

     J.      Street end barricades, walls or facing where required by the city engineer;

     K.    Stop or yield signs where street intersects with a major street or at other locations required by the city engineer;

     L.     Utility distribution lines, including but not limited to electric, communications, street lighting and cable television shall be required to be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this title, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. Minor exceptions to this section may be granted by the city engineer only when requested by the serving utility;

     M.    Reclaimed water lines as shown on a reclaimed water master plan or as required by the city engineer. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.055 Off site improvements.
     Off-site improvements may be required if determined to be necessary by the city engineer and required by the planning commission and/or the city council as conditions of subdivision approval. The nature and extent of any off-site improvement shall be identified to the maximum extent practical prior to final action by the planning commission and/or the city council on a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map. The city engineer may require additional off-site improvements based upon the circumstances of each individual case. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.42.060 Monuments.
     The following monuments shall be installed to the satisfaction of the city engineer:

     A.    Permanent iron pipe monuments of a type approved by the city engineer shall be set at each boundary corner of the subdivision, along exterior boundaries at intervals of not over five hundred feet, at the beginning and end of property line curves, and at any other points as may be required by the city engineer.

     B.     Concrete monuments depressed below street grade with cast iron ring and cover of a type approved by the city engineer shall be set at intersections of street center line tangents or offsets therefrom, and where such intersect on private property, at the beginning and end of centerline curve and/or offsets therefrom. The exact location of all such monuments shall be shown on the final map before approval is requested.

     C.     Any monument or bench mark, as required by this code, that is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements shall be replaced by the subdivider.

     D.    Monuments and bench marks shall be set before acceptance of all improvements by the city council.

     E.     A three-quarter inch pipe eighteen inches long, visibly marked or tagged with the registration number or license number of the civil engineer or land surveyor under whose direction the survey was made, shall be placed at the front corners of each lot or set in lieu thereof a permanent mark shall be made or set on the top of the concrete curb along with prolongation of the side lot lines of the lot to the street. (Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

Chapter 18.44 LAND DEDICATED FOR PARK AND RECREATION PURPOSES
18.44.010 Findings.
     The city council finds, determines and declares as follows:

     A.    In 1965, the Legislature of the state of California amended the Subdivision Map Act (Section 11500 et seq., of the Business and Professions Code) so as to enable cities and counties to require either the dedication of land, the payment of fees, or a combination of both, for park or recreational purposes as a condition of approval of a subdivision map; and

     B.     Before a city or county may avail itself of said Act, it must have a general plan containing a recreational element with definite principles and standards for the park and recreational facilities to serve the residents of the city or county; and

     C.     The city council has adopted a general plan, including amendments thereto, containing such recreational element. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.015 Dedication by subdivider.
     Every subdivider who subdivides land shall, at the option of the city, dedicate a portion of such land, pay a fee, or do both, as set forth in this chapter, for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to serve residents of the city. Only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions containing fifty parcels or fewer. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions, as that phrase is defined in Section 66410 et seq., of the Government Code of this state except subdivisions for which vesting tentative subdivision or vesting tentative parcel maps have been filed within thirty days after July 20, 1972; industrial subdivisions; condominium projects, which consist of the subdivision of air space in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added; and parcel maps for a subdivision containing fewer than five parcels for a shopping center containing more than three hundred thousand square feet of gross leasable area and no residential development or uses. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.025 Relation of land required to population density.
     The parks and recreation element of the general plan identifies a ratio of 6.14 acres of parkland per one thousand residents. It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that a minimum of five acres of property for each one thousand persons residing within the city be devoted to park and recreational purposes. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 99-08 § 2, 1999; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.026 Definitions.
     “Dwelling unit” shall mean a building for human habitation, which is designed, intended or used for sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation.

     “Single-family unit” shall mean a free-standing residential building that includes only one dwelling unit.

     “Two to four family units” shall mean a building that includes two to four residential dwelling units.

     “Five or more family units” shall mean a building that includes five or more residential dwelling units.

     “Manufactured home” shall mean any home factory-built in the U.S. to the HUD Title 6 construction standards (commonly known as “the HUD-code”).

     “Residential hotels” shall mean a rental apartment building offering maid service, a dining room, and room meal service for stays longer than thirty days. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016)

 

18.44.030 Population density determination.
     A.    Population density for the purpose of this chapter is determined as follows:

     1.     Single-family unit 3.49 persons per D.U.;

     2.     Two to four family units, 3.49 persons per D.U.;

     3.     Five or more family units, 3.49 persons per D.U.;

     4.     Manufactured home, 3.49 persons per D.U.;

     5.     Residential hotels, 1.1 persons per D.U.

     B.     The basis for determining the total number of dwelling units shall be the number of such units permitted by the city on the property included in the approved tentative subdivision map. If a subsequent application is made for rezoning or other action to increase the total number of dwelling units, the amount of parkland to be dedicated or in-lieu park dedication fee to be paid will be increased in accordance with the current park dedication regulations. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.035 Amount of land to be dedicated or fee in lieu thereof.
     A.    The amount of parkland required to be dedicated by a subdivider pursuant to this chapter shall be five acres per one thousand population.

     B.     When a fee is to be paid in-lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the per-acre valuation set forth in Chapter 15.08, Parks and Civic Facilities Development Impact Fees, as adopted and as may be periodically amended as provided for in the ordinance for the amount of land that would be required for dedication pursuant to subsection A of this section. The amount of land shall be calculated by the following formula:

 

DUs x POP x 5 acres

1,000 People

 

     Definitions:

 

     DU = Number of dwelling units in a subdivision.

     POP = Population per dwelling unit.

 

     C.     Monies expended by the subdivider for actual improvement of park and recreation facilities or lands shall be credited against these fees or park land dedication requirements provided that such improvements have been approved by the city in advance and meet applicable city standards. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 99-08 § 3, 1999; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.040 Credit for private open space.
     Where private open space for park and recreational purposes is provided in a proposed subdivision, and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents of the subdivision, such areas may be credited against the requirement of dedication for park and recreation purposes or fees paid in lieu thereof, to such an extent that the city council finds appropriate, in no event to exceed fifty percent, taking into account the mode of valuation set forth in this title, provided the city council finds it is in the public interest to do so, and that the following criteria are met:

     A.    That yards, court areas, setbacks and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building regulations are not included in the computation of such private open space;

     B.     That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by written agreement;

     C.     That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenants which run with the land in favor of the future owners of property within the tract, and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the city council;

     D.    That the percentage of credit recognized for private open space shall take into account such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access and locations and the parcel’s suitability for use for park or recreational purposes, as distinguished from inactive or primarily aesthetic open space; and

     E.     That the facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan, and are approved by the city council. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.045 Dedication of and/or fee or both—Procedures.
     A.    Procedure. The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to dedicate land, pay a fee, or both shall be as follows:

     1.     Subdivider. At the time a tentative parcel or subdivision map application is filed, the owner of the property shall designate property for park and recreational purposes on the map or submit a justification to pay an in-lieu parkland dedication fee.

     2.     Action of Advisory Bodies. Among its recommendations to the city council on the tentative subdivision map, the planning commission shall recommend approval, disapproval or modification of the property owner’s park dedication proposal.

     3.     Action of City Council. At the time of the tentative subdivision map approval, the city council shall determine, as a part of such approval, whether to require parkland dedication within the subdivision, payment of an in-lieu parkland dedication fee, or a combination of both.

     4.     Prerequisites for Approval of Final Map. Where parkland dedication is required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision map act and any additional requirements of the city. Where park in-lieu fees are required, the park in-lieu fees shall be deposited with the city prior to the approval of the final map. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final map and shall be recorded in conjunction with the final map.

     B.     Determination. The city council shall accept parkland dedication payment of an in-lieu park dedication fee, or a combination of both in accordance with the following criteria:

     1.     Recreation element of the city’s general plan; and

     2.     Topography, geology, access and location of land in the subdivision available for dedication; and

     3.     Size and shape of the subdivision and land available for dedication.

     The determination of the city council as to whether land shall be dedicated, or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.050 Time of commencement to be designated.
     At the time the tentative map is approved, the city council shall designate the time when development of the park and recreational facilities shall be commenced. Park and recreational facility construction timing may be designated as a date certain or as conditional upon the occurrence of one or more events affecting such development such as the formation of an assessment district, the approval of a bond issue, the completion of a capital improvement program for other facilities in the area, or similar event. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.055 Limitation on use of land and fees.
     The land and fees received under this chapter shall be used for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities to serve residents of the city. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

 

18.44.060 Applicability to minor divisions of land.
     The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all lot splits and other divisions of land into four or fewer lots or parcels which do not constitute a subdivision of land under the provisions of state law. (Ord. 2016-04 § 1, 2016; Ord. 98-10 § 1, 1998)

Title 19 ZONING
DIVISION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
DIVISION 2. ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
DIVISION 3. ADMINISTRATION

DIVISION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 19.01 AUTHORITY, PURPOSES AND EFFECTS OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
19.01.010 Title.
     This title of the American Canyon Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the “American Canyon Zoning Ordinance.” (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.020 Authority.
     This title is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in California Government Code Section 65850. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.030 Purposes of the zoning ordinance.
     A.    The purpose of the zoning ordinance is to protect and to promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, aesthetics, prosperity, and general welfare.

     B.     More specifically, the zoning ordinance is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives:

     1.     To provide a clear and concise guide for the physical development of the city;

     2.     To establish clear, understandable and applicable land use regulations and guidelines consistent with the city’s police powers;

     3.     To provide implementing standards and procedures that will individually and collectively ensure consistency of development with the general plan;

     4.     To foster a harmonious, convenient, and workable relationship among land uses;

     5.     To promote the stability of existing land uses that conform with the general plan and to protect them from inharmonious influences and harmful intrusions;

     6.     To foster the provision of adequate off-street parking and off-street loading facilities;

     7.     To protect and enhance real property values;

     8.     To protect and enhance the quality of the environment;

     9.     To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the city;

     10.   To ensure quality development, consistent with the general plan’s design and development principles, and an attractive and functional community appearance. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.040 Applicability.
     This title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all property in incorporated American Canyon whether owned by private persons, firms, corporations, or organizations; by the United States or any of its agencies; by the state of California or any of its agencies or political subdivisions; by any county or city, including the city of American Canyon; or by any authority or public entity organized under the laws of the state of California. Any governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this title only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the city. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.050 Compliance with title.
     A.    It is unlawful for any building or structure to be moved, erected, used, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt or for any use to be established or changed that does not strictly conform to the provisions of this title.

     B.     It is unlawful for any yard, open space, or land to be used for any purpose or in any way not specifically permitted by this title.

     C.     No department, official, or employee of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses for buildings, structures, or uses subject to the requirements of this title shall issue a permit or license in conflict with the provisions of this title; any permit or license issued in conflict with any provision of this title shall be null and void. Further, no permit or license shall be issued by any department, official, or employee of the city for any building, structure, or use subject to the requirements of this title on a parcel of land where the department, official, or employee is aware that a violation of this title exists. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.060 Relationship to other regulations and requirements.
     A.    The regulations of this title and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this title shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements adopted or imposed by the city council, any board, commission, or department of the city, or any other local, state, or federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development authorized by this title. All uses and development authorized by this title shall comply with all other such regulations and requirements. Where two or more ordinances regulate the same use or activity, the more restrictive ordinance shall apply.

     B.     Nothing contained in this title shall be deemed to repeal or amend any regulation of the city requiring a permit or license or both for any business, trade, or occupation nor shall anything in this title be deemed to repeal or amend the building standards adopted or enforced by the city.

     C.     Consistent with CEQA Guidelines 15162(c), each discretionary development project shall be reviewed to ensure compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). The approval authority for CEQA environmental review shall be delegated to the community development director, planning commission, or city council when the municipal code delegates the associated discretionary application to that decision maker.

     D.    Notwithstanding subsection C, CEQA environmental review and approval of the discretionary development project shall remain with the city council when the CEQA environmental review requires a statement of overriding considerations.

     E.     A CEQA environmental determination made by the community development director or planning commission may be appealed to the city council in accordance with municipal code Sections 2.04.080 through 2.04.110. (Ord. 2016-06 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.070 Prior rights and violations.
     A.    The enactment of this title shall not terminate or otherwise affect variances, conditional use permits or other approvals authorized under the provisions of any ordinance repealed, suspended, or revised by the adoption of this title, nor shall any prior violation of any such prior ordinance be excused by the adoption of this title unless the violation conforms to the standards of this title.

     B.     Any building or structure for which an entitlement permit has been issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may be completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications, and permits on which such building permit was granted, if construction is commenced within the legal life of such entitlement and diligently pursued to completion. No extensions of time shall be granted for commencement of construction. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.080 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this title, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, regardless of the fact that any or one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.090 Fees.
     The city council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the various applications authorized or required by this title. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until the fee is paid in full. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.100 Private agreements.
     A.    The city shall not be responsible for enforcing covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs) or other private agreements.

     B.     The city shall not be named as a third party beneficiary in any private agreement executed in relationship to this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.110 Acceptance of maintenance.
     The city may accept maintenance of any public facilities only if they meet all city standards, any applicable conditions of entitlement approval, or any criteria for acceptance of public dedications and facilities. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.01.120 Interpretation.
     If ambiguity arises concerning the content or application of this title, it shall be the duty of the community development director to ascertain all pertinent facts and make an interpretation. Alternatively, the community development director may request the planning commission to make an interpretation. An interpretation by the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission as provided in Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.02 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
19.02.010 Purpose.
     Enforcement of the provisions of this title and any entitlements granted by the city shall be diligently pursued in order to provide for their effective administration, to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval, to promote the city’s planning efforts and implementation of the general plan, and to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.02.020 Responsibility for enforcement.
     A.    The community development director shall be the official responsible for the enforcement of this title. In the discharge of this duty the community development director or designee shall have the right to enter on any site or enter any structure for the purpose of investigation and inspection, provided that the right of entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that in no case shall any structure be entered in the absence or without permission of the owner or tenant without the written order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

     B.     The community development director may serve notice requiring the removal of any structure or cessation of any use in violation of this title on the owner or their authorized agent, on a tenant, or on an architect, builder, contractor, or other person who commits or participates in any violation. The community development director may call upon the city attorney to institute necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title, and the city attorney is authorized to institute appropriate actions to that end. The community development director may call upon the chief of police and authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.02.030 Violations and penalties.
     A.    Any person, firm, corporation, or organization violating any provision of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars and by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both a fine and imprisonment, or shall be subject to such punishment as provided elsewhere in the municipal code. A person, firm, corporation, or organization shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation of this title is committed, continued, or permitted by the person, firm, corporation, or organization and shall be punishable as herein provided.

     B.     Any structure or sign erected, moved, altered, enlarged, or maintained and any use of a site contrary to the provisions of this title shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney shall immediately institute necessary legal proceedings for the abatement, removal, and enforcement thereof in the manner provided by law, shall take such other steps as may be necessary to accomplish these ends, and shall apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will remove or abate the structure, corporation, or organization from erecting, moving, altering, or enlarging the structure or sign or using the site contrary to the provisions of this title.

     C.     All remedies provided for herein, and any other portion of the municipal code, shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.02.040 Maintenance of common areas, improvements and facilities.
     A.    The recipient of any permit issued pursuant to this title, or his or her successor, shall be responsible for maintaining all common areas, improvements or facilities required by this title or any permit issued in accordance with its provisions, except those areas, improvements, or facilities with respect to which an offer of dedication to the public has been accepted by the appropriate public authority. Such responsibility shall be reflected in the project’s covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), which shall be approved by the city and the California Department of Real Estate and shall be consistent with the conditions of any related entitlement.

     B.     By way of illustration, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, private roads and parking areas, water and sewer lines, and recreational facilities must be properly maintained so they can be used in the manner intended, and required vegetation and trees used for screening, landscaping, or shading must be replaced if they die or are destroyed. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.03 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
19.03.020 Uncertain boundaries.
     Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:

     A.    Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of alleys, streets, highways, streams, or railroads shall be construed to follow such centerlines.

     B.     Boundaries indicated, as approximately following the lot lines, city limits, or extraterritorial boundary lines shall be construed as following such lines, limits, or boundaries.

     C.     In the case of unsubdivided property or where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless indicated by dimension, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the zoning map.

     D.    In the case of any remaining uncertainty, the city council shall determine the location of boundaries.

     E.     Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment.

     F.     Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, transportation, or public utility company is vacated or abandoned and the property is unclassified, the property shall be automatically classified as being in the base zoning district most consistent with the property’s general plan designation.

     G.    All property in the city or hereafter annexed, and not otherwise classified by the city, is classified as being in the base-zoning district most consistent with the property’s general plan designation if the property was not previously prezoned prior to annexation. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.04 DEFINITIONS
19.04.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to define terms used in this title and establish rules for the construction of the language to ensure a consistent interpretation of the requirements of this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.04.020 Rules for construction of language.
     In interpreting the various provisions of this title, the following rules of construction shall apply:

     A.    The particular shall control the general.

     B.     In case of conflict between the text and diagram, the text shall control.

     C.     All references to departments, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the city of American Canyon, unless otherwise indicated.

     D.    All references to public officials are to those of the city of American Canyon, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.

     E.     All references to days are to calendar days unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next working day.

     F.     The words “shall,” “will” and “is to” are always mandatory and not discretionary. The words “should” or “may” are permissive.

     G.    The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the past.

     H.    The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

     I.      Whenever a certain hour or time of day is specified in this title or any permit, condition of approval or notice issued or given as set forth in this title, such hour shall be standard time or daylight savings time, whichever is in current use in the city.

     J.      Whenever this title requires consideration of distances, parking spaces or other aspects of development or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities which are fractions of whole numbers, such numbers are to be rounded to the nearest highest whole number, when the fraction is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5, except as otherwise noted in this title. In the case of the number of dwelling units, the numerical quantities which are fractions of whole numbers shall be rounded to the next lowest whole number in all such instances. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.04.030 Definitions.
     Words and phrases used in this title shall have the meanings set forth in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined in this chapter but defined elsewhere in the zoning ordinance (including Chapter 19.23, Sign Regulations and Chapter 19.05, Use Classifications) shall be given the meanings set forth in those chapters. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

     “Abut” means to physically touch, border upon, or to share a common corner or property line.

     “Accessory building or structure” means a detached, subordinate structure or a subordinate structure attached to a main structure by a breezeway, the use of which is appropriate, subordinate, and customarily incidental to that of the main structure or the main use of the land, and which is located on the same site with the main structure or use.

     “Accessory use” means a use primarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land, which accessory use does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the lot or parcel of land on which the principal use is located.

     Acre, Gross. “Gross acre” means the area of a lot or site, including easements of right-of-way to be dedicated, but excluding existing public rights-of-way.

     Acre, Net. “Net acre” means the area of a lot or site remaining after dedication of all required rights-of-way.

     “Adjoining” means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in contact with each other. Lots or parcels of land which touch at corners only shall not be deemed adjoining. “Abutting,” “adjacent” and “contiguous” shall mean the same as adjoining.

     “Affordable rent” means monthly rent, including utilities and all fees for housing services, not exceeding the following calculations:

     1.     Very low-income households: fifty percent of the median income multiplied by thirty percent and divided by twelve;

     2.     Low-income households: sixty percent of the median income multiplied by thirty percent and divided by twelve.

     “Affordable sales price” means the maximum purchase price that will be affordable to the specified target income household, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the project and including all housing costs.

     “Alley” means a public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

     “Alter” means to make a change in the exterior appearance or the supporting members of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, that will prolong the life of the structure. In the case of signs, “alter” includes copy changes.

     “Annual household income” means the combined gross income for all adult persons living in a dwelling unit as calculated for the purpose of the Section 8 program under the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended, or its successor.

     “Antennae” means transmitting and receiving devices.

     “Area, lot, parcel or site” means the horizontal area within property lines excluding access corridors, vehicular easements, and areas to be included in future street rights-of-way as established by easement, dedication, or ordinance.

     “Awning” means a roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements.

     “Base district” means the zoning districts and their associated purposes and regulations set forth in this title.

     “Breezeway” means a structure not less than five feet in length, not exceeding fourteen feet in height and having not more than fifty percent of the sides of the structure enclosed with any material other than that necessary for roof supports, for the principal purpose of connecting the main structure on a site with another main structure or an accessory structure on the same site.

     “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature.

     “Building coverage” means the cumulative area of a lot occupied by the first floor of a building and accessory structures.

     “Building envelope” means the maximum two-dimensional space on a lot within which a structure can be built, as permitted by applicable setback and lot coverage controls.

     “Change of use” means a discontinuance of a use and the substitution therefore of a different use.

     “Child” means a person who is under eighteen years of age.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of American Canyon.

     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city of American Canyon.

     “Community development director” means the community development director of the city of American Canyon.

     “Compatible” means that which is harmonious with and will not adversely affect surrounding buildings and/or uses.

     “Conditionally-permitted” means permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit.

     “Construction” means construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, conversion or movement of any building, structures, or land together with any scientific surveys associated therewith.

     “Cottage food operations” means an enterprise defined by the California Health and Safety Code Section 11378, holding a permit or registration by the county of Napa, and is generally an accessory business located within a residence where non-potentially hazardous food products are prepared or packed for direct (“Class A” as defined in Section 113758), or direct and indirect sale to consumers (“Class B” as defined in Section 113758).

     “Council” means the city council of the city of American Canyon.

     “Court” means an unoccupied open space on the same site with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by exterior building walls.

     “Density” means the number of dwelling units per unit of land.

     Depth, Lot. “Lot depth” means the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines (see Figure D-1).

     “Development” means the division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.

     “Driveway” means a private road, the use of which is limited to persons resident or working on the site and their invitees, licensees, and business visitors, and which provides access to off-street parking or loading facilities.

     “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms with a single kitchen, designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes.

     Dwelling Unit, Studio. “Studio dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with a kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.

     “Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.

     “Emergency work” means the use of any machinery, equipment, vehicle, manpower, or other activity in a short-term effort to protect, or restore safe conditions in the city, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

     “Façade” means the exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building.

     “Family” means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household unit.

     “Fence” means an artificially-constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen an area of land.

     Floor Area, Gross. “Gross floor area” means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including: basement or attic areas used only for storage; space used only for mechanical equipment; breezeways, uncovered steps, patios, and terraces; porches and exterior balconies, if not enclosed; and atria and lobbies. Unless excepted above, “gross floor area” includes but is not limited to elevator shafts and stairwells measured at each floor (but not mechanical shafts), penthouses, enclosed porches, interior balconies, and mezzanines.

     “Floor area ratio (FAR)” means the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area.

     Frontage, Building. “Building frontage” means the exterior building wall of a ground floor business establishment on the side or sides of the building fronting and/or oriented toward a public street or highway. “Building frontage” shall be measured continuously along the building wall for the entire length of the business establishment, including any portion thereof which is other than parallel to the remainder of the wall.

     Frontage, Street. “Street frontage” means that portion of a lot or parcel of land which borders a public street other than the sideline of a corner lot. “Street frontage” shall be measured along the common lot line separating the lot or parcel of land from the public street, highway, or parkway.

     “Garage” or “carport” means an accessory structure or a portion of a main structure, having a permanent roof and designed for the storage of motor vehicles.

     “General plan” means the general plan of the city of American Canyon and all elements thereof.

     “Grade (ground level)” means the average of the finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In cases where walls are parallel to and within five feet of sidewalks, the above ground level shall be measured at the sidewalks.

     “Ground floor” means the first floor of a building other than a basement.

     “Guest room” means a room which is designed, used or intended to be used as temporary sleeping accommodations for any person, and which does not contain a bar sink and/or gas, electrical or water outlets designed, used or intended to be used for cooking facilities except as otherwise specifically provided for by this title.

     “Household” means a family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit.

     “Housing cost” means the sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale units: principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

     “Illegal nonconforming building or use” means a building or use which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this title and did not lawfully exist on the effective date of applicable chapters of this title.

     Intersection, Street. “Street intersection” means the area common to two or more intersecting streets.

     “Kitchen” means any room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.

     “Lot” means a parcel, tract, or area of land whose boundaries have been established by a legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map, and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.

     “Lot area” means the total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way.

     Lot, Corner. “Corner lot” means a lot or parcel situated at the intersection of two or more highways or streets, which highways or streets have an angle intersection measured within the lot or parcel of land of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees (see Figure D-2).

     Lot, Flag. “Flag lot” means a lot or parcel taking access by a strip of land, the owner of which lot or parcel has fee-simple title to the strip extending from the main portion of the lot or parcel to the adjoining street, road or access easement (see Figure D-2).

     Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot or parcel of land other than a corner or flag lot (see Figure D-2).

     Lot, Key. “Key lot” means an interior lot adjoining the rear lot line of a reversed corner lot (see Figure D-2).

     Lot, Reversed Corner. “Reversed corner lot” means a corner lot, the highway or street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of a lot or parcel of land which adjoins the rear lot line of the lot (see Figure D-2).

     Lot, Through. “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel highways and/or streets (see Figure D-2).

     Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means a line separating an interior lot from a street, or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot from a street (see Figure D-2).

     Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line (see Figure D-2).

     Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot boundary line which is not a front line or a rear lot line (see Figure D-2).

     “Lower-income household” means a household with an annual household income of eighty percent or less of the median income for Napa County, adjusted for household size.

     “Median income” means the median income, adjusted for family size, applicable to Napa County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successory provision) by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.

     “Minimum distance between buildings” means the distance between the walls of buildings, measured at the nearest point to an adjacent building.

     “Moderate-income household” means a household with an annual household income of between eighty-one percent and one hundred twenty percent of the median income for Napa County adjusted for household size.

     “Monthly owner-occupied housing payment” means that sum equal to the principal, interest, property taxes, homeowner’s insurance and homeowner’s association dues paid on an annual basis, divided by twelve.

     “Nuisance” means a condition that is injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, or has a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property or to cause damage to public rights-of-way.

     “Off-street loading facilities” means a site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths and associated aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

     “Off-street parking facilities” means a site or portion of a site devoted to the off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.

     “On-site” means located on the lot that is the subject of discussion.

     “Outdoor storage” means the keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four hours.

     “Overlay district” means a zoning district (e.g., the AC airport compatibility overlay district) that modifies the allowable uses, design standards, and/or development standards of the base district with which it is combined.

     Patio, Covered. “Covered patio” means an accessory structure not exceeding fourteen feet in height, and enclosed on not more than three sides except for posts necessary for roof support.

     “Permanent foundation system” means an assembly of materials constructed below or partially below grade and not intended to be removed from its installation site, which assembly is designed to support a structure and is engineered to resist the imposition of external natural forces as defined by Section 18551 of the Health and Safety Code, as such section may have been amended at the time of application of this title.

     “Permanent storage” means the storage of motor vehicles, trailers, airplanes, boats, parts thereof, or building materials for a period of forty-eight consecutive hours or more.

     “Permit” means written governmental permission issued by an authorized official empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization.

     “Permitted use” means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization, or partnership, or any city, county, district or state or any department or agency thereof.

     “Planning commission” means the city of American Canyon planning commission.

     “Processing” means a series of operations, usually in a continuous and regular action or succession of actions, taking place or carried on in a definite manner.

 

     “Project” means any proposal for new or changed use, or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of this title.

     “Project inauguration” means a project has been inaugurated if applicable grading and building permits have been issued, necessary infrastructure installed, foundations installed and aboveground construction initiated and ongoing without any cessations of construction activity for more than one hundred eighty days.

     “Recreational vehicle” means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, with a living area less than two hundred twenty square feet, excluding built-in equipment such as wardrobes, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, bath and toilet rooms.

     “Residential accessory structure” means a building or structure normally associated with dwellings, such as detached garages, carports, greenhouses, storage buildings, and swimming pools, but excluding cargo containers.

     “Residential property” means a parcel of real property which is developed and used either in whole or in part for residential purposes.

     “Right-of-way” means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer or other similar use.

     “Right-of-way lines” means the lines that form the boundaries of a right-of-way.

     “Sidewalk” means a paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.

     “Single ownership” means holding record title, possession under a contract to purchase, or possession under a lease, by a person, firm, corporation, or partnership, individually, jointly, in common, or in any other manner whereby the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.

     “Site coverage” means the percentage of total site area covered by structures, open or enclosed, excluding uncovered steps, patios, terraces, and swimming pools.

     “Slope” means the relationship between the change in elevation (rise) of land and the horizontal distance (run) over which the elevation occurs.

     “Specific plan” means a plan for a defined area that is consistent with Chapter 19.17 of this title.

     “Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the roof above. “Story” includes a basement but not a cellar.

     “Story poles” means a three-dimensional, full-scale, silhouette structure constructed of 2x4, or 2x6 lumber or similar other sturdy building material that outlines the location, bulk and mass that a proposed structure will occupy on a site.

     “Street” means a public or private right-of-way, other than a major or secondary highway or alley, whose function is to carry vehicular traffic and/or provide vehicular access to abutting property.

     “Structure” means anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to a building or other structure having fixed location on the ground.

     Structure, Main or Principal. “Main structure” or “principal structure” means a structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning as the principal use.

     Structure, Temporary. “Temporary structure” means a structure without any foundation or footings, which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

     “Swimming pool” means a pool, pond, lake, or open tank capable of containing water to a depth greater than one and one-half feet at any point.

     “Target household” means the household for which a dwelling unit is to be provided under Chapter 19.27, Housing Incentives, or Chapter 19.28, Inclusionary Housing Requirements.

     “Use” means the purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered, or enlarged for which either a site or a structure is or may be occupied or maintained.

     “Use initiation” means the implementation of a use on a parcel or occupancy of a structure.

     Use, Principal. “Principal use” means a primary or dominant use established, or proposed to be established, on a lot.

     “Variance” means permission to depart from the literal requirements of this title.

     “Very low-income household” means a household with an annual household income of up to fifty percent of the median income for Napa County, adjusted for household size.

     “Warehousing” means the storage of materials in a warehouse or terminal, where such materials may be combined, or separated for transshipment or storage purposes but the original material is not chemically or physically changed.

     “Wheel stop” means a physical barrier sufficient in size and shape to prevent the movement of automobiles or other vehicles over or past such barrier.

     “Width” means the horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines (see Figure D-1).

     “Yard” means an open space on the same lot or parcel of land, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted by this title.

     Yard, Front. “Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width of a lot or parcel of land. The depth of a required front yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the right-of-way line of the highway or street on which the property fronts, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land, except as otherwise provided for a flag lot. On corner lots, the front yard shall be located across the narrower frontage of the lot. A yard shall not be deemed a front yard if there is no right of access of any kind, pedestrian or vehicular, from the adjoining street.

     Yard, Side, Street. “Street side yard” means a yard bounded by a highway or street, extending from the required front yard, or the right-of-way line on which the property fronts where no front yard is required, to the required rear yard or to the rear lot line where no rear yard is required. The width of such required side yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between the right-of-way line of the highway or street on which the property sides, and a line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land.

     Yard, Side, Interior. “Interior side yard” means a yard extending from the required front yard, or the right-of-way line on which the property fronts where no front yard is required, to the required rear yard or to the rear lot line where no rear yard is required on other than a corner side yard. The width of a required interior side yard shall be a specified horizontal distance between each such side lot line parallel thereto on the lot or parcel of land.

     “Zoning district” means a specifically delineated area or district in the city within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.

     “Zoning ordinance” means the zoning ordinance of the city of American Canyon, as amended.

 

Section 19.04.030

Figure D-1

LOT DEPTH AND WIDTH MEASUREMENTS

 



 

Section 19.04.030

Figure D-2

ILLUSTRATION OF LOT TYPES

 



 

(Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2013-07 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.05 USE CLASSIFICATIONS
19.05.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of these provisions is to classify uses according to types on the basis of common functional, product, or compatibility characteristics, and to set forth permitted and conditionally-permitted uses for each zoning district. Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, any use of land, operation, or business that is in violation of state and/or federal law shall be prohibited in all specific plan areas, districts, and/or zones within the city. (Ord. 2009-08 § 2, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.020 Permitted and conditionally permitted uses.
     Uses subject to the provisions of this title shall be known as either permitted uses or conditionallypermitted uses subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in accordance with Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.030 Determination of classifications.
     The community development director shall have the authority to classify common uses according to use classifications. The classification of a use is subject to the right of appeal pursuant to the appeal procedure set forth in Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures. A list of common uses and the use classifications into which they are classified shall be maintained by the community development director. A list of common uses which are prohibited shall also be maintained by the community development director. Any new use, or any use that cannot be clearly determined to be in an existing use classification, may be incorporated into the zoning regulations by a zoning ordinance text amendment. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.040 Residential classifications.
     Residential uses include living accommodations on a wholly or primarily nontransient basis, but exclude institutional living arrangements providing twenty-four-hour skilled nursing or medical care and those providing forced residence, such as detention facilities.

     Cannabis indoor cultivation: any cannabis cultivated within a private residence or within an enclosed accessory structure on the grounds of the private residence (e.g., in a greenhouse).

     Cannabis outdoor cultivation: cannabis plants cultivated outdoors on the lot of a personal residence.

     Congregate living facility: an establishment offering lodging on a monthly basis or longer, along with common eating arrangements and other services such as recreational, social and cultural activities and transportation, but excluding medical care.

     Employee housing: housing for six or fewer employees in a single-family dwelling shall be deemed a single-family use and shall be treated the same as any single-family dwelling in districts where single-family dwellings are allowed. Employee housing shall not be included within the definition of a boarding house, rooming house, hotel, dormitory or other similar term that implies the employee housing differs in any way from a family dwelling and shall not constitute a change in occupancy for purposes of local building codes. It shall not be subject to any fees to which other family dwellings of the same type in the same zone are not likewise subject.

     Farm employee housing: living quarters provided on agriculture district property for the use of workers employed in agricultural activities.

     Garden apartments: a multifamily development of one or more two- or three-story structures containing up to twenty units each that has units located one over the other, with integrated off-street parking, open space and recreation.

     Mobilehome: a factory-built, single-family structure that meets the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.

     Mobilehome park: a site developed for the long-term placement of mobilehomes.

     Multifamily residential: three or more dwelling units on a lot. Multifamily residential units may share one or more common walls and include townhomes and garden apartments.

     Residential care home: provision of twenty-four-hour nonmedical care of six or fewer persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or twenty-four-hour care for six or fewer foster children. This classification includes only those services and facilities licensed by the state for such purposes. Small group homes without personal services shall have the same standards and processing as residential care homes.

     Second residential unit: a second dwelling unit located on a lot with an existing principal dwelling unit.

     Single-family residential, detached: a dwelling unit located on a separate lot which has no common walls with any other dwelling unit. Detached single-family residential include mobilehomes placed on a permanent foundation.

     Single-family residential, semidetached: a one-family dwelling attached to one other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling located on a separate lot.

     Single room occupancy (SRO): a type of group residential use where there are at least five single rooms with no more than two occupants in each unit that complies with the regulations in Section 19.10.160 of this title. The single rooms are habitable rooms that may have a bathroom and/or limited cooking facilities, and are intended for combined living and dining purposes.

     Supportive housing: permanent rental housing that provides a range of support services designed to enable residents to maintain stable housing, improve his or her health status, lead fuller lives, and when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing units are residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zoning district.

     Townhouse: a one-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.

     Transitional housing: a type of supportive housing used to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. A homeless person may live in a transitional dwelling for no less than six months while receiving supportive services that enable independent living. Transitional housing units are residential uses subject only to those requirements and restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zoning district. (Ord. 2018-06 § 5, 2018; Ord. 2017-07 § 1, 2017; Ord. 2014-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.050 Commercial classifications.
     Commercial uses include the sale or rental of goods and the provision of services other than those classified as public or quasi-public, or industrial.

     Adult-entertainment business means any of the following:

     1.     “Adult arcade” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any time, and where a substantial portion of the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or describing specified sexual activities.

     2.     “Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store” means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:

     a.     Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, compact discs (CDs), slides or other visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

     b.     Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.

     The items described in subsections (a) and (b) shall be referred to collectively as “adult products.”

     A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of products depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration of the specified products that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     3.     “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment that: a. regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or b. regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity.

     4.     “Adult hotel/motel” means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that, a. provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, compact discs (CDs) or other photographic reproductions a substantial portion of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and b. rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a twenty-four hour period.

     5.     “Adult motion picture theater” means a building or portion thereof or area, open or enclosed, used for the presentation of motion pictures or other images in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the presentation of motion pictures distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, for observation by patrons or customers.

     6.     “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

     7.     “Modeling studio” means a business that provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, figure models who display specified anatomical areas to be observed, drawn, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. Modeling studio does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. Modeling studio further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, that does not provide, permit or make available specified sexual activities.

     Amusement center: any place in which five or more coin- or slug-operated amusement devices are installed, including any place open to the public, whether or not the primary use of the premises is devoted to the operation of such devices.

     Animal Sales and Services.

 

     1.     Boarding, kennel: provision of shelter and care for four or more small animals four or more months of age. This classification includes activities such as feeding, exercising, grooming, breeding, and incidental medical care.

     2.     Grooming: provision of bathing and trimming services for small animals on a commer-cial basis. This classification includes boarding of small animals for a maximum period of forty-eight hours.

     3.     Medical care: medical and surgical treatment of small animals. This classification includes hospital facilities that are entirely enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned. Incidental grooming and temporary boarding of animals for thirty days is included.

     4.     Retail sales: retail sales of small animals and related products within an entirely enclosed building. This classification includes incidental grooming.

     Bank savings and loan: a financial institution including federally-chartered banks, savings and loan associations, industrial loan companies, and credit unions that provides retail banking services to individuals and businesses. This classification does not include payday lending businesses or check cashing businesses. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of cash money.

     1.     Drive-up service: provision of banking services accessible to persons who remain in their automobiles.

     2.     Walk-up service: provision of banking services to persons at a walk-up window or automated teller machine.

     Bed and breakfast inns: establishments offering lodging on less than a monthly basis in a structure that was originally built as a residential dwelling, with incidental eating and drinking service for lodgers only provided from a single kitchen on the premises. This classification excludes uses classified under group residential.

     Bookstores: an establishment providing the retail sales of books, magazines, or book-related merchandise to the general public.

     Building materials and services: retailing, wholesaling or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumberyards, tool and equipment sales and rental establishments, and building contractors’ yards, but excludes activities classified under vehicle/equipment sales, leasing and services.

     Cannabis retail: a storefront business that sells cannabis and/or cannabis products directly to a consumer. For purposes of this code, a non-storefront retail business is categorized a cannabis distributor in accordance with Section 19.05.060.

     Catering: preparation and delivery of food and beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or consumption.

     Check cashing business, as defined in California Civil Code Section 1789.31 and as amended from time to time: a retail business owned or operated by a “check casher” person or entity who engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. “Check casher” does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company. “Check casher” also does not include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers that cashes checks or issues money orders for a fee not exceeding two dollars as a service to its customers that is incidental to its main purpose or business.

     Coin dealer: any person, firm, partnership, or corporation whose principal business is the buying, selling and trading of coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of gold, silver or other precious metals.

     Commercial grade ingots: 0.99 fine ingots of gold, silver, or platinum, or 0.925 fine sterling silver art bars and medallions, provided that the ingots, art bars, and medallions are marked by the refiner or fabricator as to their assay fineness.

     Commercial printing: establishments providing printing, blueprinting, photocopying, engraving, binding, or related services.

     Communication services: establishments involving point-to-point communication services, whether by wire or radio, either aurally or visually, including radio and television broadcasting stations and the exchange or recording of messages, but not including on-site transmission towers.

     Drugstores: retail sales of medicinal and pharmaceutical related products.

     Eating and drinking establishments: an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served and consumed primarily within the principal building.

     Electronic cigarette or e-cigarette: a device that is capable of providing an inhalable dose of nicotine. Electronic cigarette does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in the mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease.

     Entertainment, indoor: the provision of participant or spectator entertainment within an enclosed building, excluding uses classified under adult business. Typical uses include live theater, motion picture theaters, and nightclubs.

     Food sales: a retail establishment such as a grocery store or market providing food related products.

     Funeral and interment services: establishments primarily engaged in preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. This classification excludes cemeteries, crematoriums, and columbariums.

     Gaming: legal gaming activities.

     Gas stations and automobile service facilities: an establishment engaged primarily in the retail sale of motor fuels and incidentally in the supplying of goods and services required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. This classification includes incidental maintenance and repair of automobiles and light trucks. Should be discouraged at major intersections.

     Grocery and drug stores: an establishment where grocery and drug-related products are sold to the general public.

     Health services: establishments primarily engaged in the provision of personal health services ranging from prevention and diagnosis to treatment and rehabilitation services provided by physicians, dentists, therapists, optometrists and other health care personnel. Typical uses include medical and dental offices, health maintenance organizations, optical services, immediate care facilities, rehabilitation centers and pharmacies. This classification excludes hospitals and long-term care facilities.

     Hookah bar or hookah lounge: any facility, building, structure or location, where customers share tobacco or a similar smoking product from an individual or communal hookah placed throughout the establishment.

     Household goods sales: an establishment engaged in the selling of household goods or merchandise to the general public.

     Imitation tobacco product: any edible non-tobacco product designed to resemble a tobacco product or any non-edible, non-tobacco product designed to resemble a tobacco product. An example of an imitation tobacco product includes, but is not limited to, non-nicotine fruit or candy flavored liquids used in an electronic cigarette.

     Laboratory: an establishment providing medical or dental laboratory services; or providing photo-graphic, analytical, or testing services. Other laboratories are classified as limited industry.

     Limited printing: establishments that provide convenience photocopying and accessory retail-oriented services.

     Lodging services: establishments offering lodging on a less than monthly basis, and having kitchens in no more than sixty percent of guest units. These classifications include commercial functions that are integrated into the lodging services operation and may be provided for the general public such as meeting rooms and eating, drinking, banquet service, inns, hotels and motels. This classification excludes uses classified under congregate living facility and room rentals in a detached dwelling unit.

     Long-term care facility: an establishment providing care on a twenty-four-hour basis for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services.

     Maintenance and repair services: establishments providing appliance repair, office machine repair, or building maintenance services. This classification excludes the maintenance and repair of vehicles (see vehicle/equipment repair).

     Nursery: an establishment selling horticultural materials in which all merchandise other than plants is kept within an enclosed building or a fully-screened enclosure, and fertilizer of any type is stored and sold in package form only.

     On-premises liquor consumption: establishments predominantly engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Typical uses include bars, cocktail lounges, taverns and similar uses. This classification also includes live entertainment for the enjoyment of patrons, but excludes those uses classified under the commercial recreation and entertainment, indoor entertainment use type.

     1.     Tasting room: an establishment that offers samples of beer or wine for tasting on the premises, with or without charge.

     Outdoor sales and displays: outdoor sales and displays are permitted only when in conjunction with a permanent on-site structure housing the business.

     Overnight accommodations, lodging services: establishments offering lodging on a less than monthly basis, and having kitchens in no more than sixty percent of guest units. This classification includes commercial functions that are integrated into lodging services operation and may be provided for the general public such as under congregate living facility and room rentals in a detached dwelling unit. Overnight accommodations and lodging services not allowed in the neighborhood commercial district.

     Pawnbroker: any person, co-partnership, firm, or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. The key difference between a “pawnbroker” and a “secondhand dealer” is that a pawnbroker loans money for tangible personal property while a secondhand dealer does not.

     Pawnbroker does not include:

     1.     Auctioneers;

     2.     Coin dealers;

     3.     Secondhand dealer.

     Pawnshop: a business engaged in conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of pawnbroking or loaning money, which includes buying, selling, taking in pawn tangible personal property given or deposited as security for a loan.

     Payday lending business: a retail business owned or operated by a “licensee” as that term is defined in California Financial Code Section 23001(d), as amended from time to time who offers, originates, or makes a deferred deposit transaction, who arranges a deferred deposit transaction for a deferred deposit originator, who acts as an agent for a deferred deposit originator, or who assists a deferred deposit originator in the origination of a deferred deposit transaction. However, “licensee” does not include a state or federally chartered bank, thrift, savings association, industrial loan company, or credit union. “Licensee” also does not include a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers that cashes checks or issues money orders for a minimum fee not exceeding two dollars as a service to its customers that is incidental to its main purpose or business.

     Personal improvement services: provision of instructional services or facilities, including photography, fine arts, crafts, dance or music studios; driving schools; business and trade schools; reducing salons; and health or physical fitness clubs.

     1.     Night use: use of the facilities between ten p.m. and seven a.m.

     Personal services: provision of recurrently-needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes hair and nail care salons, garment alteration services, repair shops, dry cleaning pickup, selfservice laundries, and massage services, but excludes banks, and savings and loans.

     Precious metal exchange, commonly referred to as “cash for gold”: the operation of a gold and silver business, either stand alone or in conjunction with the operation of a retail store (e.g., jewelry store, or other similar store) which results in twenty percent or more of their gross business receipts being derived from the purchase of gold or silver jewelry or other similar items from a non-wholesale source (including, but not limited to, art objects, flatware, tableware or other personal household items). Gold and silver dealer does not include:

     1.     Auctioneers;

     2.     Coin dealers.

     Professional and medical offices: offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, administrative, or counseling services, such as design, engineering, real estate, insurance, investment, medical and legal offices. This classification excludes banks, savings and loan associations, and health services.

     Recycling collection center: a collection center for recyclable household materials, including glass, metal, paper products and other materials as may be determined by the community development director.

     Restaurant: an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. This classification includes restaurants, lunch counters, delicatessens, coffee shops, cafes and soda fountains; includes the on-site sale of beer, alcohol and wine incidental to the principal use; but excludes those uses classified under the on-premises liquor consumption use type. This classification also includes live entertainment for the enjoyment of dining patrons, but excludes those uses classified under the commercial recreation and entertainment, indoor entertainment use type.

     1.     Night use: use of the facilities between ten p.m. and seven a.m.

     Restaurant, take-out: an establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the restaurant, and where ordering and pickup of food may take place from an automobile.

     1.     Night use: use of the facilities between ten p.m. and seven a.m.

     Retail commercial: the retail sales of commercial goods and services to the general public.

     Retail food sales: retail sales of food and/or beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Establishments at which twenty percent or more of the transactions are sales of prepared food for on-site or take-out consumption shall be classified as catering or restaurants.

     1.     Convenience store: retail sales of prepackaged food, beverages, and small convenience items typically found in establishments with long or late hours of operation.

     2.     Liquor store: a retail establishment at which fifty percent or more of the transactions in-volve the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption.

     Retail sales: establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. This classification includes processing or manufacturing activities incidental or subordinate to the primary retail activity whose products are primarily sold onsite, such as a jeweler or bakery.

     1.     Limited: retail sales of products manufactured by a principal industrial use.

     2.     Visitor-oriented: retail sales of specialty goods which are likely to be of interest or may be required by visitors to the community, such as gifts, souvenirs, handcrafts, antiques, and clothing.

     Secondhand dealer: a retail use where any person, co-partnership, firm or corporation in possession of a valid secondhand dealer’s license (California Finance Code Section 2100) whose business includes buying, selling, trading, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. A secondhand dealer who buys secondhand tangible personal property would be required to obtain a license from the police chief and file reports pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections 21625 through 21647. Secondhand dealer does not include:

     1.     Auctioneers;

     2.     Coin dealers;

     3.     Pawnbroker.

     Tangible personal property: all secondhand property including, but not limited to: clothing, jewelry, personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription which is purchased by a second hand dealer; or, which, at the time it is acquired by the second-hand dealer bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription. Tangible personal property also includes new or used motor vehicles. Tangible personal property does not include new goods or merchandise purchased from a bona fide manufacturer or distributor or wholesaler of such new goods or merchandise, or coins, monetized bullion, or commercial grade ingots of precious metals.

     Tobacco paraphernalia: cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.

     Tobacco product: any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be intro- duced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.

     Tobacco retailer, large-scale: a store equal or greater than ten thousand square feet that devotes more than five percent of their floor areas to the sale, display, sale and storage of any combination of the following products: tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, imitation tobacco product, electronic cigarettes, and devices capable of providing an inhalable dose of nicotine.

     Tobacco retailer, small-format: any room, store, building, or other place less than ten thousand square feet in which fifty percent or more of the transactions involve the sale of any combination of the following products: tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, imitation tobacco product, electronic cigarettes, and devices capable of providing an inhalable dose of nicotine.

     Vapor bar or vapor lounge (also referred to as “smoking device bar” or “electronic smoking device lounge”): any facility, building, structure or location where customers use an electronic smoking device or other apparatus to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substance within the establishment.

     Vehicle/Equipment Sales and Services.

     1.     Automobile rental: rental of automobiles, including storage and incidental maintenance, but excluding maintenance requiring pneumatic lifts.

     2.     Automobile washing: washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles.

     3.     Service station: an establishment engaged primarily in the retail sale of motor fuels and incidentally in the supplying of goods and services required in the operation and maintenance of motor vehicles. This classification includes incidental maintenance and repair of automobiles and light trucks, but excludes body and fender work or repair of heavy trucks or vehicles, upholstery work, auto glass work, painting, tire recapping, auto dismantling, auto storage, and the sale of groceries, dairy products, liquor, garden supplies and similar items.

     4.     Vehicle/equipment repair: repair of automobiles, light trucks, motorcycles, including the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes auto repair shops, wheel and brake shops, and tire sales and installation, but excludes body and fender shops, repair of heavy trucks or vehicles, vehicle dismantling or salvage, and tire retreading or recapping.

     5.     Vehicle/equipment sales, lease and rentals: sale, lease or rental of automobiles, trucks, tractors, construction and agricultural equipment, mobilehomes, and similar equipment, including storage of vehicles for sale, lease or rental and incidental maintenance and repair of such vehicles.

     Video rentals: a retail establishment where the rental or sale of video related products is performed.

     Wholesaling, commercial: wholesaling and storage of commercial goods and supplies within an enclosed building, but excluding distribution activities. (Ord. 2018-06 § 5, 2018; Ord. 2016-03 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2013-09 §§ 2, 3, 2013; Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.060 Industrial classifications.
     Industrial uses include the on-site production of goods by methods not agricultural in nature, distribution, warehousing, and storage activities, research and development, and vehicle and equipment services other than those classified as commercial uses.

     Cannabis distributor: a business that transports cannabis products between licensees such as purchases from cultivators and manufacturers. Distributors provide required quality assurance services and arrange for (but do not perform) lab testing. “Distributor” also includes retail delivery for non-storefront locations.

     Cannabis indoor cultivation: growing cannabis plants entirely indoors for commercial purposes. This classification may include hydroponics and artificial lights to provide plants with the nutrients and light levels required for growth.

     Cannabis manufacturing: processing cannabis products, primarily from extracted or raw cannabis materials, or bulk storage and handling of volatile and nonvolatile cannabis products and materials.

     Cannabis microbusiness: a cannabis business that engages in at least three of the following activities: non-storefront retailer, distributor, transport only distributor, indoor cultivation (less than one thousand square feet), and manufacturer (State License Level 1, Type 6).

     Cannabis testing: establishments primarily engaged in cannabis research of an industrial or scientific nature, including cannabis product testing and biotechnology, but excluding manufacturing. This classification also includes required testing for cannabinoid levels (such as THC and CBD), pesticides, fungus, heavy metals, and other contaminants.

     Hazardous use: a use that primarily involves the storage, manufacture, or processing of highly combustible or explosive products or materials which are likely to burn with extreme rapidity or which may produce poisonous fumes or explosions; storage or manufacturing that involves highly corrosive, toxic, or noxious alkalis, acids, or other liquids or chemicals producing flame, fume, poisonous, irritant, or corrosive gases; or the storage or processing of any materials producing explosive mixtures of dust or that result in the division of matter into fine particles subject to spontaneous ignition.

     Industry, general: manufacturing or processing of products, primarily from extracted or raw materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. Uses in this classification may involve a high incidence of truck or rail traffic, and/or outdoor storage of products, materials, equipment, or bulk fuel. This classification includes chemical manufacture and processing; heavy equipment and vehicle assembly and service; food and beverage processing and packaging; laundry and dry cleaning plants; auto dismantling and salvage within an enclosed building; stone, clay, and concrete products manufacture (excluding concrete ready-mix plants); metal work; and wood products manufacture and remanufacture.

     Industry, limited: manufacturing of finished parts or products, primarily from previously prepared materials; and provision of industrial ser-vices; both within an enclosed building. This classification includes processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging, but excludes basic industrial processing from raw materials, food processing, and vehicle/equipment services.

     Mineral extraction: the extraction of earth material from a borrow pit, for transportation to and use at another location.

     Recycling center: a site, with or without buildings, upon which used materials are separated and processed for shipment for eventual reuse in new products.

     Research and development: establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature, including limited product testing and biotechnology, but excluding manufacturing.

     Storage tanks: private on-site natural or artificial places and structures where liquids or material is collected, accumulated, and stored and the cumulative sum of all on-site storage capacity equals or exceeds twenty-five thousand gallons.

     Vehicle/Equipment Services.

     1.     Heavy vehicle/equipment repair: repair of heavy trucks or vehicles, mobilehomes, recreational vehicles, or boats; body and fender shops; tire retreading and recapping; and upholstery work. This classification does not include vehicle dismantling or salvage.

     2.     Vehicle storage: storage of operative or inoperative vehicles. This classification includes storage of parking towaways, impound yards, and storage lots for commercial and recreational vehicles.

     Warehousing and storage: provision of storage space for household or commercial goods within an enclosed building. This classification includes ministorage facilities, but excludes trucking terminals.

     Wholesaling, Distribution and Storage.

     1.     Trucking terminal: a wholesaling, storage, or distribution facility having more than six heavy trucks on the premises at one time, but excluding trucking accessory to a limited industry classification.

     2.     Small-scale: wholesaling, storage, and distribution having a maximum gross floor area of five thousand square feet, and having no more than two docks or service bays. (Ord. 2018-06 § 5, 2018; Ord. 2010-02 § 4, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.070 Recreational classifications.
     The purpose of this section is to define the various permitted uses in the recreation and open space classifications.

     Campground: a plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by camping units as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation purposes.

     Marina: a facility for the storing, rental, servicing, fueling, berthing, and securing of boats, that may include eating and retail facilities for owners, crews, and guests.

     Recreational facilities, private: recreational facilities for the sole use of on-site or project residents and their guests, including swimming pools, spas, sports courts and community clubhouses.

     Recreation facilities, public: publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, playing fields, gymnasiums, and other facilities for active and passive recreation.

     Recreation and sports, indoor: the provision of predominantly participant sports and health activities within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller-skating rinks, indoor racquetball courts, athletic clubs, and health clubs.

     Recreation and sports, outdoor: predominantly participant sports conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include hiking trails, equestrian facilities, driving ranges, golf courses, swimming pools, and tennis courts.

     Recreation, passive: activities that involve relatively inactive or less-energetic activities, such as walking, hiking, horseback riding, observing, and picnicking.

     Recreational vehicle park: any lot or parcel of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. “Temporary” in this case shall be defined as occupancy for fewer than ninety continuous days.

     Staging area: an area that provides access to regional park trails and public recreational uses. Public parking and information and interpretive centers are included. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.080 Public and quasi-public classifications.
     Public and quasi-public use types include utility, educational, cultural, medical, protective, governmental and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance.

     Ambulance service: provision of emergency medical care or transportation, including incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

     Ambulance service, public: ambulance service that is operated by or contracted to the city of American Canyon or the American Canyon fire district.

     Animal shelter: provision of shelter and care for stray animals, including feeding, exercising, grooming and incidental medical care. This classification includes the disposition of animal remains.

     Antenna: a noncommercial device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally-based structures.

     1.     Commercial: an antenna used for commercial purposes. Commercial antenna also means macro wireless facility, which means any high-powered wireless telecommunication facility used to serve a major coverage area of several miles with multiple antennas.

     2.     Small-cell antenna facility: Small-cell antenna facility consisting of antennas, antenna supports, equipment, cabinets, equipment housing and enclosure; and related accessory equipment. SAF also means a micro wireless facility. See Section 19.53.030.

     Cemetery: land used for the burial of human remains and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries operated in conjunction with the cemetery.

     Charitable uses: use by nonprofit or benevolent organizations to provide a service beneficial to the general public or to a significant portion of the public for no fee or at a fee recognized as being less than that charged by profit-making organizations.

     Club, lodge: meeting, recreational or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests.

     Community center: one or more buildings used for recreational, social, education, or cultural activities, open to the public or a designated part of the public.

     Conference center: a facility used for conferences and seminars, with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and eating, recreation, entertainment, resource facilities, and meeting rooms.

     Cultural facility: nonprofit institution displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This classification includes libraries, museums, and art galleries.

     Day care center: a facility, other than family child care homes, providing care, supervision, and protection of children or senior citizens on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.

     Emergency shelter: a facility, other than a residential care home, operated by a provider, which provides temporary accommodations to homeless persons and/or families and which meet the standards for shelters contained in Title 25, California Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter P, Subchapter 12, Section 7972. The term “provider” means a government agency or private nonprofit organization which provides, or contracts with recognized community organizations to provide emergency or transitional shelter for the homeless, and which has been certified by the city as meeting all applicable provisions contained in the California Health and Safety, and Administrative Codes. “Temporary accommodations” means that a homeless person or family will be allowed to reside at the shelter for a time period not to exceed six months.

     Government facility: a facility used by a government agency to provide a public service.

     Hospital: a facility that provides medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis. This classification includes incidental facilities for outpatient treatment, as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.

     Maintenance and service facility: a facility providing maintenance and repair services for publicly-owned vehicles and equipment, and materials storage areas. This classification includes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities.

     Public information center: a facility providing information to visitors to the city and region regarding points of interest, activities, businesses and lodging.

     Public parking: surface parking facilities that are publicly owned and operated.

     1.     Structure: includes garages and other types of parking located in structures.

     Public safety facility: a facility for public safety or emergency services, including police and fire protection.

     Religious facility: a facility for religious worship and incidental religious education, but not including schools as defined in this section.

     School: any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.

     Transportation terminal: facilities for loading, unloading, and transferring passengers, baggage, and incidental freight between modes of transportation. This classification includes bus terminals, railroad stations, and public transit stations.

     Utilities, major: electrical substations, aboveground electrical transmission lines, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water reservoirs, water wells, detention basins, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities.

     Utilities, minor: utility facilities that are necessary to support legally established uses and involve only minor structures, such as electrical distribution lines, gas distribution pipelines, utility poles, and pole transformers, but excluding antennas and antenna towers. (Ord. 2018-05 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2014-06 § 2, 2014; Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2007-11 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.090 Agricultural classifications.
     This section is intended to implement the general plan’s provision for certain agricultural uses.

     Animal husbandry: raising of animals or production of animal products, such as eggs or dairy products, on an agricultural or commercial basis. This classification includes grazing, ranching, dairy farming, poultry raising, the raising of fur-bearing animals, and the sale and storage of materials produced on-site, but excludes the raising of swine, feed lots, stockyards, slaughterhouses, dead animal rendering and wild animal keeping.

     Cannabis outdoor cultivation: growing cannabis plants entirely outdoors for personal or commercial purposes.

     Crop production: raising and harvesting of tree crops, row crops, vine crops, or field crops on an agricultural or commercial basis, including pack-ing, processing and storage, but excluding canneries.

     Winery: premises for the production, blending, cellar treatment, storage and bottling of wine other than cider, experimental wine or wine for personal consumption by the producer. Tasting rooms are allowed in conjunction with a primary winery use on the same site. (Ord. 2018-06 § 5, 2018; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.100 Accessory classifications.
     Accessory uses are uses that are incidental to the principal permitted or conditionally-permitted use or structure on a site and are customarily found on the same lot.

     Accessory dwelling unit: a dwelling unit located in a commercial zoning district on the same site as a primary permitted or conditionally-permitted use.

     Livestock keeping: the keeping of large animals for personal purposes, including equines, bovines, sheep and goats, but excluding swine, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 19.31, Animal Keeping Regulations.

     Cafeteria: incidental dining facilities provided for on-site employees and guests of a commercial or industrial use.

     Caretaker’s quarters: a dwelling unit on the site of a commercial, industrial, public or semipublic use, occupied by a guard, caretaker, or operator of a facility.

     Day care home, large: the provision of care, protection and supervision, in the provider’s own home, for seven to fourteen children, inclusive, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.

     Day care home, small: the provision of care, protection and supervision, in the provider’s own home, for six or fewer children, inclusive, including children under the age of ten years who reside at the home, on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.

     Family child care home, large: the provision of care, protection and supervision, in the provider’s own home, for up to fourteen children on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.

     Family child care home, small: the provision of care, protection and supervision, in the provider’s own home, for eight or fewer children on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.

     Guest house: detached living quarters of no more than six hundred forty square feet on the same premises as a primary residence for the use of family members, guests or employees of the occupants of such residence, containing no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling.

     Home occupation: one or more activities carried out for gain by a resident conducted as an accessory use in the resident’s dwelling unit.

     Horticulture, limited: the raising of vegetables, flowers, ornamental trees and shrubs, or orchard crops for personal use.

     Recreational facilities, private: recreational facilities for the sole use of on-site or project residents or similar activities not requiring the use of roofed structures.

     Tent: a temporary structure having a roof and/or walls of fabric. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.05.110 Temporary use classifications.
     Temporary uses are those allowed for a fixed period of time, with the intent of their discontinuance upon the expiration of the time period.

     Commercial filming: commercial motion picture or video photography at the same location six or fewer consecutive days per quarter of a calendar year in residential districts or fewer than fifteen days per quarter of a calendar year in nonresidential districts.

     Live entertainment: music, comedy, readings, dancing, acting or other entertainment performed on a temporary basis. This classification includes dancing by patrons to live or recorded music.

     Mobile structures: temporary mobilehomes, mobile offices, mobile classrooms and recreational vehicles used in connection with new subdivisions, construction sites and existing uses of land.

     Personal property sales: the selling or disposition of personal property at a residence by its occupant(s), or at a church or charity bazaar, subject to the provisions of the municipal code.

     Public assembly: any group of thirty or more persons participating in an organized activity having a common purpose on or within a city street, city park, parking facility, sidewalk, or other public property or right-of-way.

     Retail sales, outdoor: temporary outdoor retail sales of new merchandise on the site of a legally established retail business which has a direct relationship to existing businesses.

     Seasonal sales: outdoor retail sales of seasonal agricultural items, such as Christmas trees, strawberries, pumpkins, and holiday flowers.

     Special event:

     1.     Any temporary event not exceeding thirty days, whether indoors or outdoors, involving thirty or more persons, which is inconsistent with the permanent use to which the property may legally be put, or the occupancy levels permitted on property; or

     2.     Any public assembly as defined in this section; or

     3.     Any event, regardless of the number of persons involved, requiring full or partial street closure, which occurs on a city street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way, and/or which is likely to obstruct, delay or interfere with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

     The following list of examples is illustrative, but not determinative, of activities that may constitute “special events”:

     1.     Motorized vehicle races or contests.

     2.     Carnivals, circuses, fairs, festivals, nondomesticated animal act or exhibition, and similar activities.

     3.     Any event with mechanical amusement rides.

     4.     Promotional or fundraising activities.

     5.     Parades.

     6.     Outdoor shows, concerts and exhibitions.

     7.     Outdoor craft fairs, soapbox derbies, or other similar events.

     Tent: a temporary structure having a roof and/or walls of fabric. (Ord. 2010-07 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2001-2 § 1, 2001)

DIVISION 2. ZONING DISTRICT PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 19.10 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
19.10.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose for establishing these residential districts, permitted uses, and development standards is to:

     1.     Provide appropriately located areas for residential development consistent with the general plan and with standards of public health and safety established by the municipal code;

     2.     Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling by establishing reasonable development standards for the mass, scale, and location on a building site for all new residential construction;

     3.     Achieve a high standard of site and building design, and design compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods;

     4.     Provide for a range of permitted uses and activities within the various residential districts; and

     5.     Provide sites for public and semipublic land uses needed to complement residential development or requiring location in a residential environment.

     B.     Intent. The intent of this chapter is to establish a range of permitted uses and reasonable development standards to guide the orderly development within each residential district in a manner consistent with the general plan’s land use schedule and subarea schedule. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.020 Establishment of districts.
     In order to provide sufficient land to meet the housing needs of all existing and future residents of the city, the following residential districts are established:

     A.    RE (residential estate) districts: to provide for residential estate areas where the minimum lot size is one acre.

     B.     RR (rural residential) districts: to provide for very low-density residential uses and related activities in existing or proposed large-lot residential neighborhoods, and in the peripheral foothill areas of the city. There are three separate RR districts:

     1.     RRH (rural residential hillside) districts: requires a minimum lot size of twenty thousand square feet and imposes special development standards.

     2.     The RR-20000 district requires a minimum lot size of twenty thousand square feet.

     3.     The RR-10000 district requires a minimum lot size of ten thousand square feet.

     C.     RS (suburban residential) districts: to provide for low-density residential uses and related activities in areas of the city predominated by subdivisions with single-family lot patterns. There are two separate RS districts:

     1.     The RS-8000 district with a minimum lot size of eight thousand square feet;

     2.     The RS-6500 district with a minimum lot size of six thousand five hundred square feet.

     D.    RM (medium residential) districts: to accommodate multifamily residential uses in areas of minimal constraints and ready access to transportation and services, with single-family uses allowed under some circumstances in conformance with the general plan. Development in the RM district shall be within the range of five to twelve units per gross acre.

     E.     RH (high residential) districts to provide for high-density multifamily residential uses in areas of minimal constraints and ready access to transportation and services, and to provide a range of housing opportunities. There are two separate RH districts:

     1.     The RH-1 district with a density range of twelve to sixteen units per gross acre;

     2.     The RH-2 district with a density of twenty units per gross acre.

     F.     RO (residential overlay) district to provide for high-density multifamily residential uses on selected sites in community commercial and neighborhood commercial districts, in single or multi-use structures. The RO district provides a density of twenty units per gross acre west of Broadway/Highway 29, a density of thirty-five units per gross acre east of Broadway/Highway 29. Development standards shall comply with Tables 1 and 2 of Chapter 19.11, community commercial and neighborhood commercial district for multifamily residential and mixed-use structures. (Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2006-07 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2001-11 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.030 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all uses within the residential districts as shown on the official zoning district map of the city. Development within the residential districts shall conform with all applicable development standards, regulations, and performance standards of this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.040 Permitted uses.
     Table 19.10.040 of this section sets forth the permitted and conditionally permitted uses for each residential district. A “P” designates a permitted use. A “C” indicates a conditionally permitted use subject to approval of a use permit by the planning commission. An “M” indicates a minor use permit is required pursuant to Chapter 19.42. If no letter is found opposite a particular use, it is not permitted in that district.

 

Table 19.10.040


PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS1

 

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Use Classifications

RRH

RE

RR

RS

RM

RH

Related Provisions

Residential

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cannabis indoor cultivation

P

P

P

P

P

P

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis outdoor cultivation

-

-

-

-

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Congregate living facility

-

-

-

-

P

P

 

Cottage food operations

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Employee housing (1 to 6 occupants)

P

P

P

P

-

-

 

Garden apartments

-

-

-

-

P

P

 

Mobilehome

-

C

C

C

-

-

 

Mobilehome park

-

-

-

-

C

C

Chapter 19.10

Multifamily residential

-

-

-

-

P

P

 

Residential care home

-

P

P

P

P

P

 

Single room occupancy

-

-

-

-

-

P

Section 19.10.160

Single-family residential

 

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Detached

P

P

P

P

P2

P2

2GP Policy 1.8.3

- Semidetached

-

-

P3

P4

P

P

3GP Policy 1.7.1

Townhouses

-

-

-

-

P

P

 

Commercial

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult business

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Animal sales and service

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Boarding kennel

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Grooming

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Medical care

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Retail care

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Bank, savings and loan

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Drive-up service

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Walk-up service

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Building materials and services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Catering

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Commercial printing

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Limited printing

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Communication services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Entertainment, indoor

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Amusement center

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Gaming

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Funeral and interment services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Health services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Laboratory

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Lodging services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Bed and breakfast inn

C

C

C

-

-

-

 

Long-term care facility

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Maintenance and repair services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Nursery

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Offices, business, and professional

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

On-premises liquor consumption

 

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Tasting room

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Pawnshops

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Personal improvement services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Night use

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Personal services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Recycling collection center

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Restaurant

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Night use

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Restaurant, take-out

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Night use

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Retail food sales

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Convenience store

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Liquor store

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Retail sales

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Limited

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Visitor-oriented

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Vehicle/equipment sales and service

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Automobile rental

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Automobile washing

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Service station

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Vehicle/equipment repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Vehicle/equipment sales, lease and rentals

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Wholesaling, commercial

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Industrial

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hazardous use

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Industry, general

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Industry, limited

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Mineral extraction

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Recycling center

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Research and development

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Storage tank(s)

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Vehicle/equipment services

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Vehicle/equipment repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Vehicle storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Wholesaling, distribution and storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Small scale

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

- Trucking terminal

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Recreational

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Recreational facilities, public

C

C

P

P

P

P

 

Recreation and sports, outdoor

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Recreation, passive

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Staging area

C

C

C

-

-

-

 

Public and Quasi-Public

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Antenna

-

-

P

P

P

P

 

- Exceeding height limitations

-

-

C

C

C

C

 

- Small-cell antenna facility

P

-

-

-

P

P

Chapter 19.53

Community center

-

-

-

C

C

C

GP Policy 1.12.1

Conference center

-

-

-

-

-

-

 

Cultural facility

-

-

 

C

C

C

GP Policy 1.12.1

Day care center

-

M

M

M

M

M

GP Policy 1.23.5

Homeless shelter

-

-

-

-

C

C

Chapter 19.42

Public safety facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Religious facility

C

C

C

C

C

C

GP Policy 1.23.4

School

-

C

C

C

C

C

GP Policy 1.12.1

Utilities, major

-

-

C

C

C

C

 

Utilities, minor

-

-

P

P

P

P

 

Agriculture

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Animal husbandry

-

P

-

-

-

-

 

Crop production

C

P

-

-

-

-

 

Accessory

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory dwelling unit

P

P

P

P

P

P

Chapter 19.39

Livestock keeping

P

P

P

P

-

-

Chapter 19.31

Caretaker’s quarters

C

C

-

-

-

-

 

Family child care home, large

P

P

P

P

-

-

Chapter 19.33

Family child care home, small

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Guest house

C

C

C

C

-

-

 

Home occupation

P

P

P

P

P

P

Chapter 19.29

Horticulture, limited

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Room rentals

-

-

C

C

-

-

 

Temporary

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Animal show

 

 

-

-

-

-

 

Commercial filming

C

C

C

C

C

C

 

Mobile structures

C

C

C

C

C

C

Chapter 19.30

Personal property sales

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

1       Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements.

 

(Ord. 2020-04 § 2, 2020; Ord. 2018-06 § 6, 2018; Ord. 2018-05 § 2, 2018; Ord. 2017-07 § 2, 2017; Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2014-06 § 3, 2014; Ord. 2013-07 § 3, 2013; Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-02 § 4, 2010; Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2009-11 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2005-02, 2005; Ord. 2001-11 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.050 Lot area, yard setbacks, and building coverage standards.
     Table 19.10.050 of this section sets forth the minimum lot area, minimum yard setbacks, and lot coverage standards for each residential district. The provisions of this section shall establish the minimum lot area and yard and setback standards for each residential zoning district.

     A.    Minimum Lot Area. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the minimum lot area shall be determined by multiplying the lot width by the lot depth. The lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side property lines measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and rear property lines. The lot depth shall be the horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines.

     1.     Flag Lots.

     a.     The area of a flag lot’s access corridor shall not be included in determining the site area of the lot (see Figure A-2).

     b.     The corridor of land which provides access to a street for a flag lot shall have a minimum street frontage of sixteen feet and a minimum width which is less than the required lot width but not less than sixteen feet (see Figure A-2).

     2.     Width of Residential Corner Lots. The minimum width of corner lots in a residential district shall be a minimum of ten percent greater than the minimum width for the district specified in Table 19.10.050 of this chapter.

     3.     Depth Adjoining State Highway or Railroad. A lot whose rear lot line abuts a state highway or railroad right-of-way shall have a minimum depth that is at least twenty percent greater than the lot depth standard for the applicable zoning district.

     4.     Minimum Lot Frontage on a Cul-de-Sac. Unless otherwise approved by the city council in conjunction with the approval of a subdivision map, all lots in the bulb of a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum width or street frontage at the property line of forty feet.

     B.     General Yard Provisions. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter and specific district regulations, the provisions of this section apply to the placement of principal structures. The location of accessory buildings, equipment, and uses and the required separation between primary buildings is addressed elsewhere in this chapter.

     1.     Point of Measurement. Except as otherwise provided, required yards shall be measured as the minimum horizontal distance from the appropriate front, side, or rear property line or street/alley right-of-way line of the site to a line parallel thereto on the site (see Figure A-1).

     2.     Partially-Improved Streets. Where a site abuts a street having only a portion of its required width dedicated or reserved for street purposes, site area and required yards shall be measured from a line drawn on the boundary of the additional width required for street purposes abutting the site.

     3.     Irregularly-Shaped Lots. On corner lots, through lots, lots with three or more frontages, flag lots, and irregularly-shaped lots where the provisions of this chapter do not clearly establish the location of yards and lot lines, the community development director shall make such determination, using the provisions of this chapter for guidance.

     C.     Projections into Yards. Projections are permitted into yards required for principal buildings as follows, subject to the provisions of the Uniform Building Code:

     1.     Eaves and cantilevered roofs may project up to two and one-half feet, provided:

     a.     That such eaves or cantilevered roofs are not closer than two and one-half feet to any lot or street line;

     b.     That no portions of such eaves or cantilevered roofs are less than eight feet above grade;

     c.     That there are no vertical supports or members within the required yard (see Figure A-4).

     2.     Fireplace structures, buttresses, and wing walls may project up to two and one-half feet, provided:

     a.     That a minimum five feet is provided on the side yard where front yard access is provided;

 

     b.     That such structures shall not be utilized to provide closets or otherwise increase usable floor area;

     c.     That such fireplace structures are not wider than six feet measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part (see Figure A-5).

     3.     Bay and greenhouse windows may project up to two and one-half feet, provided:

     a.     That such windows are not closer than two and one-half feet to any lot or street line;

     b.     That there are no vertical supports or members within the required yard.

     4.     Uncovered porches, platforms, landings, and decks, including access stairs thereto may project up to three feet into required interior side yards, and up to five feet into required front, rear, and corner side yards, provided:

     a.     That such projections shall not be closer than two feet to any lot or street line;

     b.     That such projections are open and unenclosed; provided, however, that an openwork railing not to exceed three and one-half feet in height may be installed;

     c.     That such projections do not exceed any average height of one foot;

     d.     That such projections do not extend above the level of the first floor.

     5.     Awnings and canopies may project up to two and one-half feet into required interior side yards and five feet into required front, rear, and corner side yards, provided:

     a.     That such awnings or canopies are not closer than two and one-half feet to any lot or street line;

     b.     That such awnings or canopies have no vertical support within such yard;

     c.     That such awnings or canopies extend only over the windows or doors to be protected, and for not more than one foot on either side thereof.

     6.     Covered patios attached to a dwelling unit may project into a required rear yard, provided:

     a.     That such patio is not closer than five feet to any lot line;

     b.     That such patio shall remain permanently unenclosed on at least two sides. This provision, however, shall not preclude the placement of detachable screens;

     c.     A freestanding patio shall be subject to the same requirements as accessory buildings in rear yards as provided by Section 19.10.060.

     7.     Rain conductors, downspouts, utility-service risers, shutoff valves, sills, capitals, bases, cornices, and belt courses may project up to one foot into a required yard.

     8.     Water heaters, water softeners, and utility meters, including service conduits and pipes, enclosed or unenclosed may project up to two and one-half feet into a required interior side or rear yard, provided that such structures or equipment are not closer than two and one-half feet to any lot line. Gas meters, if enclosed or adequately screened from view by a structure permitted in the yard, may project up to two and one-half feet into a required front or corner side yard.

     9.     Wall and window-mounted air conditioners, coolers, and fans may project into any required yard, provided that such equipment is not closer than two and one-half feet to any lot line.

     D.    Maximum Building Coverage. The maximum building coverage allowed in each residential district is the percentage of the building site covered by all primary and accessory structures on the site, measured horizontally to the outside face of exterior walls or structural members. Open decks and balconies and open breezeways connecting two buildings are not included in lot coverage.

 

Table 19.10.050

 

SCHEDULE OF RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS

 

Zoning Districts

RRH

RE

RR-20000

RR-10000

RS-8000

RS-6500

RM

RH

Maximum density

One unit/acre max

One unit/acre max

2 units/acre

4 units/acre

5—6 units/acre

6—7 units/acre

Per General Plan

Per General Plan

Minimum area per lot

20,000 sq. ft.

43,560 sq. ft.

20,000 sq. ft.

10,000 sq. ft.

8,000 sq. ft.

6,500 sq. ft.

20,000 sq. ft.1

20,000 sq. ft.1

Minimum width per lot

100 ft.

120 ft.

75 ft.

70 ft.

65 ft.

60 ft.

100 ft.1

100 ft.1

Minimum depth per lot

160 ft.

200 ft.

120 ft.

110 ft.

100 ft.

90 ft.

100 ft.1

100 ft.1

Minimum setback from Newell Drive

Single story - 300 ft.

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Two-story homes - 400 ft.

Minimum front yard

30 ft.

10% of lot depth

20 ft.

20 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

20 ft.

Garage

35 ft.

—

—

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

—

Minimum side yard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

First story

15 ft. with no less than 35 ft. between homes on adjoining parcels

10% of lot width

10 ft.

10 ft.

5 ft.

5 ft.

5 ft.

5 ft.

Second story

20 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

8 ft.

8 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Street side of corner lot

25 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Minimum rear yard

30 ft.

25% of lot depth

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

15 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

Building envelope

Maximum

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

20,000 sq. ft. to 1 acre lots

8,000 sq. ft.

> 1 acre lots

12,000 sq. ft.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum building coverage

60% of approved building envelope

30%

30%

30%

40%

40%

50%

50%

Maximum number of stories

2

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

2.5

3

3

Maximum building height

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Main structure

35 ft.

35 ft.

35 ft.

35 ft.

35 ft.

35 ft.

42 ft.

42 ft.

Detached accessory building

15 ft.

20 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

 

1.   Applies only to the new parcels created after the effective date of the zoning code.

 

     Special Development Requirements for the RRH zoning district:

     1.     Subdivisions in the RRH Zoning District shall be subject to the following standards:

     a.     Residential lots shall vary significantly in size in order to create the openness and variation characteristic of a rural neighborhood. No more than two contiguous lots shall be of the same size. Lot size variations shall be achieved by varying lot area/lot widths. Parcel size variations on contiguous lots of one acre or less shall vary up or down a minimum of twenty-five percent in size. Contiguous lots larger than one acre shall vary up or down in size by ten percent.

     b.     The subdivision design shall ensure protection of designated viewsheds from Newell Drive to the highest ridgeline located to the east of the project.

     c.     Each residential lot will identify a maximum building height that will enable other homes with sufficient elevation to achieve a view toward the Napa River wetlands. Technical information that enables identification of a maximum building height will include but not be limited to: lot placement within the subdivision, building envelope placement, and grading. The maximum building height will be recorded in the project CC&Rs (Covenants, Codes and Restrictions).

     d.     Design guidelines addressing architecture for individual homes shall be prepared and submitted to the city of American Canyon, concurrently with submittal of a tentative subdivision map, master plan or specific plan. The design guidelines must be consistent with the General Plan Land Use Element Design Principles (Policy 1.11.5).

     e.     Native landscaping shall be provided in the Newell Drive setback area. The preliminary and final landscape improvement plans for this common area open space shall include clusters of native shrubs and trees to enhance the privacy and soften the visual form of future homes as viewed from public areas such as Newell Drive. Such landscape improvements shall be approved by the city and maintained by the subdivision’s homeowner’s association.

     f.      Streets within the RRH district may make use of a reduced overall paved width of not less than thirty feet, subject to approval of a design exception to be considered concurrently with the approval of a tentative subdivision map.

     2.     Residential Building Permit Requirements.

     a.     To determine potential impacts to viewsheds and neighboring properties, the applicant shall install story poles to provide a three-dimensional, full-scale, silhouette structure that outlines the location, bulk and mass that a proposed structure will occupy on a site prior to submittal of a building permit for any structure on a residential parcel.

     b.     Prior to submittal of a building permit for any structure or group of structures, the applicant shall submit written documentation from the applicable homeowner’s association that the application complies with the design guidelines in the recorded CC&Rs.

     c.     An active homeowner’s association shall be set up to ensure maintenance of private infrastructure and administer enforcement of neighborhood CC&Rs. (Ord. 2015-01 § 2, 2015; Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 1, 2004; Ord. 2001-11 § 1, 2001; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.060 Accessory structures, equipment and uses.
     Accessory structures, equipment and uses are permitted in required yards of residential districts as provided herein:

     A.    Accessory Structures.

     1.     Accessory structures may be located no closer than three feet to the side and rear yards required for the primary structure, provided that in the aggregate, no more than fifty percent of the required rear yard area shall be covered by accessory structures. Accessory structures are permitted only on lots having a primary dwelling.

     2.     On a reversed corner lot, an accessory structure shall not be located closer to the rear property line than the required side yard on the adjoining key lot, and not closer to the side property line adjoining the street than the required front yard on the adjoining key lot.

     3.     Maximum height of an accessory structure shall be fifteen feet.

     4.     Steel shipping containers may not be located in any residential district unless it is not visible from any public property or right-of-way.

     B.     Planters. Planter boxes and masonry planters are permitted in all required yards not to exceed a height of three and one-half feet.

     C.     Swimming Pools. A swimming pool is permitted in a required rear or side yard provided it is not closer than five feet to any lot line.

     D.    Swimming Pool Equipment and Safety Fences.

     1.     Swimming pool or spa equipment vaults may be located in a side yard so long as a minimum clear distance is provided between the vault and a fence, wall, or other structure of three feet.

     2.     Swimming pool or spa equipment vaults may be located adjacent to a rear property line within a required side yard.

     3.     Required safety fences for swimming pools and spas six feet in height or less may be located within any required side or rear yard. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.070 Distance between buildings in residential districts.
     The provisions of this section shall apply where more than one building is placed on a parcel in a residential district.

     A.    Distance Between Main Buildings. A minimum distance of ten feet shall be maintained between all primary residential buildings established on the same lot or parcel of land.

     B.     Distance Between Accessory and Primary Buildings. Except where a greater distance is otherwise required by this chapter, a minimum distance of six feet shall be required between any primary residential building and an accessory building established on the same lot or parcel of land.

     C.     Projections Between Buildings. The following projections are permitted within the required distance between buildings, provided they are developed subject to the same standards as, and not closer to a line midway between such buildings, than is permitted in relation to a side lot line within a required interior side yard:

     1.     Eaves and cantilevered roofs;

     2.     Fireplace structures, buttresses, and wing walls;

     3.     Rain conductors and spouts, water tables, sills, capitals, cornices, and belt courses;

     4.     Awnings and canopies;

     5.     Water heaters, water softeners, gas or electric meters, including service conductors and pipes;

     6.     Stairways and balconies above the level of the first floor;

     7.     Uncovered porches, platforms, landings, and decks, including access stairs thereto, which do not extend above the first floor are permitted within the required distance between buildings without distance restriction. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.080 Fences and walls.
     Fences and walls in residential districts may be erected and maintained in required yards subject to the standards specified herein. All height limitations applying to fences and walls shall also apply to hedges planted within yards and forming a barrier serving the same purpose as a fence or wall.

     A.    Location in Yards.

     1.     Front Yards. Fences and walls within a required front yard shall not exceed a height of forty-two inches.

     2.     Corner Side Yards.

     a.     Fences and walls within a required corner side yard shall not exceed three and one-half feet in height where closer than ten feet to the street line, nor exceed six feet in height where ten feet or more from the street line, notwithstanding the provisions of the following subsection related to vision clearance.

     b.     On a corner lot, no fence, wall, hedge, or other artificial obstruction within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting points on the street property lines equal to the front setback (for the applicable zone district but no less than twenty feet) from the street intersection shall exceed a height of three feet above established grade at the edge of the existing or proposed pavement, provided that trees pruned to eight feet above street grade shall be permitted (see Figure A-6).

     c.     Interior Side and Rear Yards. Fences and walls within a required interior side or rear yard shall not exceed six feet in height. When not within required setbacks, maximum fence height shall be ten feet.

     3.     Lots of Twenty Thousand Square Feet or More. On lots of twenty thousand square feet or more, a six-foot high, fifty percent see-through fence (when viewed at a forty-five degree angle) may be located within the required front yard setback, if the wall/fence is located within the property line of the subject parcel. If gated, gates for vehicles must be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the property line.

     B.     Retaining Walls.

     1.     Retaining walls not exceeding six feet in height are permitted in all yards.

     2.     Where a retaining wall protects a cut below the natural grade and is located on a front, side, or rear lot line, such retaining wall may be topped by a fence or wall of the same height that would otherwise be permitted at the location if no retaining wall existed. Where such retaining wall contains a fill, the height of the retaining wall built to retain the fill shall be considered as contributing to the permissible height of a fence or wall; providing, however, that in any event an open-work non-view-obscuring fence of three and one-half feet may be erected at the top of the retaining wall for safety.

     3.     Where a wall or fence is located in a required yard adjacent to a retaining wall containing a fill, such wall or fence shall be set back from the retaining wall a distance of one foot for each foot in height, to up to five feet; provided, however, that this does not permit a wall or fence in required yards higher than permitted by this section. The area between such wall or fence and the retaining wall shall be landscaped and continuously maintained in an orderly, neat fashion.

     C.     Exempted Fences and Walls. Where a fence or wall exceeding the maximum heights specified by this section is required by any law or regulation of the state of California, a fence or wall not exceeding such required height is permitted.

     D.    Measurement of Fence and Wall Height. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the highest adjacent grade. In order to allow for variation in topography, the height of a required fence or wall may vary an amount not to exceed six inches; provided, however, that in no event shall the average height of such fence or wall exceed the maximum height specified.

     E.     Minor Variation to Fence Height Restrictions/Conditional Fence Permit. The community development director, after providing notice to adjacent property owners, may consider approval of a conditional fence permit to allow fence heights up to two and one-half feet higher than those specified in this section for residential districts based on the following criteria:

     1.     The proposed increased fence height will not create negative shading impacts on adjacent properties or impacts are mitigated through use of open fence design features.

     2.     The proposed increased fence height incorporates appropriate architectural details and materials that assure compatibility with existing fences and fence patterns.

     3.     The proposed increased fence height in a front or exterior side yard area does not create traffic hazards or detract from the neighborhood character by creating visual obstructions to open front yard patterns on an established neighborhood street.

     4.     Any action by the community development director on a conditional fence permit may be appealed to the planning commission. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.090 Height limits.
     A.    Maximum Height. The maximum building height in each residential district is set forth in Table 19.10.050 of this chapter (set out at the end of this chapter).

     B.     Height Measurement. The height of a structure shall be measured vertically from the average elevation of the natural grade of the ground covered by the structure (see Figure A-7) to the highest point of the structure or to the coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height between eaves and ridges for hip, gable, or gambrel roofs.

     C.     Projections Above Permitted Height.

     1.     Architectural projections such as mechanical equipment enclosures and other appurtenant rooftop structures or penetrations such as skylights, stairwells, and ventilation atria; spires, cupolas, chimneys, and other design elements integral to the overall design character of a building and intended to distinguish its design may be permitted above the height limits where not in conflict with the intent of this chapter, but may not exceed twenty percent of the horizontal area of the floor area below or ten feet in height above the main roof above which they are situated.

     2.     Utility poles and towers shall not be subject to the height limits prescribed in the district regulations. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.100 Parking requirements.
     Parking requirements for residential uses are contained in Chapter 19.21, Parking and Loading Standards. (Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 1, 2004; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.110 Garage sales.
     Garage sales, estate sales (which includes estate auctions), and personal property sales shall be subject to the following regulations:

     A.    Merchandise. Only the sale of personal household items is allowed. The sale of items acquired for resale or items assembled or manufactured on the premises (including products from a home occupation but excluding arts and crafts items) for the purpose of resale is prohibited. All transactions shall take place on the property of the owner conducting the event.

     B.     Displays. No item for sale shall be displayed within the public right-of-way.

     C.     Duration and Frequency. A sale or auction shall not exceed three consecutive days and occur no more than six times per calendar year on any one parcel. This regulation does not preclude the sale of individually advertised items at any time, provided they are not displayed so as to be visible from public view, other than legally parked vehicles and trailers.

     D.    Signs. All signs shall conform to the requirements set forth in this title for sign regulations. All signs shall be removed within two days of the estate or garage sale. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.130 Manufactured homes.
     A.    Intent. It is the intent of the city to provide opportunities for the placement of manufactured homes in single-family residential districts, consistent with state law and to ensure that such manufactured homes are designed and located so as to be harmonious within the context of the surrounding houses and neighborhood.

     B.     Approval. Approval by the community development director is required prior to the issuance of building permits for individual manufactured homes on a site in any residential district, subject to the provisions of this section. The community development director shall review each proposed manufactured home to determine compatibility in design and appearance with residential structures in the vicinity, based upon design and development criteria set forth in this section.

     C.     Location. Manufactured homes may be located in any residential district where a single-family detached dwelling is permitted, subject to the same restrictions on density and to the same property development regulations.

     D.    Design and Development. The design and development criteria set forth herein are intended to protect neighborhood integrity, provide for harmonious relationships between manufactured homes and surrounding uses, and minimize problems that could occur as a result of locating manu-factured homes on building sites designated for single-family residential uses. Each manufactured home:

     1.     Shall be at least eighteen feet wide, as measured at its narrowest width;

     2.     Shall be built on a permanent foundation approved by the building official;

     3.     Shall have been manufactured after June 15, 1976, and shall be certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act of 1974, and shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of the most recent edition of the Uniform Building Code adopted by the city;

     4.     Shall provide skirting of exterior finish materials extending to the finished grade;

     5.     Shall provide exterior siding material compatible with adjacent residential structures; shiny or metallic finishes are prohibited;

     6.     Shall have a roof with a pitch of not fewer than three inches vertical rise per twelve inches horizontal distance;

     7.     Shall have roofing material of concrete or asphalt tile, shakes, or shingles complying with the most recent editions of the Uniform Building Code adopted by the city;

 

     8.     Shall provide eaves or roof overhangs of not less than one foot as measured from the vertical side of the unit;

     9.     Shall maintain a finished floor elevation no higher than twenty inches above the exterior finished grade; and

     10.   Shall maintain required covered parking in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The exterior materials and roofing proposed for any garage shall be the same as those materials used on the main structure.

     E.     Cancellation of State Registration. Whenever a manufactured home is installed on a permanent foundation, any registration of the manufactured home with the state of California shall be canceled, pursuant to state laws and regulations. Before any occupancy certificate may be issued for use of such a manufactured home, the owner shall provide to the building official satisfactory evidence showing that the state registration of the manufactured home has been or will, with certainty, be canceled; if the manufactured home is new and has never been registered with the state, the owner shall provide the building official with a statement to that effect from the dealer selling the home. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.140 Undergrounding of utilities.
     Prior to the issuance of any permits for new development in any residential district, utility service to the site shall be undergrounded in accordance with the requirements of the public works department unless otherwise approved by the city engineer and community development director. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.150 Nonconforming building lines.
     Where an existing, legal, nonconforming structure encroaches into a setback which was established after the building was constructed, the existing building line may be continued, subject to community development director approval. (Ord. 2003-02, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.10.160 Single room occupancy.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of these regulations are to assure well managed and maintained single room occupancy (SRO) developments. SROs are a type of group residential use. The following provisions shall apply specifically to SROs and may provide guidance for other group residential projects.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     Density. Given that these are small individual housing rooms, to equate SRO projects with General Plan housing unit densities, the city shall apply a factor of two to the density range. That is, a General Plan density range of ten to twenty units per acre shall equate to an SRO project density range of twenty to forty rooms/acre. Density bonuses may also be applied to qualifying SRO projects.

     2.     Any SRO project must also meet the following standards:

     a.     Proposed new construction, or exterior alterations to the existing buildings are compatible with the design and scale of the surrounding neighborhood;

     b.     SRO sizes shall range from one hundred fifty to four hundred fifty square feet;

     c.     A preliminary management plan shall be submitted as part of a design permit application and shall be reviewed and approved by the community development director prior to the application being deemed complete. A final management plan shall be approved by the community development department prior to issuance of a building permit, and recorded at the Napa County recorder’s office;

     d.     An on-site twenty-four-hour manager is required;

     e.     Tenancy of a SRO shall not be less than thirty days. (Ord. 2017-07 § 3, 2017)

 

19.10-F Figures for Chapter 19.10
Figure A-1
YARD MEASUREMENTS



 

Figure A-2
FLAG LOTS

 



 

Figure A-3
CORNER SIDEYARD ON REVERSE CORNER LOT

 



 

Figure A-4
EAVES AND CANTILEVERED ROOFS IN REQUIRED YARDS

 



 

Figure A-5
FIREPLACE STRUCTURES IN REQUIRED YARDS

 



 

Figure A-6
CORNER LOT VISION CLEARANCE

 



 

Figure A-7
BUILDING HEIGHT MEASUREMENT

 



 

Chapter 19.11 COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
19.11.010 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

     A.    Establish reasonable development standards to guide the orderly development of property within the CC (community commercial) and CN (neighborhood commercial) district, and

     B.     Establish a range of permitted uses and reasonable development standards to guide the orderly development within each commercial district in a manner consistent with the general plan’s land use schedule and sub-area schedule. (Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.020 Establishment of districts.
     This chapter establishes two zoning districts to allow a broad range of commercial uses within those districts. The following commercial districts are hereby established:

     CC (community commercial) district: to accommodate a broad range of commercial uses that will serve local residents and the greater community and reduce the need for external trips to adjacent jurisdictions for goods and services, and provide shopping and service opportunities for commuters, visitors, and tourists. Also accommodates multifamily residential uses, especially in conjunction with a commercial use.

     CN (neighborhood commercial) district: to encourage a limited range of retail and service commercial uses that are oriented to the day-to-day needs of the local residents, at a scale compatible with adjacent neighborhoods. Also accommodates multifamily residential uses, especially in conjunction with a commercial use. (Ord. 2006-07 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.030 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all uses within the commercial districts as shown on the official zoning district map of the city of American Canyon. Development within the commercial districts shall conform with all applicable development standards, regulations, and performance standards of this title. (Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.040 Permitted uses.
     Table 1 of this section sets forth the permitted and conditionally permitted uses for each commercial district. A “P” designates a permitted use. A “C” indicates a conditionally permitted use subject to approval of a use permit by the planning commission. An “M” indicates a minor use permit is required pursuant to Chapter 19.42. If no letter is found opposite a particular use, it is not permitted in that district.

 

Table 1
Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses1

Community Commercial and Neighborhood Commercial Districts

 

Use Classification

Zoning District

Related Provision

 

CN

CC

 

Residential

 

 

 

Cannabis indoor cultivation

P

P

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis outdoor cultivation

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Congregate living facility

-

-

 

Farm employees housing

-

C

 

Garden apartments

-

-

 

Mobilehome

-

-

 

Mobilehome park

-

-

 

Multifamily residential

P1

P2

1GP Policy 1.14.1

2GP Policy 1.15.1

Residential care home

-

-

 

Second residential unit

-

-

 

Single-family residential

 

 

 

Detached

-

-

 

Semidetached

-

-

 

Townhouses

-

-

 

Commercial

 

 

 

Adult-entertainment business

-

P

 

Animal sales and services

 

 

 

Boarding kennel

-

C

 

Grooming

P

P

 

Medical care

P

P

 

Retail sales

P

P

 

Bank, savings and loan

P

P

 

Bookstores

P

P

 

Building materials and services

-

C

 

Cannabis retail

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Catering

P

P

 

Check cashing business

-

-

 

Coin dealer

P

P

 

Commercial printing

-

P

 

Limited printing

P

P

 

Communication services

-

P

 

Drugstores

P

P

 

Eating and drinking establishments

P

P

 

Adjacent to residential use or zoning district

C

C

 

Entertainment, indoor

C

P

 

Amusement center

C

C

 

Gaming

-

C

 

Food sales

P

P

 

Funeral and interment services

-

C

 

Gas stations and automobile service facilities

C

C

 

Grocery and drug stores

P

P

 

Health services

P

P

 

Hookah bar

-

-

 

Household good sales

P

P

 

Laboratory

-

P

 

Lodging services

-

P

 

Long-term care facility

-

P

 

Maintenance and repair services

-

P

 

Mini-storage/public storage facility

-

-

 

Nursery

P

P

 

Offices, business and professional

P

P

 

On-premises liquor consumption

-

C

 

Tasting room

-

C

 

Outdoor sales and displays

-

P

 

Overnight accommodations, lodging services

-

P

GP Policy 1.15

Pawnshops

-

-

 

Payday lending business

-

-

 

Personal improvement services

C

C

 

Night use

P

P

 

Personal services

P

P

 

Precious metal exchange

-

-

 

Professional and medical offices

P

P

 

Public safety facility

C

P

 

Recycling collection center

P

P

 

Restaurant and delicatessens

C

C

 

Retail food sales

C

C

 

Convenience store

P

P

 

Liquor store

C

P

 

Retail sales

P

P

 

Limited

-

-

 

Visitor oriented

P

P

 

Tobacco retailer, large-scale

-

-

 

Tobacco retailer, small-format

-

-

 

Vapor bar

-

-

 

Vehicle/equipment sales

-

-

 

Automobile rental

-

C

 

Automobile washing

-

C

 

Service stations

C

C

 

Vehicle/equipment repair and service

-

C

GP Policy 1.15

Vehicle/equipment leasing and rental

-

C

GP Policy 1.15

Wholesaling, commercial

-

P

GP Policy 1.15

Video rental

P

P

 

Industrial

 

 

 

Cannabis distributor

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis indoor cultivation

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis manufacturing

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis microbusiness

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis testing

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Hazardous use

-

-

 

Industrial, general

-

-

 

Industrial, limited

-

-

 

Mineral extraction

-

-

 

Recycling center

-

-

 

Research and development

-

-

 

Storage tank(s)

-

-

 

Vehicle/equipment services

-

-

 

Vehicle/equipment repair

-

-

 

Vehicle storage

-

-

 

Wholesaling, distribution and storage

 

 

 

Trucking terminals

-

-

 

Small scale

-

-

 

Recreational

 

 

 

Campground

-

-

 

Marina

-

-

 

Recreational vehicle park

-

-

 

Recreational facilities, private

-

-

 

Recreational facilities, public

-

-

 

Recreational and sports, indoor

C

P

 

Recreational and sports, outdoor

-

-

 

Recreation, passive

-

-

 

Staging area

-

-

 

Public and Quasi-Public

 

 

 

Ambulance shelter

-

C

 

Antenna

P

P

 

Exceeding height limitations

C

C

 

Commercial

C

C

 

Small-cell antenna facility

P

P

Chapter 19.53

Cemetery

-

-

 

Charitable uses

C

C

 

Club, lodge

C

C

 

Community center

-

C

 

Conference center

-

C

 

Cultural facility

C

C

 

Day care center

M

P

 

Emergency shelter

-

P

 

Government facility

C

C

 

Hospital

-

C

 

Maintenance and service facility

-

-

 

Public information center

P

P

 

Public parking

P

P

 

Structure

C

C

 

Public safety facility

-

P

 

Religious facility

C

C

GP Policy 1.23.4

School

-

-

 

Transportation facility

-

P

 

Utilities, major

-

-

 

Utilities, minor

P

P

 

Agriculture

 

 

 

Animal husbandry

-

-

 

Cannabis outdoor cultivation

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Crop production

-

-

 

Winery

-

C

 

Accessory

 

 

 

Accessory dwelling unit

C

C

Chapter 19.10

Livestock keeping

-

-

 

Cafeteria

-

P

 

Caretaker’s quarters

-

-

 

Day care home, large

-

-

 

Day care home, small

-

-

 

Guest house

-

-

 

Home occupation

-

-

Chapter 19.29

Horticulture, limited

P

P

 

Recreational facilities, private

-

-

 

Room rentals

-

-

 

Temporary

 

 

 

Animal show

C

C

 

Circus, carnival

C

C

 

Commercial filming

C

C

 

Live entertainment

C

C

 

Mobile structures

C

C

Chapter 19.30

Personal property sales

P

P

 

Retail sales, outdoor

C

C

 

Seasonal sales

P

P

 

Street fair

C

C

 

Tent

C

C

 

 

1       Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements.

 

(Ord. 2018-06 § 7, 2018; Ord. 2018-05 § 3, 2018; Ord. 2016-03 § 2, 2016; Ord. 2014-06 § 4, 2014; Ord. 2013-09 § 4, 2013; Ord. 2010-07 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-02 § 4, 2010; Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009; Ord. 2006-07 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 2, 2004; Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.050 Development standards.
     Table 2 of this chapter sets forth the minimum lot area for each commercial district.

 

Table 2

Zoning District

CN

CC

Minimum area per lot

10,000 sq. ft.

1 acre**

Minimum width per lot

100 feet

200 feet

Minimum depth per lot

100 feet

100 feet

Minimum front yard

10 feet

20 feet

Minimum side yard

10 feet

10 feet

Street side of corner lot

10 feet

15 feet

Minimum rear yard

20 feet

10 feet

Minimum setback

40 feet

40 feet

from Hwy. 29

50 feet avg.

50 feet avg.

Density

 

 

Nonresidential

0.35 FAR

0.50 FAR

Mixed-use structure

1.5

1.5

  Residential portion

1.0

1.0

  Commercial portion

0.50

0.50

Maximum number of stories:

 

 

     All buildings

2 stories

2 stories

Exceptions:

 

 

     Residential or mixed-use structures

3 stories

3 stories west of Broadway

     Residential, overnight accommodations and lodging services, or mixed-use structures

N/A

4 stories east of Broadway

Maximum building height:

30 feet

35 feet

Exceptions:

 

 

     Residential or mixed-use structures

42 feet

42 feet west of Broadway

     Residential, overnight accommodations and lodging services, or mixed-use structures

N/A

54 feet east of Broadway

Maximum building coverage for stand-alone residential uses

50 percent west of Broadway

50 percent west of Broadway

 

60 percent east of Broadway

60 percent east of Broadway

*       Where an existing legal, non-conforming, structure after the building was constructed, the existing director approval.

**    Parcels owned by public agencies are exempt commercial (CC) district.

 

(Ord. 2018-07 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2006-07 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 2, 2004; Ord. 2004-05 § 1, 2004; Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.060 Automobile parking requirements.
     A.    General Provisions.

     1.     The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the establishment, alteration, or change in any use or structure, except as may be provided for herein. Parking required by this chapter shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged, or a use is established, changed, or expanded. The word “use” shall mean both the type and intensity of the use.

     2.     When a change in use or expansion in floor are within an existing development increase by twenty percent or more the amount of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be provided in addition to the number existing prior to the change in use or enlargement, unless the pre-existing number required by this chapter for the previous use, in which case the number in excess of the prescribed minimum may be deducted from the number required to be provided to serve the change in use or enlargement.

     3.     Required parking spaces shall not be located within any front or side yards setback areas.

     4.     Except as may be provided for this chapter, required parking spaces required shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land and within three hundred feet of the use they serve. Such distance shall be computed from the nearest point of a structure’s public access to the nearest point of parking area.

     5.     The planning commission may approve deviations from these standards by use permit.

     B.     Number of Spaces Required.

     1.     Except as may be provided for this chapter, automobile parking spaces shall be provided in the number set forth in Table 3 of this chapter. These requirements shall be considered minimum standards. The decision-making authority for a project may require more parking than is required by Table 3 when it finds that due to the characteristics of a project, the application of the above standards may lead into traffic congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets as well as unauthorized parking in nearby private lots.

     2.     Fractional space requirements of .5 or more shall be counted as the next largest whole space.

     3.     When two or more uses are located in the same building or structure, or are within the same common development, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use, except as specifically provided in this chapter.

     4.     Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the decision-making authority for a project, based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use.

     5.     Handicapped parking shall be provided according to the latest standards established by the state of California.

 

     6.     No area may be utilized and counted both as a required parking space other than for company owned vehicles periodically stored for on-site loading.

 

Table 3

Elementary school

2 per classroom, plus 1 per 5 fixed seats in an auditorium or per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area.

High school

5 per classroom, plus 1 per 5 fixed seats in an auditorium or per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area.

Pre-schools; day care centers

1 per staff members, plus 1 for each 10 children.

Additional parking or designated area for dropoff and pickup of students for the above uses may be required

Religious assembly

1 per 4 fixed seats in the principal sanctuary, or 1 per 9 linear feet of fixed benches, or 1 per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area.

Offices, business and professional

1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Retail sales, general

1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Retail sales, food

1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area

Bulky merchandise sales, including furniture, household appliances, and building materials

1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area

Vehicle/equipment sales; nursery

1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area within any showroom, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of outdoor display or sales area for the first 10,000 square feet; then 1 per 5,000 square feet of outdoor display or sales area thereafter.

Wholesaling, commercial

1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area

Restaurant, including those providing liquor consumption

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

On-premises liquor consumption as a primary use

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum use of 5 spaces shall be provided for such a use.

Bank; savings and loan

1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area in public area (excluding vault), plus 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area for general office uses.

Health services

1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Long-term care facility

1 per 2 beds

Personal services

1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Lodging services

1 per guest room or unit, plus 1 per 10 rooms or units, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area in any public meeting room, plus seventy-five percent of the requirement for other associated uses

Recreational vehicle park

1 per recreational vehicle site.

Funeral and internment services

1 per 4 fixed seats, or 1 per 9 linear feet of fixed benches, or I per 50 square feet of non-fixed seating area, whichever is greater.

Amusement center; nightclub, gaming

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area

Bowling alley

5 per lane, plus requirements for any related commercial uses

Health club; spa; dance studio

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area accessible to members or clients, including any pool area.

Game court

3 per court

Golf course

6 per hole, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area in any public meeting room plus seventy-five percent of the requirement for other associated uses.

Vehicle repair

4 per repair stall

Service station

1 per pump island, plus 1 per service bay

Car wash, full serve

1 per 2 employees on the maximum shift, plus vehicle stacking are equal to 3 time the capacity of the enclosed washing operation.

Car wash, self serve

2 spaces for drying and cleaning purposes per stall, plus 2 reservoir spaces in front of each stall.

Self-storage facilities

1 per employee.

A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

 

 

     C.     Shared Parking.

     1.     The number of required parking spaces may be reduced for projects comprised of uses that generate parking needs primarily at different times, and that cooperatively establish and operate shared parking facilities.

     2.     Shared parking may be approved through a conditionally use permit for existing development. Where shared parking is proposed for new development as part of a design permit or conditional use permit application, the request shall be processed concurrently with said applications. Nothing in this section shall preclude the reviewing authority from placing additional conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city or to establish the number or percentage of parking spaces to be shared.

     3.     The applicant shall provide substantial evidence and documentation (including a description of all uses and operating characteristics) that a sufficient number of spaces are being provided to meet the parking demand of all participating uses at any given time of the day, week or year.

     4.     All shared parking spaces shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible to the uses they serve, and shall not be separated from such uses by any street, unless otherwise approved by the decision-making authority.

     5.     Reasonable pedestrian connections shall be provided from any shared parking spaces to all the uses that they serve.

     6.     Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), deed restrictions or other agreements as may be required by the decision-making authority shall be executed and recorded, ensuring that required parking is provided and that the uses and operating characteristics of all participating uses are maintained.

     D.    Dimensional Requirements.

     1.     Standard Spaces: Required minimum parking dimensions are indicated in Table 4. Minimum dimensions shall not include any landscaped areas.

 

Table 4

MINIMUM PARKING DIMENSIONS FOR STANDARD STALLS

Parking
Angle (PA)

Minimum Stall Dimensions

Minimum Aisle Widths (A)

Width (W)

Depth (D)

Length(L)

One-Way

Two-Way

Parallel

8′

n/a

22′

18′6″

20′

30 degrees

9′

16′

18′

12′

20′

45 degrees

9′

19′

18′

14′

20′

60 degrees

9′

20′

18′

20′

20′

90 degrees

9′

18′

18′

25′

25′

 

 

     2.     Compact Spaces. Reduced dimensions of eight feet in width and sixteen feet in length (ninety-degree stalls) may be allowed for uncovered parking spaces for uses that have at least twelve parking spaces. Compact spaces shall not exceed twenty percent of the total required parking spaces. Compact spaces shall be clearly indicated by appropriate markings and signage.

     E.     Striping and Surfacing. All parking lots shall be permanently surfaced and striped in accordance with the city’s engineering standards and specifications.

     F.     Parking Lot Entries. All parking lot entries shall have the minimum widths specified in the city’s engineering standards and specifications.

     G.    Curbing and Walkways.

     1.     Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided at least three feet from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structures where parking and/or drive aisles are located adjacent thereto. Curbing may be left out at structure access points.

     2.     The clear width of a walkway that is adjacent to overhanging parked cars shall be at least four feet.

     3.     Individual wheel stops shall not be used.

     H.    Drainage. All required off street parking areas shall be so designed that surface water will not drain over any sidewalk or adjacent property.

     I.      Landscaping.

     1.     Surface parking areas of ten or more spaces shall have a landscaped area equal to a minimum of ten percent of the parking and circulation area.

     2. Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area as evenly as possible. In larger parking areas (two or more maneuvering aisles), interior landscaping shall be used to visually separate the parking area into small spaces. Parking row ends shall be protected by landscaped planters.

     3.     Landscaped areas shall have a minimum width of five feet.

     4.     A minimum of one tree shall be provided for every six parking spaces in a double-loaded layout, and one for every three spaces in a single-loaded layout. The trees shall be located so as to visually disrupt long rows of parked vehicles; trees may be clustered. Canopy-type trees should be used to provide a relatively consistent tree cover which will shade the pavement and vehicles.

 

     5.     A landscaped strip shall be provided adjacent to any public or private street wherever parking or circulation is generally or immediately located adjacent to such rights-of-way.

     6.     Defined pedestrian routes shall be incorporated into parking and landscaped areas.

     7.     Landscape areas shall be bordered by a concrete curb that has a minimum height and width of six inches. Landscaped planters within parking areas may be diamond-shaped in design.

     J.      Screening.

     1.     Where vehicles are to be parked immediately adjacent to a public or private street, a solid wall, opaque fence, berm, or compact evergreen hedge with a maximum height of thirty inches, measured from the finished surface of the parking area shall be provided.

     2.     Where a parking or loading area in an industrial district is located directly across a street or alley from a residential district, a solid wall, opaque fence, berm, or compact evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height shall be located on the property line.

     K.    Lighting.

     1.     Public parking areas designed to accommodate three or more vehicles shall have lighting facilities capable of providing sufficient illumination at every point of the parking area. A lighting study demonstrating that a minimum of one foot candle will be maintained across the surface of the parking area may be required by the community development director.

     2.     Any parking area illumination, including security lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.

     L.     Location of Parking Spaces.

     1.     Parking shall be designed so that all maneuvering may occur on-site and that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction.

     2.     No space in a parking lot shall be located so that a vehicle must maneuver within twenty feet of a vehicular entrance, measured from the property line.

     M.    Maintenance. All required parking facilities and areas, including landscaping, surfacing, and striping shall be permanently maintained in good condition, free of weeds, litter and debris. (Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.070 Loading requirements.
     A.    Number Required. Loading spaces shall be provided for all industrial uses according to the table below for the specified uses. The decision-making authority may require more loading spaces than are required by the table to insure that a sufficient off-street loading area will be provided to accommodate routine operations in a safe and convenient manner. Required loading spaces shall be designated as such and restricted to such use.

     B.     Minimum Dimensions. Each loading space shall have an unobstructed minimum dimension of twelve feet in width, forty-five feet in length, and fourteen feet in height. Larger spaces may be required by the decision-making authority to ensure that a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area will be provided to accommodate routine delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.

     C.     Location of Loading Spaces.

     1.     Loading spaces required by this chapter shall be located immediately adjacent to the exterior wall of the building they serve or within the building and should minimize potential impacts on adjacent uses.

     2.     Loading spaces shall not be located in any required front or side yard.

     3.     Loading spaces should be so located and designed that trucks shall not be required to back into a public street for ingress or egress. Truck maneuvering areas should be provided on-site where necessary to comply with this requirement.

     4.     Loading spaces should be concealed from off-site view to the maximum extent feasible.

     5.     Where a loading area in a commercial or industrial district is located directly across a street or alley from a residential district, a solid wall, opaque fence, or compact evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height shall be located on the property line.

 

Use

Gross Floor Area

Minimum Loading Spaces

Commercial (non-office)

<5,000 square feet

None

 

5,000—20,000 square feet

One

Office

<20,000 square feet

None

20,000—40,000 square feet

One

Manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing, industrial

<20,000 square feet

One

All of the above uses

Each additional 20,000 square feet

One additional space

 

(Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.080 Bicycle parking requirements.
     Bicycle parking shall be provided in commercial and employment areas according to the table below.

 

Total Automobile Parking Spaces

Minimum Number of Bicycle Spaces

1—4

0

5—14

1

14—29

2

30—44

3

45—59

4

60—74

5

75—99

6

100—199

7

200—299

8

300—399

9

400 and greater

10

 

Bicycle parking should be located in highly visible locations and should be lockable. (Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.11.090 Design elements.
     It is the intent of the General Plan and this chapter to ensure that all new construction and major alterations or additions to existing commercial buildings be designed to exhibit a high quality of architectural character and emphasize a low scale village environment. All new construction and major alterations or additions to existing commercial buildings shall include one or more of the design features, components, or materials in those portions of the building visible from any public right-of-way set forth in this section.

     A.    Architectural features and elements shall include a craftsman/mountain village theme or turn of the century agricultural or winery compound.

     B.     Materials and design components that are indigenous to the Napa Valley, including but not limited to, exposed heavy timbers for structural supports trellis features, and gable roof elements; stone foundations and rock based pillars with heavy timber support elements; wood or split stone or masonry siding; and metal roofs should be integrated into the project design.

     C.     Exposed structural steel for support is encouraged, but stainless steel and mirrored glass elements should be discouraged.

     D.    Façade elements should include the articulation and modulation to provide visual interest.

     E.     Visually and physically transparent building elements such as windows and doors with glass panels should be provided along the majority of the ground elevation facing street frontages and primary parking areas.

     F.     Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view using materials and design elements consistent with the overall project. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009; Ord. 2006-07 § 4, 2006; Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 2, 2004; Ord. 2003-03, 2003; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.12 TOWN CENTER ZONE DISTRICT
19.12.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the town center zone district is to:

     A.    Provide a broad range of commercial, residential and public land uses in the physical context of a traditional downtown with surrounding residential neighborhoods. The district may include a diverse range of land uses including but not limited to: government and community services, retail commercial, professional offices, entertainment, restaurants, cultural facilities (museums, libraries, etc.), visitor-serving facilities (hotels, information centers), event/conference center, wineries, transit, parking, variety of housing types including single-family attached and detached, townhouses, condominiums, mixed-use and apartments and public park and school and other amenities.

     B.     Create a physical setting and mix of land uses that serve as a focus of neighborhood, community and regional activities and events.

     C.     Create a pedestrian-oriented environment which also meets the needs of vehicular traffic. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.12.020 Applicability.
     Development shall occur pursuant to a specific plan adopted by the city council for all or a portion of the town center zone district. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.12.030 Permitted uses.
     A.    Permitted uses shall be those uses designated as permitted uses by a specific plan adopted by the city council for all or a portion of the town center zone district.

     B.     Agricultural or grazing uses.

     C.     Temporary uses as may be permitted by the city. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.12.040 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Conditionally permitted uses shall be those uses designated as conditionally permitted uses by a specific plan adopted by the city council for all or a portion of the town center zone district. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.12.050 Development standards.
     A.    Development standards shall be those standards included in a specific plan adopted by the city council for all or a portion of the town center zone district. Development standards include but are not limited to: building heights, building setbacks, landscaping, parking requirements, lot size, residential density, and floor-area ratio for nonresidential development.

     B.     Performance standards shall be those standards included in a specific plan adopted by the city council for all or a portion of the town center zone district. Performance standards include but are not limited to: lighting, noise, and hours of operation. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

Chapter 19.13 PUBLIC DISTRICT
19.13.010 Purpose.
     The purpose for establishing these public districts and permitted uses is to:

     A.    Provide approximately located areas for public districts consistent with the general plan and with standards of public health and safety established by the municipal code;

     B.     Accommodate public and institutional uses that serve the needs of the residents of American Canyon;

     C.     Provide for continuation and expansion of existing governmental facilities in order to support the existing and future population and development of the city;

     D.    Limit the development within the electrical transmission corridors;

     E.     Allow for the reuse of surplus public and utility properties and facilities for private use;

     F.     Provide for religious facilities in any land use designation, provided they are compatible with the policies of that site;

     G.    Allow continuation of existing and provide new child and senior day care;

     H.    Establish a center to provide services for the senior citizens of American Canyon. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.13.020 Permitted uses.
     Table 19.13.020 of this chapter sets forth the permitted and conditionally-permitted uses for each public district. A “P” designates a permitted use. A “C” indicates a conditionally permitted use subject to approval of a use permit by the planning commission. If no letter is found opposite a particular use, it is not permitted in that district.

 

Table 19.13.020 PUBLIC DISTRICT1

 

Use Classification

P District

Related
Provisions

Commercial

 

 

Recycling collection center

C

 

Recreational

 

 

Recreation facilities, public

P

 

Recreation and sports, outdoor

P

 

Recreation, passive

P

 

Public and Quasi-Public

 

 

Ambulance service, public

P

 

Animal shelter

C

 

Antenna

P

 

- Exceeding height limitations

C

 

- Commercial

-

 

- Small-cell antenna facility

P

Chapter 19.53

Cemetery

C

 

Charitable uses

P

 

Club, lodge

C

 

Community center

P

 

Conference center

P

 

Cultural facility

P

 

Day care center

C

 

Government facility

P

 

Hospital

C

 

Maintenance and service facility

C

 

Public information center

P

 

Public parking

P

 

Public safety facility

C

 

Religious facility

C

GP Policy 1.23.4

School

C

 

Transportation terminal

C

 

Utilities, major

C

 

Utilities, minor

P

 

Accessory

 

 

Cafeteria

P

 

Caretaker’s quarters

C

 

Temporary

 

 

Animal show

P

 

Circus, carnival

C

 

Commercial filming

C

 

Live entertainment

C

 

Mobile structure

C

Chapter 19.30

Personal property sales

P

 

Seasonal sales

P

 

Street fair

C

 

Tent

C

 

 

1       Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements.

 

(Ord. 2018-05 § 4, 2018; Ord. 2010-07 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2007-11 § 2, 2007; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.14 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
19.14.010 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

     A.    Establish reasonable development standards and a broad range of permitted and conditionally permitted uses to guide the orderly development and use of property within the LI (light industrial) district and the GI (general industrial) district; and

     B.     To ensure that industrial uses are developed and operated in a manner that does not produce dangerous or objectionable elements or conditions. Unless otherwise specified, the location where the determination shall be made of the existence of any dangerous or objectionable element or condition shall be at the lot, parcel or ownership line of the use. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.020 Establishment of districts.
     This chapter establishes two zoning districts to allow a broad range of industrial uses within those districts. The following industrial districts are established:

     A.    LI (light industrial) district: to accommodate the continuation of existing and the development of new light manufacturing uses, research and development, offices, and similar uses, including businesses that are ancillary to and support such uses, in locations that generally have high public visibility. Outdoor activities are limited and must be fully screened from off-site view;

     B.     GI (general industrial) district: to provide areas appropriate for functional industrial activities, including warehousing, manufacturing, food processing, product and equipment assembly, and similar types of uses that may involve both indoor and outdoor activities, and related ancillary uses. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.030 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all uses within the industrial districts as shown on the official zoning district map of the city. Development within the industrial districts shall conform with all applicable development standards, regulations, and performance standards of this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.040 Performance standards.
     A.    Hazardous Materials. All operations that involve the storage, use or transport of flammable or explosive materials or gases shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppressing equipment and devices, subject to the approval of the American Canyon fire protection district.

     B.     Noise. Noise generated by any use shall comply with any noise standards adopted by the city.

     C.     Vibrations. Vibrations associated with on-site operations shall not be discernible off-site, except for those due to operations involved in the construction or demolition of structures or caused by motor vehicles or trains.

     D.    Airborne Emissions. No airborne emissions shall be produced that are readily detectable off-site without instruments by the average person, or that cause any damage to human health, animals, vegetation or property.

     1.     Visible emissions shall not exceed the rules and regulations of the Bay Area Air Quality Management District.

 

     2.     No emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall be produced in such quantities as to be readily detectable off-site by the average person.

     E.     Electrical Disturbance. No activities shall produce electrical disturbance that affects the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance.

     F.     Climate. No humidity, heat or cold shall be produced that is perceptible without instruments by the average person off-site.

     G.    Lights. No bright or flashing lights shall be visible off-site.

     H.    No security bars shall be installed on the exterior of windows or doors of structures in the industrial zoning districts. (Ord. 2018-06 § 9, 2018; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.050 Permitted uses.
     Table 19.14.050 of this section sets forth the permitted and conditionally-permitted uses for each industrial district. A “P” designates a permitted use. A “C” indicates a conditionally permitted use subject to approval of a use permit by the planning commission. An “M” indicates a minor use permit is required pursuant to Chapter 19.42. If no letter is found opposite a particular use, it is not permitted in that district.

 

Table 19.14.050
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY
PERMITTED USES1
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS

 

Use Classifications

Zoning District

Related Provisions

 

LI

GI

 

Residential

 

 

 

Congregate living facility

-

-

 

Farm employees housing

-

-

 

Garden apartments

-

-

 

Mobilehome

-

-

 

Mobilehome parks

-

-

 

Multifamily residential

-

-

 

Residential care home

-

-

 

Second residential unit

-

-

 

Single-family residential

 

 

 

- Detached

-

-

 

- Semidetached

-

-

 

Townhouses

-

-

 

Commercial

 

 

 

Adult-entertainment business

-

P

 

Ambulance services

P

P

 

Animal retails sales

-

-

 

- Boarding kennel

-

-

 

- Grooming

-

-

 

- Medical care

-

-

 

- Retail sales

-

-

 

Bank, savings and loan

C

-

GP Policy 1.22.2

- Drive-up service

C

-

GP Policy 1.22.2

- Walk-up service

C

-

GP Policy 1.22.2

Bookstore

P

P

 

Building materials and services

C

P

GP Policy 1.22.6

Cannabis retail

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Catering

P

P

 

Commercial printing

P

P

 

- Limited printing

C

C

 

Communication services

P

P

 

Drugstores

P

P

 

Eating and drinking establishments

C

C

 

Entertainment, indoor

-

-

 

- Amusement center

-

-

 

- Gaming

-

-

 

Food sales

C

C

 

Funeral and interment services

-

-

 

Health services

-

-

 

Hookah bar

-

-

 

Laboratory

P

P

 

Lodging services

-

-

 

- Bed and breakfast inns

-

-

 

Long-term care facility

-

-

 

Maintenance and repair services

P

P

GP Policy 1.22.6

Nursery

-

-

 

Offices, business and professional

P

C

GP Policy 1.22.1

On-premises liquor consumption

-

-

GP Policy 1.22.2

- Tasting room

C

C

 

Outdoor sales and displays

C

-

 

Overnight accommodations, lodging services

-

-

 

Pawnshops

-

-

 

- Adjacent to residential district

-

-

 

Personal improvement services

C

C

GP Policy 1.22.2

- Adjacent to residential district

C

-

 

Personal services

-

-

 

Professional and medical offices

P

P

 

Recycling collection center

C

C

GP Policy 1.22.2

Restaurant

C

C

 

- Night use

C

-

 

Restaurant, take-out

C

-

 

- Night use

C

-

 

Retail commercial

C

-

 

Retail food sales

-

-

 

- Convenience store

-

-

 

- Liquor store

-

-

 

Retail sales

C

C

GP Policy 1.22.2

- Limited

-

-

 

- Visitor-oriented

-

-

 

Tobacco retailer, large-scale

-

-

 

Tobacco retailer, small-format

-

-

 

Vapor bar

-

-

 

Vehicle/equipment sales and service

-

-

 

- Automobile rental

C

-

GP Policy 1.22.6

- Automobile washing

-

C

GP Policy 1.22.6

- Service station

-

-

 

- Vehicle/equipment repair

-

P

GP Policy 1.22.6

- Vehicle/equipment sales, lease and rentals

C

C

GP Policy 1.22.6

Video rental

-

-

 

Wholesale, commercial

C

P

 

Industrial

 

 

 

Cannabis distributor

-

C

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis indoor cultivation

-

C

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis manufacturing

-

C

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis microbusiness

-

C

Chapter 5.10

Cannabis testing

-

C

Chapter 5.10

Hazardous use

-

C

 

Industry, general

-

P

 

Industry, limited

P

P

 

Mineral extraction

-

C

GP Policy 8.15.3—8.17.3

Recycling center

-

C

 

Research and development

P

P

 

Storage tank(s)

C

C

 

Vehicle/equipment services

 

 

 

- Vehicle/equipment repair

-

P

 

- Vehicle storage

-

C

 

Wholesaling, distribution and storage

 

 

 

- Small scale

C

P

 

- Trucking terminal

-

P

 

Recreational

 

 

 

Campground

-

-

 

Marina

-

-

 

Recreational facilities, private

-

-

 

Recreational facilities, public

-

-

 

Recreation and sports, indoor

P

P

 

Recreation and sports, outdoor

-

-

 

Recreation, passive

-

-

 

Recreational vehicle park

-

-

 

Staging area

-

-

 

Public and Quasi-Public

 

 

 

Ambulance service

P

P

 

Animal shelter

C

C

 

Antenna

P

P

 

- Commercial

-

-

 

- Small-cell antenna facility

P

P

Chapter 19.53

Cemetery

-

-

 

Charitable uses

-

-

 

Club, lodge

-

-

 

Community center

-

-

 

Conference center

-

-

 

Cultural facility

-

-

 

Day care center

M

M

 

Emergency shelter

P

-

 

Government facility

P

P

 

Hospital

-

-

 

Maintenance and service facility

P

P

 

Public information center

-

-

 

Public parking

-

-

 

- Structure

-

-

 

Public safety facility

P

P

 

Religious facility

C

C

 

School

-

-

 

Transportation terminal

P

P

 

Utilities, major

C

C

 

Utilities, minor

P

P

 

Agricultural

 

 

 

Animal husbandry

P

P

 

Cannabis outdoor cultivation

-

-

Chapter 5.10

Crop production

-

-

 

Winery

C

P

 

Accessory

 

 

 

Accessory dwelling unit

-

-

 

Livestock keeping

-

-

 

Cafeteria

P

P

 

Caretaker’s quarters

C

C

 

Day care home, large

-

-

 

Day care home, small

-

-

 

Guest house

-

-

 

Home occupation

-

-

 

Horticulture, limited

-

-

 

Room rentals

-

-

 

Temporary

 

 

 

Animal show

-

-

 

Circus, carnival

-

-

 

Commercial filming

C

C

 

Live entertainment

-

-

 

Mobile structures

C

C

 

Personal property sales

-

-

 

Retail sales, outdoor

-

-

 

Seasonal sales

P

P

 

Street fair

-

-

 

Tent

-

-

 

1       Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements.

 

(Ord. 2018-06 § 8, 2018; Ord. 2018-05 § 5, 2018; Ord. 2016-03 § 3, 2016; Ord. 2014-06 § 5, 2014; Ord. 2010-07 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2010-02 § 4, 2010; Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.060 Development standards.
     Table 19.14.060 of this chapter sets forth the minimum lot area, minimum yard setbacks, and lot coverage standards for each industrial district.

 

Table 19.14.060

Zoning District

LI

GI

Minimum area per lot

20,000 sq. ft.

40,000 sq. ft.

Minimum width per lot

100 feet

150 feet

Minimum depth per lot

100 feet

150 feet

Minimum front yard

20 feet

20 feet

Minimum side yard

 

 

One-story

5 feet

10 feet

Two-story

10 feet

10 feet

Street side of corner lot

15 feet

15 feet

Minimum rear yard

10 feet

10 feet

Minimum setback from Hwy 29

40 feet

40 feet

50 feet avg.

50 feet avg.

Minimum setback from arterial

30 feet

30 feet

Maximum floor area ratio

 

 

Labor-intensive uses

50%

50%

Low-labor uses

70%

70%

Maximum number of stories

3.0

3.0

Maximum building height

40 feet

40 feet

 

*       Where an existing legal, nonconforming, structure encroaches into a setback, which was established after the building was constructed, the existing building line may be continued subject to community development director approval.

 

(Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009; Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 5, 2004; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.070 Automobile parking requirements.
     A.    General Provisions.

     1.     The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the establishment, alteration, or change in any use or structure, except as may be provided for herein. Parking required by this chapter shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged, or a use is established, changed, or expanded. The word “use” shall mean both the type and intensity of the use.

     2.     When a change in use or expansion in floor area within an existing development increases by twenty percent or more the amount of off-street parking or loading required by the previous use, parking or loading spaces shall be provided for the increased demand. The number of new spaces provided shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the change in use or enlargement, unless the pre-existing number is greater than the number required by this chapter for the previous use, in which case the number in excess of the prescribed minimum may be deducted from the number required to be provided to serve the change in use or enlargement.

     3.     Required parking spaces shall not be located within any front or side yard setback areas.

     4.     Except as may be provided for in this chapter, required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land and within three hundred feet of the use they serve. Such distance shall be computed from the nearest point of a structure’s public access to the nearest point of the parking area.

     5.     The planning commission may approve deviations from these standards by use permit.

     B.     Number of Spaces Required.

     1.     Except as may be provided for in this chapter, automobile parking spaces shall be provided in the number set forth in Table 19.14.070(B) of this chapter. These requirements shall be considered minimum standards. The decision-making authority for a project may require more parking than is required by Table 19.14.070(B) when it finds that due to the characteristics of a project, the application of the above standards may lead to traffic congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets as well as unauthorized parking in nearby private lots.

     2.     Fractional space requirements of .5 or more shall be counted as the next largest whole space.

     3.     When two or more uses are located in the same building or structure, or are within the same common development, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use, except as specifically provided in this chapter.

     4.     Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the decision-making authority for a project, based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use.

     5.     Handicapped parking shall be provided according to the latest standards established by the state of California.

     6.     No area may be utilized and counted both as a required parking space and a required loading space other than for company owned vehicles periodically stored for on-site loading.

 

Table 19.14.070(B)

Pre-schools; day care centers

One per staff member, plus 1 for each 10 children.

Religious assembly

1 per 4 fixed seats in the principal sanctuary; one per 9 linear feet of fixed benches; one per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area.

Offices, business and professional

One per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Retail sales, general

One per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Retail sales, food

One per 250 square feet of gross floor area

Bulk merchandise sales, including furniture, household appliances, and building materials

One per 500 square feet of gross floor area

Vehicle/equipment sales; nursery

One per 500 square feet of gross floor area within any showroom, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of outdoor display or sales area for the first 10,000 square feet; then 1 per 5,000 square feet of outdoor display or sales area thereafter.

Wholesaling, commercial

One per 500 square feet of gross floor area

Restaurant, including those providing liquor consumption

One per 100 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

Bank; savings and loan

One per 200 square feet of gross floor area in public area (excluding vault), plus 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area for general office uses.

Spectator entertainment; auditorium

One per 4 fixed seats, or one per 9 linear feet of fixed benches, or one per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area, whichever is greater.

Health club; spa; dance studio

One per 100 square feet of gross floor area accessible to members or clients, including any pool area.

Game court

Three per court

Vehicle repair

Four per repair stall

Service station

One per pump island, plus one per service bay

Car wash, full service

One per 2 employees on the maximum shift, plus vehicle stacking area equal to 3 times the capacity of the enclosed washing operation

Car wash, self-serve

Two spaces for drying and cleaning purposes per stall, plus 2 reservoir spaces in front of each stall.

Self-storage facilities

One per employee; a minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

Warehousing and storage

One per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the first 20,000 square feet of space, plus 1 per each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area thereafter.

Manufacturing, processing, packing, research, research service

One per 500 square feet of gross floor area

Research and development

One per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Company-owned vehicle parked on premises

One per truck, car or other vehicle

 

 

     C.     Shared Parking.

     1.     The number of required parking spaces may be reduced for projects comprised of uses that generate parking needs primarily at different times, and that cooperatively establish and operate shared parking facilities.

     2.     Shared parking may be approved through a conditional use permit for existing development. Where shared parking is proposed for new development as part of a design permit or conditional use permit application, the request shall be processed concurrently with the applications. Nothing in this section shall preclude the reviewing authority from placing additional conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city or to establish the number or percentage of parking spaces to be shared.

     3.     The applicant shall provide substantial evidence and documentation (including a description of all uses and operating characteristics) that a sufficient number of spaces are being provided to meet the parking demand of all participating uses at any given time of the day, week or year.

 

     4.     All shared parking spaces shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible to the uses they serve, and shall not be separated from such uses by any street, unless otherwise approved by the decision-making authority.

     5.     Reasonable pedestrian connections shall be provided from any shared parking spaces to all the uses that they serve.

     6.     Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), deed restrictions or other agreements as may be required by the decision-making authority shall be executed and recorded, ensuring that required parking is provided and that the uses and operating characteristics of all participating uses are maintained.

     D.    Dimensional Requirements.

     1.     Standard Spaces. Required minimum parking dimensions are indicated in Table 19.04.070(D). Minimum dimensions shall not include any landscaped areas.

 

 

Table 19.04.070(D)

MINIMUM PARKING DIMENSIONS FOR STANDARD STALLS

 

Parking Angle (PA)

Minimum Stall Dimensions

Minimum Aisle Widths (A)

Width (W)

Depth (D)

Length (L)

One-Way

Two-Way

Parallel

8′

n/a

22′

18′6″

20′

30 degrees

9′

16′

18′

12′

20′

45 degrees

9′

19′

18′

14′

20′

60 degrees

9′

20′

18′

20′

20′

90 degrees

9′

18′

18′

25′

25′

 

 

     2.     Compact Spaces. Reduced dimensions of eight feet in width and sixteen feet in length (ninety degree stalls) may be allowed for uncovered parking spaces for uses that have at least twelve parking spaces. Compact spaces shall not exceed twenty percent of the total required parking spaces. Compact spaces shall be clearly indicated by appropriate markings and signage.

     E.     Striping and Surfacing. All parking lots shall be permanently surfaced and striped in accordance with the city’s engineering standards and specifications.

     F.     Parking Lot Entries. All parking lot entries shall have the minimum widths specified in the city’s engineering standards and specifications.

     G.    Curbing and Walkways.

     1.     Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided at least three feet from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structures where parking and/or drive aisles are located adjacent thereto. Curbing may be left out at structure access points.

     2.     The clear width of a walkway that is adjacent to overhanging parked cars shall be at least four feet.

     3.     Individual wheel stops shall not be used.

     H.    Drainage. All required off-street parking areas shall be so designed that surface water will not drain over any sidewalk or adjacent property.

     I.      Landscaping.

     1.     Surface parking areas of ten or more spaces shall have a landscaped area equal to a minimum of ten percent of the parking and circulation area.

     2.     Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area as evenly as possible. In larger parking areas (two or more maneuvering aisles), interior landscaping shall be used to visually separate the parking area into small spaces. Parking row ends shall be protected by landscaped planters.

     3.     Landscaped areas shall have a minimum width of five feet.

     4.     A minimum of one tree shall be provided for every six parking spaces in a double-loaded layout, and one for every three spaces in a single-loaded layout. The trees shall be located so as to visually disrupt long rows of parked vehicles; trees may be clustered. Canopy-type trees should be used to provide a relatively consistent tree cover which will shade the pavement and vehicles.

     5.     A landscaped strip shall be provided adjacent to any public or private street wherever parking or circulation is generally or immediately located adjacent to such rights-of-way.

     6.     Defined pedestrian routes shall be incorporated into parking and landscaped areas.

     7.     Landscape areas shall be bordered by a concrete curb that has a minimum height and width of six inches. Landscaped planters within parking areas may be diamond-shaped in design.

     J.      Screening.

     1.     Where vehicles are to be parked immediately adjacent to a public or private street, a solid wall, opaque fence, berm, or compact evergreen hedge with a maximum height of thirty inches, measured from the finished surface of the parking area shall be provided.

     2.     Where a parking or loading area in an industrial district is located directly across a street or alley from a residential district, a solid wall, opaque fence, berm, or compact evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height shall be located on the property line.

     K.    Lighting.

     1      Public parking areas designed to accommodate three or more vehicles shall have lighting facilities capable of providing sufficient illumination at every point of the parking area. A lighting study demonstrating that a minimum of one foot candle will be maintained across the surface of the parking area may be required by the community development director.

     2.     Any parking area illumination, including security lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.

 

     L.     Location of Parking Spaces.

     1.     Parking shall be designed so that all maneuvering may occur on-site and that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction.

     2.     No space in a parking lot shall be located so that a vehicle must maneuver within twenty feet of a vehicular entrance, measured from the property line.

     M.    Maintenance. All required parking facilities and areas, including landscaping, surfacing, and striping shall be permanently maintained in good condition, free of weeds, litter and debris. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.080 Loading requirements.
     A.    Number Required. Loading spaces shall be provided for all industrial uses according to Table 19.14.080(A) below for the specified uses. The decision-making authority may require more loading spaces than are required by Table 19.14.080(A) to insure that a sufficient off-street loading area will be provided to accommodate routine operations in a safe and convenient manner. Required loading spaces shall be designated as such and restricted to such use.

 

Table 19.14.080(A)

 

Use

Gross Floor Area

Minimum Loading Spaces

Commercial (non-office)

<5,000 sq. ft.

None

5,000—20,000 sq. ft.

One

Office

<20,000 sq. ft.

None

20,000—40,000 sq. ft.

One

Manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing, industrial

<20,000 sq. ft.

One

All of the above uses

Each additional 20,000 sq. ft.

One additional space

 

     B.     Minimum Dimensions. Each loading space shall have an unobstructed minimum dimension of twelve feet in width, forty-five feet in length, and fourteen feet in height. Larger spaces may be required by the decision-making authority to ensure that a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area will be provided to accommodate routine delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.

     C.     Location of Loading Spaces.

     1.     Loading spaces required by this chapter shall be located immediately adjacent to the exterior wall of the building they serve or within the building and should minimize potential impacts on adjacent uses.

     2.     Loading spaces shall not be located in any required front or side yard.

     3.     Loading spaces should be so located and designed that trucks shall not be required to back into a public street for ingress or egress. Truck maneuvering areas should be provided on-site where necessary to comply with this requirement.

     4.     Loading spaces should be concealed from off-site view to the maximum extent feasible.

     5.     Where a loading area in a commercial or industrial district is located directly across a street or alley from a residential district, a solid wall, opaque fence, or compact evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height shall be located on the property line. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.14.090 Bicycle parking requirements.
     A.    Bicycle parking shall be provided in commercial and employment areas according to Table 19.14.090(A) below.

 

Table 19.14.090(A)

 

Total Automobile Parking Spaces

Minimum Number of Bicycle Spaces

1—4

0

5—14

1

14—29

2

30—44

3

45—59

4

60—74

5

75—99

6

100—199

7

200—299

8

300—399

9

400 and greater

10

 

     B.     Bicycle parking should be located in highly visible locations and should be lockable. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.15 RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE
19.15.010 Purpose.
     The purpose for establishing these recreation and open space districts and permitted uses is to:

     A.    Maintain adequate open spaces to protect environmental resources, provide recreational opportunities, and contribute “relief” from urban and suburban activities;

     B.     Preserve the important environmental resources of the city;

 

     C.     Accommodate passive recreation, hiking and equestrian activities;

     D.    Preclude development or activities in wetlands and significant habitats;

     E.     Support compatible commercial activities which capitalize on local and regional agricultural vineyard resources. (Ord. 2018-01 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2009-15 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.15.020 Permitted uses.
     Table 19.15.020 of this chapter sets forth the permitted and conditionally permitted uses for each public district. A “P” designates a permitted use. A “C” indicates a conditionally permitted use subject to approval of a use permit by the planning commission. If no letter is found opposite a particular use, it is not permitted in that district.

 

 

Table 19.15.020
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES1
RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT

Use Classifications

Zoning District

Related Provision

OS

OS-CRW

REC

Agriculture

Animal husbandry

-

P

P

 

Crop production

-

P

P

 

Winery2

-

-

C

 

Commercial

Boarding kennel

-

C

C

 

Lodging services

-

-

-

 

On-premises liquor consumption

-

-

-

 

Restaurant

-

-

-

 

Retail sales, incidental to primary use

-

C

C

 

Recreational

Campground

-

C

C

 

Marina

-

-

-

 

Recreational facilities, private

-

-

C

 

Recreational facilities, public

C

C

C

 

Recreation and sports, indoor

-

-

-

 

Recreation and sports, outdoor

C

C

C

 

Recreation, passive

P

P

P

 

Recreational vehicle park

-

-

-

 

Staging area

C

C

C

 

Residential

Single-family residential—Detached

-

-

P

GP Goal 1N

Public and Quasi-Public

Animal shelter

-

C

C

 

Antenna

-

P

P

 

Exceeding height limitations

-

C

C

 

Small-cell antenna facility

P

P

P

Chapter 19.53

Cemetery

C

-

-

 

Club, lodge

-

C

-

 

Community center

-

C

-

 

Conference center

-

-

-

 

Cultural facility

P

P

-

 

Maintenance and service facility

-

-

-

 

Public information center

P

P

-

 

Public parking

P

P

-

 

Public safety facility

-

C

-

 

Religious facility

-

-

-

GP Policy 1.23.4

Transportation terminal

-

-

-

 

Utilities, major

C

-

-

 

Utilities, minor

P

P

P

 

Accessory

Caretaker’s quarters

 

P

P

 

Horticulture

-

P

P

 

Tent

-

C

C

 

Temporary

Commercial filming

C

P

C

 

Mobile structure

C

C

C

Chapter 19.30

Seasonal sales

-

P

P

 

Special event

-

P

P

Chapter 5.05

 

Note:

“OS” denotes Open Space District

“OS-CRW” denotes Open Space—Clarke Ranch             West District

“REC” denotes Recreation District

 

(Ord. 2018-05 § 6, 2018; Ord. 2018-01 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2010-05 § 1, 2010; Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2009-15 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.15.030 Development standards.
     Table 19.15.030 of this chapter sets forth the development standards for each recreation and open space district.

 

Footnotes:

1.      Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements.

2.      For purposes of Table 19.15.020, “Winery” shall include the uses defined in Section 19.05.090 in conjunction with viticulture related activities such as bottling, storage, logistics, distribution, wine packing, and wine-related services.

3.      Subject to a conditional use permit approval, a maximum of 25% of the floor area within one building or 25% of the collective square footage of 2 or more buildings in the Recreation Zoning District may be allocated to non-wine related uses.

 

Table 19.15.030
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICT

Development Standard

Zoning District

Recreation

OS, OS-CRW

Minimum site size

10 acres

10 acres

Maximum site coverage

50% 1, 2, 3

10%

Maximum residential intensity (recreation district only)

1 dwelling unit

 

Maximum building height

35 feet

35 feet

Building setbacks from:

Major highways

50 feet

50 feet

Primary highways

42 feet

42 feet

Secondary highways:

In nonresidential areas

35 feet

35 feet

In residential areas

25 feet

25 feet

Commuter highways and local streets

15 feet

15 feet

Interior boundary if adjacent to residential uses:

Side

35 feet

35 feet

Rear

20 feet

20 feet

Interior boundary if adjacent to nonresidential uses:

Side

35 feet

35 feet

Rear

35 feet

35 feet

Building to building

10 feet

10 feet

Footnotes:

1.      Outdoor winery related equipment such as tanks and crushing equipment customarily located outside of buildings are not included within the lot coverage standards.

2.      Site design must accommodate onsite trail connectivity with adjacent properties.

3.      Outdoor winery related equipment shall be screened from view of public streets, parks and trails with landscaping, opaque fence, or wall. Landscape screening shall include sufficient quantities, types, heights and densities of materials to provide at least 50% opacity within five years of planting, and shall be maintained by the property owner at 50% or greater opacity thereafter.

(Ord. 2018-01 § 1, 2018; Ord. 2009-15 § 3, 2009)

 

Chapter 19.16 PC PLANNED COMMUNITY DISTRICT
19.16.010 Purpose and intent.
     The planned community zone is created to:

     A.    Provide a mechanism for implementing subarea policies contained in the general plan land use element;

     B.     Provide for a measured degree of flexibility in development standards to promote creative development concepts, including increased areas devoted to functional open space and a more thoughtful relationship between dwelling units and open space;

     C.     Promote provision of additional amenities such as community facilities in conjunction with implementation of development standards that are generally more flexible than traditional residential zoning standards;

     D.    Establish standards and parameters for contemporary development concepts such as attached or detached cluster single-family housing or a mix of similar use types;

     E.     Encourage the use of cluster development opportunities to preserve significant environmental resources;

     F.     Establish standards for variation of lot sizes to facilitate and ensure sufficient diversity in housing styles, types, sizes and costs;

     G.    Establish parameters for project phasing that reflects the city’s ability to provide services and infrastructure in a logical, orderly cost effective manner. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.020 Zone change and conceptual master plan.
     All proposals to utilize provisions of this chapter will require rezoning to the planned community zone and approval of a planned community conceptual master plan. The planned community conceptual master plan shall be made a part of the city’s official zoning map. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.030 Planned community development permit.
     A planned community development permit is the implementing mechanism of the conceptual master plan and may be processed either concurrent with or subsequent to the rezone and conceptual master plan. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.040 Relationship of conceptual master plan and planned community development permit to related entitlements.
     Related entitlements may be processed either subsequent to or concurrent with a planned community development permit. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a tentative subdivision map may be processed concurrently with a conceptual master plan. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.050 Permitted uses.
     There shall be no principally permitted uses other than those approved under a conceptual master plan and approved planned community development permit or modification thereof.

     NOTE: Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements. (Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.060 Neighborhood commercial uses in areas designated for residential land uses.
     Neighborhood commercial uses may be permitted in areas designated for residential land uses on the general plan land use map if approved under a conceptual master plan pursuant to the specifications and limitations contained in the land use and subarea schedule within the general plan land use element. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.070 Permitted densities.
     Permissible gross densities within a planned community master plan area shall be as specified in the general plan and land use map. Densities proposed for a portion of a planned community master plan area may exceed densities established under the general plan if overall densities within the boundaries of the master plan area remain consistent with the established general plan density range. Cluster single-family attached (including townhomes) or semi-attached housing may be considered in areas designated single-family residential on the general plan land use map if it can be clearly demonstrated that such clustering results in: (A) greater protection of environmental resources including, but not limited to, steep hillsides or biological resources/sensitive habitats, or results in provision of an amenity or amenities of community-wide importance; and (B) is consistent with specifications contained in the land use and subarea schedules contained in the general plan land use element. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.080 Minimum site area.
     The minimum site area for establishing a planned community district is ten acres. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.090 Procedures and submittal requirements pertaining to establishment of a planned community zone.
     A.    Conceptual Master Plan. Proposals to establish a planned community zone shall be accompanied by a conceptual master plan containing the information set forth below:

     1.     Background information on physical characteristics of the concept plan area, including a detailed topographic map, the location of all drainage courses, and a vicinity map showing all adjacent uses and physical features and any necessary environmental information, including special studies as may be required based on environmental sensitivity maps contained in the general plan;

     2.     The proposed locations of various land uses and intensities of land use, including proposed street and lot layouts, street and infrastructure connections to adjacent properties, the location of off-street parking areas, preliminary grading information including heights and widths of proposed manufactured slopes and any other pertinent information contributing to the understanding of the overall development concept;

     3.     Areas proposed to be dedicated, reserved or developed for parks, parkways, school sites, public or quasi-public buildings or similar uses. Sufficient topographic and soil condition information shall be provided for these areas to establish that they would be functional for the intended uses;

     4.     A description of the proposed development concept shall be an attachment and part of the conceptual master plan. The description should set forth proposed lot sizes and patterns, any unique architectural or site plan themes or elements that will be incorporated into the project, typical sketches for plotting of houses, criteria for addressing unique circumstances such as interface between differing land uses, any unique grading techniques that will be utilized, or similar information that will establish the parameters for exhibits, standards and conditions that will be necessary for submittal of a planned community development permit and related entitlement applications;

     5.     An infrastructure master plan, evaluating sizing and extensions of infrastructure necessary to serve all phases of the development and any future planned development of adjacent areas. Included shall be a fiscal impact study analyzing costs of new demand for necessary infrastructure and services on both a short and long-term basis, how they will be funded, and potential funding shortfalls. These requirements may be reduced or waived for provided master plan areas containing twenty acres or less in area;

     6.     An engineering analysis of infrastructure capacities, including the ability of the city to provide water and treat wastewater during peak periods or under reduced allocation years. The analysis shall include projected water use and wastewater generation at project buildout, current city uses and capacities, and anticipated uses and capacities at buildout;

     7.     Tentative subdivision map (optional, may be deferred until planned development permit phase at discretion of planned community proponent);

     8.     A preliminary phasing plan indicating sequence of development and related subdivision of land. Maximum buildout rate may be established based on the fiscal analysis and infrastructure capacity analysis. A funding mechanism must be established to pay for all necessary infrastructure for each phase of development. Phasing plan requirements may be reduced or waived for proposed master plan areas containing twenty acres or less in area.

     9.     Rate of anticipated development (required at conceptual master plan stage if a tentative map is processed concurrently);

     10.   Preliminary information on anticipated home prices, rental rates and dwelling sizes;

     11.   A statement from the Napa Unified School District indicating school capacities and facility needs in the vicinity of the proposed planned community;

     12.   Any other information that may be deemed necessary by the city to properly assess the zone change request.

     B.     Planning Commission Review. The planning commission shall review and make a recommendation to the city council regarding the proposed planned community zone and conceptual master plan following a duly noticed public hearing based on standards and findings outlined herein.

     C.     City Council Action. Upon receipt of the recommendations of the planning commission, the city council shall conduct a duly noticed public hearing to consider the request to establish a planned community zone and conceptual master plan. In the event that the planning commission recommends against the zone change to a planned community zone, the city council need not take further action on the zone change unless an interested party files a request for a hearing with the city clerk within five days after the planning commission files its recommendations with the city council (Government Code Section 65856). The council’s action shall be based on conformity with the adopted general plan and compliance with all applicable standards and findings set forth herein. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.100 Procedures and submittal requirements for approval of a planned community development permit.
     A.    A planned community development permit application shall contain detailed development information either for a portion or all of the conceptual master plan area as set forth below. Additional information or clarification of submittal materials may be requested as deemed necessary by the city based on project specific issues or characteristics:

     1.     Specific lot and street layout fully dimensioned and to scale;

     2.     Complete plot plans for all proposed dwellings, buildings and structures, fully dimensioned and to scale (may be submitted in phases based on development sequence);

     3.     Detailed building elevations fully dimensioned and to scale (may be submitted in phases based on development sequence);

     4.     Floor plans for each type of dwelling or structure being proposed (may be submitted in phases based on development sequence);

     5.     Illustrative drawings showing the relationship between interior dwelling areas and usable private yards and interior spaces (may be submitted in phases based on development sequence);

     6.     Detailed landscape and improvements plans for all open space, recreational, greenbelt, parkway, common space and slope areas;

     7.     Detailed grading information including height and width of all manufactured slopes;

     8.     A preliminary drainage plan;

     9.     Proposed tentative subdivision or parcel map if not submitted under the conceptual master plan;

     10.   A final phasing plan;

     11.   Rate of anticipated development which may be defined by the city under the terms of the planned community development permit.

     B.     Planning Commission Action. The planning commission shall be the final decision-making authority for a planned community development permit unless appealed pursuant to procedures established under Section 19.16.090(C).

     C.     Establishment of Conditions. The planning commission or city council may impose any and all conditions on the planned development permit necessary to ensure implementation of the planned community conceptual master plan in a manner consistent with the general plan, the standards in the planned community zone, and as may be required to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

     D.    Subsequent Entitlements within the Master Plan Area. Following approval of a conceptual master plan and planned community development permit, applications may be acted upon for subdivision or development of the property in accordance with the plans, terms and conditions of the planned development permit. Concurrent processing of the conceptual master plan, planned community development permit and related entitlement requests may be permissible if the entitlements are consistent with the conceptual master plan and development permit and the zone change and development permit are approved prior to other entitlement requests. The subsequent entitlement requests shall be processed in accordance with the applicable procedures established in the zoning and subdivision ordinances. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.110 Development standards—Single-family subdivisions including those proposing lot sizes smaller than the baseline lot size.
     The following standards shall be applicable to all single-family residential subdivisions within areas designated single-family or multifamily residential on the general plan land use map unless otherwise noted. The intent of these standards is to provide a measured degree of increased flexibility over standard single-family zoning while establishing compensating or circumstances that would justify greater variation than what would normally be expected. Minimum standards are established to ensure that the basic integrity of the single-family general plan designation is retained and that a range of lot sizes be provided to meet both current and future city housing needs for various home types and market ranges.

     A.    Baseline Lot Size/Mix of Lot Sizes. The baseline lot size shall be six thousand five hundred square feet. A reasonable proportion of lots proposed within a planned community may be less than the baseline with a minimum lot size of four thousand five hundred square feet. All lot sizes within a planned community may be larger than six thousand five hundred square feet although the reverse in which all lots are less than six thousand five hundred square feet is not permitted. The distribution and ratio of lot sizes shall be based on the following factors:

     1.     Topographic and other physical constraints;

     2.     Lot sizes and intensities of surrounding land uses;

     3.     Proximity to common or public open spaces;

     4.     Preservation of significant environmental resources;

     5.     The above standards are not applicable to areas designated multifamily on the general plan land use map where the acceptable minimum lot sizes and mix of lot sizes shall be established under a conceptual master plan and planned community development permit.

     B.     Exceptions for Extraordinary Features. Exceptions to the lot size and mix limitations under may be considered for significant community facilities or amenities proposed under a conceptual master plan. Significant community facilities include, but are not limited to, an improved public park encompassing an area equal to or larger than park area per population requirement established in the parks and recreation element of the general plan, a recreational facility or day care center serving the proposed community and the community at large, regional trail improvements, or significant contributions (land, facilities, or combination thereof) to school facilities. A determination of any exception pursuant to this section shall be made during review of the conceptual master plan.

     C.     Lot Width. Lot widths shall be fifty feet or greater but may be less if it can be clearly demonstrated that a lesser lot width will not result in over concentration or minimal separation of structures, excessive garage door width in proportion to overall dwelling width, or reduced articulation of the front entry.

     D.    Lot Depth. Lot depths shall be ninety feet or greater but may be less if it can be clearly demonstrated that adequate private area is being provided despite lesser lot depth or compensating common open space is provided adjacent to the lots.

     E.     Lot Design. Lots shall generally be rectangular in shape and reasonably proportioned. The number of abutting lots shall be minimized.

     F.     Dwelling/Garage Proportion. Garage door width shall not be the dominant architectural feature of the front dwelling elevation. Garage doors shall not occupy more than fifty percent of the width of the front of the dwelling unless it can clearly established that the front entry is clearly defined through use of a porch or similar feature and prominence of the garage door is reduced through use of second story architectural elements above, multiple panel garage doors rather than a single panel or similar measures.

     G.    Front Setbacks. The minimum front setback from back of sidewalk to the main dwelling is fourteen feet. The minimum setback from the back of sidewalk to face of garage (attached or detached) shall be twenty feet except for side entry garages which may be set back a minimum of fourteen feet.

     H.    Front Setback Variation. No more than three consecutive dwellings shall contain the same front setback. A minimum variation of five feet is required with the minimum front setback of fourteen feet.

     I.      Rear Setback. The minimum rear setback is twenty feet. The minimum setback to the top or toe of a manufactured slope with a steepness greater than or equal to 3:1 shall be fifteen feet. The minimum setback for a detached or attached garage (without a second story) is five feet. Reduced setback may be permitted for private yards abutting significant common open space. Reduced setbacks for patio covers, decks or other accessory structures may be established pursuant to special standards under the planned community permit.

     J.      Side Yard Setbacks. A “0” lot line may be permitted on one side if a fifteen foot separation between dwellings is provided on the opposite side. In all other cases, the minimum side yard setback shall be five feet on one side with a minimum ten foot setback on the opposite side. Alternatives may be considered if development plans clearly establish that dwelling separations and viewsheds are enhanced, privacy impacts are minimized, and grading impacts on the adjacent property are no greater than they would be with the standard setbacks.

     K.    Shared Driveways. Shall be encouraged whenever feasible.

     L.     Maximum Building Height. Two and one-half stories or thirty feet measured to the midpoint of a hip or gable type roof or the top of a flat roof.

     M.    Private Open Space. A minimum of five hundred square feet of fenced private yard area is required for each single-family lot. Exceptions may be considered for dwellings abutting common open space areas that are functional for outdoor recreational activities. All dwellings shall have direct access to private yard areas. Private yard areas shall be oriented on the south or west sides of buildings to the greatest extent feasible to ensure penetration of low winter sun angles. Alternatively the fenced yard area shall have adequate dimensions to reduce shading effects of a north building location.

     N.    Building Elevations. Similar architectural treatment shall be utilized on all sides of a building. Massing of second story elements shall be reduced through use of multiple roof lines, variation of wall planes and incorporation of architectural features such as dormers or multiple gable roof ends.

     O.    Garage Doors. All garage doors shall be of equal or greater quality to that provided by the roll up variety. Swing up doors are not permitted.

     P.     Defined Dwelling Entries. All dwelling units shall incorporate architectural elements that clearly define unit entries. All unit entries shall be highly visible and oriented to the street to minimize security problems.

     Q.    Passive Solar Design. All dwellings shall have sufficient roof overhangs to promote winter heating and summer shading. Main mass of dwellings shall be oriented so as to take advantage of southerly exposures wherever feasible with consideration also given to prevailing southwest wind flows. Attached garages on the south side of dwellings shall be avoided except where no reasonable alternative exists.

     R.     Common Open Space/Public Facilities. All projects proposing single-family dwelling lots smaller than the baseline minimum lot size shall include additional amenities and open spaces accessible by all project residents to compensate for reduced private yard areas. Open space areas must be large enough to be usable for sports and other outdoor activities. Neighborhoods shall be planned around these features to create community focal points. Size and type of facilities required will be based on project size and location. The open spaces and facilities may be public or private depending on the terms of the planned community development permit.

     S.     Perimeter Walls. Every effort shall be made to reduce the need for perimeter walls. This may be accomplished through creative grading techniques, street and lot orientation, alternative land uses or residential densities at project perimeters or similar measures. If perimeter walls are unavoidable, a greenbelt of adequate width to minimize visual impacts of perimeter walls shall be provided adjacent to arterial or collector streets.

     T.     Private Streets. Private streets may be permitted if a homeowners association is established for ongoing maintenance. The minimum standard section for a private street shall include sidewalks on both sides of the street, two travel lanes, and space available on both street sides for parallel parking. More extensive roadway improvements may be required depending on anticipated traffic levels. Alternative sections for private driveways may be considered based on function and location. Parking on both sides of the street may not be required where rear garage access is provided and is deemed consistent with the conceptual master plan. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.120 Development standards—Multifamily residential including apartments, townhouses and condominiums.
     All planned community conceptual master plan and development permit proposals containing the above development types within a portion or entire project area shall comply with the following standards set forth below:

 

     A.    Required Setbacks. Minimum building setback for principal structures on all perimeter property lines shall be twenty feet except for arterial frontages where a minimum of thirty feet shall be provided. Side and rear yard setbacks for accessory structures shall be established under the planned community development permit. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty feet from arterial frontages. All setback areas shall be fully landscaped;

     B.     Maximum building height: Two and one-half stories or thirty feet measured to the midpoint of a hip or gable type roof or the top of a flat roof;

     C.     Minimum separation between buildings containing dwelling units: twenty feet;

     D.    Common Usable Open Space. A minimum thirty percent of the project area devoted to multifamily uses shall be devoted to usable common open space for passive or active recreational uses. For purposes of meeting this requirement, usable open space areas shall not include public rights-of-way or private streets/driveways; vehicle parking areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen feet apart; private patios or yards; or areas having slopes of 3:1 or steeper. Common open space and recreational amenities shall be centrally located to serve as neighborhood focal points. Wherever possible, open spaces shall be visible from living areas within individual dwelling units to allow convenient supervision of children;

     E.     Private Open Spaces. Each dwelling unit shall have a defined private open space area (balcony or patio) with minimum dimensions of ten feet by ten feet. These areas shall be fenced or within an enclosed balcony. Private yards abutting a major common open space area shall utilize low (four and one-half feet or less in height) fencing that is architecturally compatible with building design. Other fences shall be a maximum of six feet in height;

     F.     Building Design. Multiple-family residential structures, including townhouses and condominiums, shall be designed to break up long wall or roof planes by providing defined unit entries, multiple roof lines, offsets in wall planes or similar features. Architectural treatment shall be provided on all building sides. Structures containing multiple units shall incorporate architectural elements that define individuality of each dwelling within the structure. This can be accomplished through provision of secondary roof line features such as secondary gables or porches that accentuate unit individuality;

     G.    Design of Carports Garages Trash Enclosures and Other Accessory Structures. Design of such structures shall reflect the architecture of the primary buildings with respect to style, colors and materials;

     H.    Garage Doors. All garage doors shall be of equal or greater quality to that provided by the roll up variety. Swing up doors are not permitted;

     I.      Climatic Conditions/Passive Solar Design. All dwellings shall incorporate adequate roof overhangs to provide shading of the high summer sun while allowing passive solar heating from the low winter sun. Main mass of dwellings shall be oriented to take advantage of southern exposures to the maximum extent feasible with consideration also given to prevailing southwest wind flows. Private yard areas shall be oriented on the south or west sides of buildings to ensure penetration of low winter sun angles. Alternatively, the fenced yard area shall have adequate dimensions to ensure adequate direct solar gain to a portion of the private yard;

     J.      Driveway Approaches/Design Features. All primary driveway approaches serving a multifamily development shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, decorative concrete, landscape medians or similar features. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.130 Findings.
     In order to issue a planned community development permit, the following findings shall be made:

     A.    That the land use and development plan proposed is consistent with the general plan and any adopted specific plan or conceptual master plan applicable to the area of the proposed project;

     B.     That the proposed planned community contains a development concept and standards that ensure a residential environment of sustained desirability and stability that is in harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood;

     C.     That the proposed planned community contains adequate sites for any necessary public facilities and incorporates useable common and private open space or public park space that in combination result in open space levels and amenities equal to or greater than what can be achieved under traditional zoning standards;

     D.    That plan details have been provided indicating that unit design and orientation to open space and vehicular traffic ways will facilitate cohesive neighborhood patterns, and an attractive living environment;

     E.     That the automobile, bicycle and pedestrian traffic systems are adequately designed to meet anticipated needs and to minimize potential conflicts with each other;

     F.     That a phased development plan has been established that is consistent with the city’s ability to provide infrastructure and services to the proposed planned community;

     G.    That a mix of lot sizes and unit types is provided that is appropriate to project scale and consistent with housing element policies for diversity in the city’s housing stock;

     H.    That any exception to the baseline lot size and mix requirements is compensated for by provision of public facilities and amenities of community-wide importance. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.140 Master plan modifications.
     No substantial change from an approved planned community conceptual master plan and development permit may be permitted unless approved by the original final decision making authority. Minor revisions consistent with the final approved planned community development permit may be approved by the community development director. For the purposes of this section, “substantial change” shall mean any change in land use, change in the number of permitted dwelling units, reduction in open space amenities, modification of overall design concepts, elimination, addition or rerouting of streets, or similar changes materially affecting the approved master plan concept. All such changes will require review by the planning commission and formal approval by the city council subject to procedures contained in this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.150 Modifications—Review procedures.
     All substantial changes shall require public hearings in accordance with procedures established in Section 19.16.090(B) or (C) or Section 19.16.100(B), whichever is applicable. All minor changes may be approved by the community development director without notice or hearing unless deemed appropriate by unique circumstances. Minor changes may be referred at the discretion of the community development director to the planning commission or may be appealed to the planning commission whose decision may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.160 Revocation.
     In the event of a violation of any of the terms, conditions, or approved plans pertaining to an approved planned community conceptual master plan and development permit, the city council, after public notice and hearing, may revoke or modify a previously approved planned community conceptual master plan and development permit and initiate rezoning to an appropriate standard zone district consistent with the general plan designation applicable to the property. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.16.170 Expiration of planned community development permit.
     A planned community development permit issued in conjunction with a tentative subdivision map shall expire no sooner than the approved tentative subdivision map, or any extension thereof, whichever occurs later.

     A planned community development permit not issued in conjunction with a tentative subdivision map shall expire two years after the date of approval or an alternate date specified as a condition of approval, unless the permit has been initiated through commencement of substantial construction in good faith reliance on the permit or an extension has been granted. Upon application prior to the expiration of the planned community development permit, the time at which the permit expires may be extended for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years. Prior to the expiration of a planned community development permit, upon an application to extend the permit, the permit shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved or denied, whichever occurs first. If the application for extension is denied, the decision may be appealed to the city council within fifteen days after the planning commission has denied the extension. Should a planned community development permit expire, a rezoning of the property shall be initiated to an appropriate standard zoning district consistent with the applicable general plan designation. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.17 SP SPECIFIC PLAN DISTRICT
19.17.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    Purpose. This chapter is intended to provide for the systematic implementation of general plan goals and policies for particular areas of the city that require a more comprehensive and intensive evaluation and planning effort due to their large size, the need to master plan infrastructure, and their unique environmental settings and viewsheds.

     B.     Intent. A specific plan prepared in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter is intended to serve as a regulatory document, consistent with the general plan. In the event there is an inconsistency or conflict between an adopted specific plan and comparable regulations of this title, the specific plan shall prevail. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.020 Authority.
     Specific plans are authorized by. California Government Code Section 65450 et seq., which specifies minimum contents and provides for fees and an additional environmental review procedure. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.030 Applicability.
     No building or grading permit, land division or other entitlement shall be granted within a specific plan district prior to the adoption of a specific plan. However, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any valid tentative map, conditional use permit or other entitlement approved or in effect prior to the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.040 General plan conformity.
     Land uses in a specific plan district shall conform to the densities or intensities permitted by the area’s applicable general plan land use designation(s). (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.050 Designation.
     Prior to adoption of a specific plan, an area in a specific plan zoning district shall be designated as “SP” in a manner identical to that of any other zoning district. Following adoption of a specific plan for the area, a number shall be added to the designation that corresponds to its specific plan. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.060 Application.
     A.    Application.

     1.     Application for a specific plan shall be filed with the community development department on forms prescribed by the planning commission, along with any plans, maps, or additional information required by the community development director. The application shall include, in part, a description of the proposed land use pattern, circulation and other improvements, phasing, requested modifications to development standards, financing of infrastructure improvements, and all other information required by state law for specific plans.

     2.     The text and diagrams of the proposed specific plan shall be organized in a manner that clearly states the goals of the specific plan and sets forth regulations in a format readily usable by both professionals and lay persons who may have a role in implementing the specific plan.

     B.     Preparation. Specific plans shall be prepared by the affected property owners in close cooperation with the city. Where property owners are unable or unwilling to prepare such specific plans, the city may prepare the specific plans in close cooperation with the affected property owners. The city’s costs of preparing or reviewing and adopting the specific plans and related environmental documents shall be recovered from the property owners benefiting by the specific plan, as provided for by state law. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.070 Review and approval.
     A.    Approval Authority. An application for a specific plan shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally-approved, or denied by the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures, following planning commission review and recommendations.

     B.     Concurrent Processing. Where an application for a specific plan is concurrently filed with an application for a zoning map amendment or other entitlements that may be feasibly processed together, all public hearings may be held concurrently.

     C.     Ordinance Amendment. Simultaneous with the approval of a specific plan by the city council, the specific plan shall be made a part of this title through assignment of a specific plan number and amending the zoning map accordingly.

     D.    Subsequent Amendment. A specific plan may be amended as necessary, under the same procedure as adoption of a specific plan. The specific plan text shall contain provisions for processing major and minor modifications. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.080 Required findings.
     Prior to approving a specific plan, the following findings supported by adequate evidence shall be made by the city council:

     A.    The distribution, location and extent of land uses, including open space, as depicted in the specific plan is consistent with the general plan.

     B.     The specific plan provides for public infrastructure and services needed to support the land uses described in the plan, including adequate distribution, location, extent and intensity of transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, parks, community facilities and other essential facilities.

     C.     The standards and development criteria, including requirements for resource utilization, will ensure that development proceeds in an orderly fashion and maintains a high level of quality.

     D.    The specific plan contains implementation measures, including financing programs, to ensure that development is supported by adequate infrastructure as it occurs.

     E.     The site is suitable for the type and intensity of development proposed.

     F.     The flexibility in development standards afforded by the specific plan process has resulted in a project providing more superior design and amenities than would occur under more traditional zoning practices, and the project provides clear and substantial benefit to the city. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.17.090 Conditions of approval.
     A.    A specific plan may include such terms and conditions deemed appropriate or necessary by the city council to make the findings specified in Section 19.17.080. The specific plan adoption resolution may link its adoption to other entitlements or programs, such as subdivision or parcel maps, area facilities plans, design guidelines, monitoring programs, and financing mechanisms.

     B.     A specific plan or its conditions of approvals may be subsequently modified per Chapter 19.45, Minor and Major Modifications. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.18 MHP MOBILEHOME PARK OVERLAY DISTRICT
19.18.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the MHP mobilehome park overlay district is to:

     A.    Recognize the importance of existing mobilehome parks as a valuable city resource providing affordable housing and stable communities, protected from speculative pressures to convert to other land use types;

     B.     Provide appropriate areas for residential mobilehome park development that are consistent with the general plan and with standards of the public health and safety as established by state or city code;

     C.     Ensure adequate light, air, privacy and open space for each dwelling, and protect residents from the harmful effects of excessive noise, population density, traffic congestion and other environmental effects;

     D.    Achieve design compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods and promote and encourage orderly residential development with appropriate physical amenities. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.18.020 Allowable uses.
     A.    Permitted Uses. The following uses may be allowed in the MHP overlay district through approval of a design permit (Chapter 19.41):

     1.     Mobilehome park, defined as a site developed for the long-term placement of mobilehomes that are certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974;

     2.     Accessory structures and recreational facilities related to mobilehome parks;

     3.     Caretaker’s quarters.

     B.     Conditionally-Permitted Uses. The following uses may be allowed in the MHP overlay district through approval of a conditional use permit (Chapter 19.42):

     1.     Mobilehome subdivision;

     2.     The permitted and conditionally-permitted uses allowed by this title for the underlying base zone district.

     C.     Mobilehome Park Conversion. All requests to convert a mobilehome park or subdivision to another land use requires a rezoning to eliminate the overlay district and compliance with the city’s mobilehome park conversion ordinance. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.18.030 Development standards.
     A.    Project Area. A site proposed for a mobilehome park or subdivision shall be a minimum of ten acres.

     B.     Density and Site Area.

     1.     The minimum and maximum overall density of a mobilehome park or subdivision shall conform to the site’s general plan land use designation and the underlying base zone district.

     2.     Individual mobilehome sites or lots shall have a minimum area of three thousand six hundred eighty square feet.

     C.     Site Width. Individual mobilehome sites or lots shall have a minimum width of forty-six feet.

     D.    Perimeter Buffer Area. A landscaped area with a minimum width of twenty feet shall be maintained along the exterior boundaries of a mobilehome park or subdivision site as a buffer between the mobilehome units and the adjoining property, except when located adjacent to any public roadway, where a landscaped buffer area with a minimum width of thirty feet of shall be maintained.

     E.     Minimum Yards.

     1.     Side and Rear Yards. A five-foot minimum setback from the outer edge of any structure or mobilehome to the mobilehome side or rear space or lot line shall be maintained.

     2.     Front Yard. A fifteen-foot minimum setback from the outer edge of any structure or mobilehome to the mobilehome front space or lot line shall be maintained.

     3.     Cornices, eaves, canopies, fireplaces and other similar architectural features, but not including any flat wall or window surface, may extend up to two feet into any yard. No other encroachments shall be permitted.

     F.     Maximum Height. The maximum height in the MHP overlay district shall be twenty-five feet and structures shall be limited to one story.

     G.    Common Areas. Common areas shall be provided within a mobilehome park or subdivision for recreation and other activities. The size and type of facilities required will be based on project size and location.

     H.    Circulation and Parking. All streets, access drives, parking bays and connection to public roads shall be in accordance with plans reviewed and approved by the city engineer.

     1.     Access.

     a.     All mobilehome spaces shall be served from internal private streets within the mobilehome park or subdivision, and there shall be no direct access from a mobilehome space to a public street or alley.

     b.     Private streets shall have a clear and unobstructed access to a public thoroughfare.

     2.     Street Widths.

     a.     The minimum width for any street within a mobilehome park shall be no less than twenty-five feet.

     b.     No interior street shall be less than thirty-two feet in width, curb to curb, if parking is allowed on one side and not less than forty feet in width if parking is allowed on both sides.

     3.     Pedestrian Circulation. Sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be incorporated into the park design to allow normal circulation patterns to take place between adjacent parcels and common areas.

     4.     Parking. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 19.21, Parking and Loading.

     I.      Boat and Trailer Storage.

     1.     All pleasure boats, trailers, campers and motor coaches shall be stored in an approved area set aside for such storage.

     2.     Such areas shall be screened from view and shall provide a minimum of one boat or trailer space for every five mobilehome sites.

     3.     Such storage shall not be allowed on any street or individual mobilehome space.

     J.      Landscaping.

     1.     A detailed landscaping plan shall be submitted for consideration with each application for a mobilehome park or subdivision, in accordance with Chapter 19.22, Landscaping and Screening. All open areas except driveways, parking areas, walkways, utility areas, decks, patios and porches shall be landscaped and maintained.

     2.     Substantial trees shall be planted throughout the mobilehome park or subdivision, and one street, of a variety approved by the planning commission, shall be provided on each lot. Specimen trees of not less than five-gallon container size or one inch in trunk diameter shall be planted.

     K.    Utilities.

     1.     All utilities in a mobilehome park or subdivision shall be installed underground.

     2.     Individual exposed antennas are not permitted. Each mobilehome park or subdivision shall utilize a master antenna system.

     L.     Fences.

     1.     The approving authority may require that the park or subdivision property be enclosed at the rear and sides by a six-foot fence and/or thick screen planting for control of view, light, sound and adequate security.

     2.     Fences up to six feet in height may be permitted in the front setback area provided an average setback of ten feet from the street property line is observed and the area between the fence and property line is well landscaped and maintained. The height of fencing and landscaping located at intersections of streets, driveways and pedestrian walkways may be limited to provide clear lines of sight.

     M.    Other Standards. Additional development standards may be prescribed as conditions of approval when such requirements are determined to be necessary to ensure the protection of the character of neighboring properties, the compatibility of land uses, and the health and safety of mobilehome development occupants and other city residents.

     N.    Continued Maintenance. All recreation facilities, common open spaces, common area landscaping, perimeter walls and streets/driveways established under permits approved prior to adoption of this chapter shall be maintained and repaired on an ongoing basis to ensure that such facilities serve the purpose intended under the original or subsequent permit approvals. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.18.040 Signs.
     A.    Mobilehome park or subdivision signs shall be limited to one twenty-four square foot sign per major entrance, not to exceed a height of six feet.

     B.     Each mobilehome park or subdivision shall maintain a directory sign showing the location and house number of each unit.

     C.     Signs shall be subject to the permit procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 19.23, Sign Regulations, except as noted herein. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.18.050 Senior mobile home park overlay zone.
     A.    “Senior mobile home park” is a mobile home park in the city located within the MHP mobile home park overlay district in which at least eighty percent of the spaces are occupied by or intended for occupancy by at least one person who is age fifty-five or older.

     B.     Coterminous with the existing zoning for mobile home park residential is the senior mobile home park overlay zone (MHP-S).

     C.     Mobile home units in a mobile home park in the senior mobile home overlay zone shall be occupied only consistent with the definition of senior mobile home park in subsection A of this section so that at least eighty percent of spaces and mobile home units are rented and occupied by at least one person who is age fifty-five or older. The age restriction stated herein does not apply to or affect ownership of mobile home units, but is an occupancy requirement.

     D.    The signage, advertising, park rules and regulations, and leases for spaces or units in mobile home parks in the senior mobile home park overlay zone shall state the park is a senior park, or “housing for older persons,” which at a minimum is consistent with the definition in subsection A of this section.

     E.     Senior mobile home park owners and/or their management personnel shall submit biennial verification of occupancy to confirm their status as a senior mobile home park, through survey or affidavit, in a form to be determined by the city planning director, which shall be consistent with the survey or affidavit that satisfies the Federal Fair Housing Act regulations and which the city planning director, or designee, shall review and certify.

     F.     Failure to submit the verification required by this section or failure of the verification to confirm a mobile home park within the senior mobile home park overlay zone meets the definition in subsection A of this section shall constitute a violation of the city’s zoning ordinance, subject to enforcement in the manner and form provided for in the American Canyon Municipal Code. (Ord. 2010-01 § 1, 2010)

 

Chapter 19.19 CS SPECIALTY COMMERCIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT
19.19.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the CS specialty commercial overlay district is to provide for commercial and commercially-related uses that capitalize on and attract visitors due to a site’s unique views and other natural characteristics. (Ord. 2013-04 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.19.020 Allowable uses.
     A.    Property in the CS overlay district may be used either for industrial purposes, consistent with the permitted and conditionally permitted uses allowed by this title for the underlying LI base zone district, or for specialty commercial purposes1.

     B.     Should the owner of property in the CS overlay district decide to use the property for the purpose set forth in Section 19.19.010, the following uses as defined in use classifications, may be permitted1:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses:

     a.     Public information center,

     b.     Public parking,

     c.     Utilities, minor;

     2.     Commercial uses:

     a.     Bank, savings and loan, including walk-up service,

     b.     Entertainment, indoor,

     c.     Long-term care,

     d.     Lodging services,

     e.     Personal services,

     f.      Restaurant,

     g.     Retail sales, visitor-oriented.

     C.     Should the owner of property in the CS overlay district decide to use the property for the purpose set forth in Section 19.19.010, the following uses as defined in use classifications, may be permitted subject to a conditional use permit1:

     1.     Public and quasi-public uses:

     a.     Charitable uses;

     2.     Commercial uses:

     a.     Entertainment, indoor; amusement center,

     b.     Lodging services adjacent to a residential district,

     c.     On-premises liquor consumption, tasting room,

     d.     Liquor store;

     3.     Temporary uses:

     a.     Commercial filming,

     b.     Live entertainment,

     c.     Mobile structure (subject to Chapter 19.30),

     d.     Tent;

     4.     Public and quasi-public uses:

     a.     Antenna, commercial,

     b.     Antenna exceeding height limitations;

     5.     Commercial uses:

     a.     Entertainment, indoor, gaming,

     b.     On-premises liquor consumption,

     c.     Restaurant, night use adjacent to residential district,

     d.     Restaurant, take-out; night use adjacent to residential district.

 

1        Permitted and conditionally permitted uses on parcels located within a designated Napa County Airport compatibility zone may be restricted or prohibited subject to the requirements of the policies related to airport compatibility in the American Canyon general plan and the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan. Restrictions may include the requirement for recordation of overflight or avigation easements.

 

(Ord. 2013-04 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.19.030 Development standards.
     A.    The development standards set forth in the schedule of zoning district regulations for the LI district shall apply to development in the CS specialty commercial overlay district.

     B.     The design of development in the CS district shall comply with the following criteria:

     1.     Buildings shall be oriented to take advantage of the site’s unique views, where feasible.

     2.     Architecture should blend with hillsides to the extent feasible.

     3.     Projects using the specialty commercial overlay zoning that require approval of a design permit shall incorporate into the site plan a public pedestrian easement to the site with potential connections to adjacent properties that provides access to the site’s unique views.

     4.     Long-term care facilities shall mitigate potential emergency service impacts by paying an emergency service impact fee if and when such an impact fee is adopted.

     5.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for a long-term care facility in Zone D, an acoustical study shall be conducted that assesses and mitigates aircraft noise impacts consistent with Appendix C of the Napa County Airport Land Use Compatibility plan.

     6.     Prior to approval of any discretionary application for a long-term care facility, clustering is encouraged to maximize development in Zone E and retain open land areas in Zone D.

     7.     Prior to approval of any discretionary application for a long-term care facility, an assessment shall be made to evaluate and limit the size of the project consistent with the density and height requirements allowable in the applicable Napa County Airport Land Use Compatibility zone.

     8.     Prior to issuance of a building permit for a long-term care facility, an overflight easement shall be recorded on the property if one is not already in place.

     9.     Any long-term care facility proposed in Napa County Airport Land Use Compatibility Zone D shall be reviewed by the Napa County Airport Land Use Commission for consistency with the compatibility plan. (Ord. 2013-04 § 2, 2013; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.20 AC AIRPORT COMPATIBILITY OVERLAY DISTRICT (Reserved)
Chapter 19.21 PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS
Note
*       Prior history note; Ord. 2001-02.

 

19.21.010 Purpose.
     These regulations are intended to achieve the following:

     A.    To provide parking and loading facilities in proportion to the needs generated by various types of land uses;

     B.     To provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly-lighted, and well-maintained and screened off-street parking and loading facilities;

     C.     To reduce traffic congestion and hazards. (Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 3, 2004)

 

19.21.020 Applicability.
     A.    The requirements of this chapter shall apply to the establishment, alteration, or change in any use or structure, except as provided herein. Parking required by this chapter shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged, or a use is established, changed, or expanded. The word “use” shall mean both the type and intensity of the use.

     B.     When a change in use or expansion in floor area within an existing development increases by twenty percent or more the amount of off-street parking or loading required by the previous use, parking or loading spaces shall be provided for the increased demand. The number of new spaces provided shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the change in use or enlargement, unless the pre-existing number is greater than the number required by this chapter for the previous use, in which case the number in excess of the prescribed minimum may be deducted from the number required to be provided to serve the change in use or enlargement. (Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 3, 2004)

 

19.21.030 Vehicle parking requirements.
     A.    Number of Spaces Required.

     1.     Automobile parking spaces shall be provided in the number set forth in Table 19.21.030(A). Fractional space requirements of .5 or more shall be counted as the next largest whole space. These requirements shall be considered minimum standards. The decision-making authority for a project may require more parking than is required by Table 19.21.030(A) when it finds that due to the characteristics of a project, the application of the above standards may lead to traffic congestion or parking violations in adjacent streets as well as unauthorized parking in nearby private lots.

     2.     When two or more use are located in the same building or structure, or are within the same common development, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use, except as specifically provided in this chapter.

 

Table 19.21.030(A)


REQUIRED PARKING SPACES

Type of Use

Number of Required Parking Spaces

Residential Uses

Single-family residential;

Two-family residential

2 covered spaces

Multifamily residential;

Accessory unit

Studio: 1 covered space
Unit with 1 bedroom: 1 covered, plus .5 uncovered spaces
Unit with 2 or more bedrooms: 1 covered space plus 1 uncovered space
Plus 1 guest space per 4 units

Secondary unit

1 space (covered or uncovered)

Mobilehome park

1 covered plus 1 uncovered space per unit, plus .5 guest spaces per unit

Senior citizen housing development

1 per 1.5 units

Public and Quasi-Public Uses

Elementary school

2 per classroom, plus 1 per 5 fixed seats in an auditorium or per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area

High school

5 per classroom, plus 1 per 5 fixed seats in an auditorium or per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area

Pre-schools; day care centers

1 per staff member, plus 1 for each 10 children

Additional parking or designated area for dropoff and pickup of students for the above uses may be required.

Religious assembly

1 per 4 fixed seats in the principal sanctuary, or
1 per 9 linear feet of fixed benches, or
1 per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area

Commercial Uses

Amusement center; nightclub; gaming

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area

Bank; savings and loan

1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area in public areas (excluding vault), plus 1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area for general office uses

Bowling alley

5 per lane, plus requirements for any related commercial uses

Car wash, full-serve

1 per 2 employees on the maximum shift, plus vehicle stacking area equal to 3 times the capacity of the enclosed washing operation

Car wash, self-serve

2 spaces for drying and cleaning purposes per stall, plus 2 reservoir spaces in front of each stall

Eating and drinking establishments, including those providing liquor consumption

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

Funeral and interment services

1 per 4 fixed seats, or

1 per 9 linear feet of fixed benches, or

1 per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area, whichever

is greater

Game court

3 per court

Golf course

6 per hole, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area in any public meeting room plus 75 percent of the

requirement for other associated uses

Health club; spa; dance studio

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area accessible to

members or clients, including any pool area

Health services

1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Liquor consumption, on-premise, as a primary use

1 per 100 square feet of gross floor area. A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

Lodging services

1 per guest room or unit, plus 1 per 10 rooms or units, plus 1 per 50 square feet of gross floor area in any public meeting room, plus 75 percent of the requirement for other associated uses

Long-term care facility

1 per 2 beds

Offices, business and professional

1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Personal services

1 per 200 square feet of gross floor area

Recreational vehicle park

1 per recreational vehicle site

Retail sales

•    Retail sales, general

•    Retail sales, food

•    Bulky merchandise sales, including furniture, household appliances, and

building materials

•    Vehicle/equipment sales; nursery

•    Wholesaling, commercial


1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area

1 per 250 square feet of gross floor area

1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area



1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area within any showroom, plus 1 per 1,000 square feet of outdoor

display or sales area for the first 10,000 square feet; then

1 per 5,000 square feet of outdoor display or sales area

thereafter 1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area

Self-storage facilities

1 per employee. A minimum of 5 spaces shall be provided for such use.

Service station

1 per pump island, plus 1 per service bay

Spectator entertainment; auditorium

1 per 4 fixed seats, or

1 per 9 linear feet of fixed benches, or

1 per 50 square feet of nonfixed seating area, whichever

is greater

Vehicle repair

4 per repair stall

Type of Use

Number of Required Parking Spaces

Industrial Uses

Company-owned vehicles parked on premises

1 per truck, car or other vehicle

Manufacturing, processing, packaging,

1 per 500 square feet of gross floor area

research, service

 

Research and development

1 per 300 square feet of gross floor area

Warehousing and storage

1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for the first

 

20,000 square feet of space, plus 1 per each 2,000 square

 

feet of gross floor area thereafter

 

The above requirements for industrial uses may be increased, if necessary, to provide a minimum of 2 spaces per 3 employees on the 2 adjoining shifts having the largest number of employees.

 

     3.     Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be determined by the decision-making authority for a project, based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the use.

     4.     Handicapped parking shall be provided according to the latest standards established by the state of California.

     5.     No area maybe utilized and counted both as a required parking space and a required loading space other than for company-owned vehicles periodically stored for on-site loading.

     B.     Shared Parking.

     1.     The number of required parking spaces may be reduced for projects comprised of uses that generate parking needs primarily at different times, and that cooperatively establish and operate shared parking facilities.

     2.     Shared parking may be approved through a conditional use permit for existing development. Where shared parking is proposed for new development as part of a site plan review or conditional use permit application, the request shall be processed concurrently with the applications. Nothing in this section shall preclude the reviewing authority from placing additional conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city or to establish the number or percentage of parking spaces to be shared.

     3.     Shared parking arrangements may only be approved if the following requirements are met:

     a.     The applicant has provided substantial evidence and documentation (including a description of all uses and operating characteristics) that a sufficient number of spaces are being provided to meet the parking demand of all participating uses at any given time of the day, week or year.

     b.     All shared parking spaces shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible to the uses they serve, and shall not be separated from such uses by any street, unless otherwise approved by the decision-making authority.

     c.     Reasonable pedestrian connections shall be provided from any shared parking spaces to all the uses that they serve.

     d.     Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), deed restrictions or other agreements as may be required by the decision-making authority shall be executed and recorded, ensuring that required parking is provided and that the uses and operating characteristics of all participating uses are maintained.

     C.     Accessory Dwelling Unit Parking. Parking spaces required for accessory dwelling units (i.e., dwelling units located in a commercial zoning district on the same site as a primary permitted or conditionally-permitted use) shall be specifically designated and reserved by posting, pavement marking and/or physical separation.

     D.    Dimensional Requirements.

     1.     Minimum Dimensions. Required minimum parking dimensions are indicated in Table 19.21.030(D)(1). Minimum dimensions shall not include any landscaped areas.

 

 

Table 19.21.030(D)(1)
MINIMUM PARKING DIMENSIONS FOR STANDARD STALLS

 

Parking Angle (PA)

Minimum Stall Dimensions

Minimum Aisle Widths (A)

Width (W)

Depth (D)

Length (L)

One-Way

Two-Way

Parallel

8′

n/a

22′

18′6″

20′

30 degrees

9′

16′

18′

12′

20′

45 degrees

9′

19′

18′

14′

20′

60 degrees

9′

20′

18′

20′

20′

90 degrees

9′

18′

18′

25′

25′

 

 

     2.     Compact Spaces. Reduced dimensions of eight feet in width and sixteen feet in length (ninety degree stalls) may be allowed for uncovered parking spaces for uses shown in Table 19.21.030(D)(2) that have at least twelve parking spaces. Compact spaces shall be clearly indicated by appropriate markings and signage.

 

Table 19.21.030(D)(2)

ALLOWABLE COMPACT PARKING

 

Project Type

Maximum Percent Compact Spaces

Multifamily residential

40 percent

Commercial

20 percent

Industrial-employee parking

40 percent

 

     3.     Covered Residential Spaces. Required covered residential parking spaces shall have a minimum unobstructed length of twenty feet, width of ten feet, and ceiling height of seven feet, six inches.

     E.     Garages.

     1.     Garage door openings shall have a minimum height of seven feet and shall be covered by a solid or sectional door which shall be constructed of wood, metal or fiberglass, and painted, stained or treated to be harmonious with the exterior of the residential structure.

     2.     In front of any required garage there shall be a permanently surfaced area measuring no less than one foot greater in width on each side of the overhead door and no less than twenty feet in depth.

     3.     For all new construction or remodels and additions where a residence is required to be brought up to current uniform codes, all garage interior surfaces shall be finished with gypsum board or equivalent, nailed and taped in accordance with the minimum standards of the Uniform Building Code as adopted by the city. On walls or the ceiling where fire protection or fire rating is required, a minimum of five-eighths-inch gypsum board or equivalent shall be used. On walls or ceilings where fire protection or fire rating is not required, a minimum of one-half inch gypsum board shall be used.

     4.     For all garages and carports that may have been previously converted to a habitable space without securing building permits, the following conditions shall apply:

     a.     Building permits maybe issued for the following cosmetic improvements without requiring any previously-converted carports or garages to be updated to current uniform codes and inspected:

     i.      A re-roof where no structural changes to the roof are required or proposed and where no chimneys, fireplace or heater vents penetrate the roof;

     ii.     Changing windows and doors except in the converted area;

     iii.    Interior remodels where no changes are proposed to the converted area or walls contiguous to the converted area.

     b.     Building permits maybe issued for minor additions to existing rooms, interior and exterior re models, and other similar improvements to an existing residence without requiring a previously converted garage or carport to be restored to its original use and configuration so long as that portion of the building that was converted to another use without benefit of building permits or inspections is brought up to the standards of the Uniform Building Codes adopted by ordinance of the city council in effect at the time building pen-nits are issued for the additional or new work.

     c.     Where a building permit is requested for the addition of one or more bedrooms or the addition of a second floor, the converted area shall be brought into compliance with the uniform codes in effect at the time the building permits are issued, and a garage with space for two vehicles shall be provided. Where a two-car garage may not be constructed due to practical difficulties or unusual circumstances such as lot size, lot configuration, or topography, a variance application may be submitted to the planning commission for consideration.

     F.     Striping.

     1.     Parking spaces in parking lots shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the parking surface.

     2.     The restriping of any parking space of lot shall require the approval of a restriping plan by the director.

     G.    Surfacing.

     Parking spaces and maneuvering areas in parking lots shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete or other all-weather surfacing approved by the director.

     H.    Access to Parking.

     1.     Access to a parking space may only be from an approved driveway approach constructed to city standards unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

     2.     Handicapped access ramps in city sidewalks shall not be used for access to a parking space or access to a side or rear yard.

     I.      Curbing and Walkways.

     1.     Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided at least three feet from any wall, fence, property line, walkway, or structures where parking and/or drive aisles are located adjacent thereto. Curbing may be left out at structure access points.

     2.     The clear width of a walkway that is adjacent to overhanging parked cars shall be at least four feet.

     3.     Individual wheel stops shall not be used.

     J.      Drainage. All required off-street parking areas shall be so designed that surface water will not drain over any sidewalk or adjacent property.

     K.    Landscaping.

     1.     Surface parking areas of ten or more spaces shall have a landscaped area equal to a minimum of ten percent of the parking and circulation area.

     2.     Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the parking area as evenly as possible. In larger parking areas (two or more maneuvering aisles), interior landscaping shall be used to visually separate the parking area into small spaces. Parking row ends shall be protected by landscaped planters.

     3.     Landscaped areas shall have a minimum width of five feet.

     4.     A minimum of one tree shall be provided for every six parking spaces in a double-loaded layout, and one for every three spaces in a single-loaded layout. The trees shall be located so as to visually disrupt long rows of parked vehicles; trees may be clustered. Canopy-type trees should be used to provide a relatively consistent tree cover which will shade the pavement and vehicles.

     5.     A landscaped strip shall be provided adjacent to any public or private street wherever parking or circulation is generally or immediately located adjacent to such rights-of-way.

     6.     Defined pedestrian routes shall be incorporated into parking and landscaped areas.

     7.     Landscape areas shall be bordered by a concrete curb that has a minimum height and width of six inches. Landscaped planters within parking areas may be diamond-shaped in design.

     L.     Screening.

     1.     Where vehicles are to be parked immediately adjacent to a public or private street, a solid wall, opaque fence, berm, or compact evergreen hedge with a maximum height of thirty inches, measured from the finished surface of the parking area shall be provided.

     2.     Where a parking or loading area in a commercial or industrial district is located directly across a street or alley from a residential district, a solid wall, opaque fence, berm, or compact evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height shall be located on the property line.

     M.    Lighting.

     1.     Public parking areas designed to accommodate three or more vehicles shall have lighting facilities capable of providing sufficient illumination at every point of the parking area. A lighting study demonstrating that a minimum of one-foot candle will be maintained across the surface of the parking area may be required by the community development director.

     2.     Any parking area illumination, including security lighting shall be so arranged as to reflect away from adjoining properties and rights-of-way.

     N.    Location of Parking Spaces.

     1.     Except as otherwise set forth in the shared parking section of this chapter, parking spaces required by this chapter within commercial and industrial zones shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the use they serve, and within three hundred feet of the use they serve. Such distance shall be computed from the nearest point of a structure’s public access to the nearest point of the parking area. Required parking shall not be located in any required front or street side setback area.

     2.     Required parking for single-family dwellings and secondary units shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served, and shall not be located within a required front or street side setback area.

     3.     No vehicular parking shall be permitted in a required front yard in any residential district except on an area permanently surfaced (with continuous surfacing to point of access from a public or private street) for parking by paving, gravel, brick, grasscrete, concrete pavers or similar materials.

     4.     No more than fifty percent of the required front yard for lots with sixty feet or more of street frontage may be paved and used for vehicular parking. An increased percentage of paved area may be permitted by the community development director on lots with lesser frontage to allow up to a thirty-foot wide driveway including flag lots where the entire flag access corridor may be paved.

     5.     Required parking for multifamily dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served, or in the case of parking being located in a common area, not more than one hundred fifty feet from the dwelling served, and shall not be located within a required front or street side setback area.

     6.     Tandem parking may be allowed for single and two-family dwelling units when the tandem space is behind the covered space serving the same unit.

     7.     Parking shall be designed so that all maneuvering may occur on-site and that all vehicles may enter an abutting street in a forward direction. The director may approve exceptions for residential projects.

     8.     No space in a parking lot shall be located so that a vehicle must maneuver within twenty feet of a vehicular entrance, measured from the property line.

     O.    Maintenance. All required parking facilities, including surfacing and striping, shall be permanently maintained in good condition, free of litter and debris. (Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 3, 2004)

 

19.21.040 Loading requirements.
     A.    Number Required. Loading spaces shall be provided according to Table 19.21.040 for the specified uses. The decision-making authority may require more loading spaces than are required by Table 19.21.040 to insure that a sufficient off-street loading area will be provided to accommodate routine operations in a safe and convenient manner. Required loading spaces shall be designated as such and restricted to such use.

 

Table 19.21.040

 

REQUIRED LOADING SPACES

 

Use

Gross Floor Area

Minimum Loading Spaces

Commercial (non-office)

<5,000 square feet
5,000 — 20,000 square feet

None
One

Office

<20,000 square feet
20,000 — 40,000 square feet

None
One

Manufacturing, wholesale, warehousing, industrial

<20,000 square feet

One

All of the above uses

Each additional 20,000 square feet

One additional space

 

 

     B.     Minimum Dimensions. Each loading space shall have an unobstructed minimum dimension of twelve feet in width, forty-five feet in length, and fourteen feet in height. Larger spaces may be required by the decision-making authority to ensure that a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area will be provided to accommodate routine delivery or shipment operations in a safe and convenient manner.

     C.     Location of Loading Spaces.

     1.     Loading spaces required by this chapter shall be located immediately adjacent to the exterior wall of the building they serve or within the building.

     2.     Loading spaces shall not be located in any required front or side yard.

     3.     The location of loading spaces should minimize potential impacts on adjacent uses.

     4.     Loading spaces should be so located and designed that trucks shall not be required to back into a public street for ingress or egress. Truck maneuvering areas should be provided on-site where necessary to comply with this requirement.

     5.     Loading spaces should be concealed from offsite view to the maximum extent feasible.

     6.     Where a loading area in a commercial or industrial district is located directly across a street or alley from a residential district, a solid wall, opaque fence, or compact evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height shall be located on the property line. (Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 3, 2004)

 

19.21.050 Bicycle parking requirements.
     A.    Bicycle parking shall be provided in commercial and employment areas according to Table 19.21.050.

 

Table 19.21.050

REQUIRED BICYCLE PARKING

 

Total Automobile Parking Spaces

Minimum Number of Bicycle Spaces

1—4

0

5—14

1

15—29

2

30—44

3

45—59

4

60—74

5

75—99

6

100—199

7

200—299

8

300—399

9

400 and greater

10

 

     B.     Bicycle parking should be located in highly visible locations and should be lockable.

     C.     The bicycle parking requirement may be phased for parking areas containing sixty or greater spaces depending on accessibility of the area to bicycle routes. (Ord. 2004-10 Exh. 3, 2004)

 

Chapter 19.22 WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
19.22.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to implement the landscape design requirements of the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act of 2006 (AB 1881) and to establish standards for sustainable landscape practices in accordance with the StopWaste.Org Bay Friendly Landscape guidelines. It ensures that urbanized areas are sufficiently augmented by adequate, water-efficient, landscaping and open space in order to:

     A.    Shade vehicles in parking lots.

     B.     Break up extensive stretches of paving.

     C.     Reduce impervious areas.

     D.    Provide natural solar insulation for buildings, to screen certain types of land uses where appropriate.

     E.     Create interesting and defined entries to facilities.

     F.     Soften project perimeters. (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.020 Applicability.
     A.    Applicability. A conceptual landscape plan shall be required for all entitlements for which design permit approval is required (Chapter 19.41).

     B.     This chapter does not apply to:

     1.     Registered local, state or federal historical sites.

     2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system.

     3.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.

     C.     Review and Approval.

     1.     Conceptual landscape plans shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission, except for entitlements subject to the approval of the community development director (pursuant to Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures).

     2.     Final landscape plans, as defined by Chapter 16.13 of the municipal code, shall be subject to review and approval by the community development director. (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.030 Definitions.
     The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

     “Applied water’’ means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

     “Bay-Friendly Landscape Guidelines” means the most recent version of the guidelines developed by StopWaste.Org for use in the professional design, construction and maintenance of landscapes.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon and its representatives.

     “Conceptual landscape plan” means a preliminary landscape plan submitted to the city for review with a discretionary application.

     “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

     “Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

     “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

     “Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 492.4.

     “ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.7, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape.

     “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

     “Final landscape plan” means a landscape plan submitted to the city for review and issuance of building permits and contains the same elements as the conceptual landscape plan.

     “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

     “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).

     “Homeowner-provided landscaping” means any landscaping either installed by a private individual for a single-family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this chapter, is a person who occupies the dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes, which are not owner-occupied dwellings.

     “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

     “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

     “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources.

     “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code Section 5615.

     “Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non­development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

     “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

     “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required under Section 16.14.050.

     “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 19.22.020.

     “Lawn” means an area of short, mown grass in a yard, garden, or park.

     “Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 19.22.060. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area.

     “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, arbor or wood chips, recycled wood waste, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

     “Native species” means plants from the local microclimate or Northern California species.

     “New construction” means, for the purposes of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

     “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

     “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

 

     “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor that, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants.

     “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 19.22.050, to request a permit, plan check, or design permit from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

     “Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

     “Recreational area” means publicly owned or publicly accessible areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, and golf courses where turf provides a playing surface.

     “Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

     “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Section 19.22.060, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

     “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design permit, meets the requirements of Section 19.22.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet, is fifty percent of the total landscape area, and the modifications are completed within one year.

     “Runoff’ means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

     “Special landscape area (SLA)” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

     “Turf” means a species of grass that was developed to be used as a lawn together with the surface layer of earth held together by its roots.

     “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied).

     “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of Reclamation, 2100. (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.040 General requirements and standards.
     A.    General Requirements and Standards.

     1.     The setbacks from streets required by the schedule of zoning district regulations shall be fully landscaped except in single-family districts where parking may be permitted as specified in this title.

     2.     All landscaped areas shall be protected by six-inch concrete curbing.

     3.     Parking and circulation areas shall be landscaped according to the requirements of this title.

     4.     The use of turf in new residential projects is limited to the rear yard.

     5.     Landscaping should be used to separate parking and vehicle circulation areas from buildings, to provide a visual landscaped foreground for buildings, and to enhance the perimeter of a project.

 

     6.     Live plant materials generally should be used in all landscaped areas. Bark should only be utilized as mulch, not as a permanent form of groundcover.

     7.     Landscape planters abutting parking areas shall be sufficiently large to allow for vehicle overhang without extending into the planting area.

     B.     Trees.

     1.     Landscape plans for sites on major streets should include large-scale street trees, with deep root systems and broad canopies.

     2.     Tree planting shall consider passive solar heating and cooling opportunities related to building orientation.

     3.     Trees shall be provided in parking lot areas in a manner that provides shading of parked vehicles to the maximum extent feasible.

     4.     Trees shall be properly supported. Stakes and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functions. Ties shall be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or branches.

     C.     Hard Surfaces. Required planter or landscaped areas may be combined with pedestrian walks and similar hard surface areas, provided that such hard surface areas do not cover more than thirty percent of any required planter or landscaped areas. Ornamental or landscaping rock and gravel areas, artificial turf, or other areas covered with other artificial materials shall be considered hard surface areas for the purpose of this provision.

     D.    Slopes.

     1.     All manufactured slopes over five feet in height created by grading shall be fully landscaped utilizing a combination of trees, shrubs and groundcover materials.

     2.     Stabilizing jute netting or equivalent netting shall be provided in conjunction with the landscape planting and shall fully cover lower slope areas.

     E.     Installation.

     1.     All landscaping and planter areas shall be installed consistent with an approved final landscape plan prior to final building permit sign-off or granting of an occupancy permit for a project.

     2.     Prior to the installation of landscaping in any public right-of-way, the developer shall provide for continued maintenance until such areas are accepted by the city or as defined in a subdivision improvement agreement.

     F.     Maintenance. Required landscaped areas shall be continually maintained in good condition and kept clean and weeded. Good maintenance shall be interpreted to include: watering and maintaining water efficiency, weeding, pruning, insect and disease control, and replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve the health and appearance of plant materials. (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.050 Elements of the conceptual landscape documentation plan.
     A.    The conceptual landscape documentation plan, submitted as part of the discretionary application, shall include the following:

     1.     Project information:

     a.     Date;

     b.     Project applicant;

     c.     Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

     d.     Total landscape area (square feet);

     e.     Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well);

     f.      Landscape requirements identified in Sections 19.22.040 and 19.22.060;

     g.     Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner.

     2.     Water-efficient landscape worksheet in Section 19.22.060:

     a.     Hydrozone information table;

     b.     Water budget calculations:

     i.      Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA),

     ii.     Estimated total water use (ETWU).

     3.     Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site.

     4.     The use of turf in new residential projects is limited to twenty-five percent of the rear yard of each home.

     5.     On nonresidential projects, turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

     6.     Total irrigated areas specified as turf shall be limited to a maximum of twenty-five percent with recreational areas exempted.

     7.     Turf is prohibited in street medians, traffic islands or bulb outs of any size.

     8.     A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per California Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches.

 

     9.     Those species identified by CAL-IPC as invasive in the San Francisco Bay Area shall not be specified.

     10.   Landscape plans shall bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.) (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.060 Water-efficient landscape worksheet.
     A.    A project applicant shall complete the water-efficient landscape worksheet which contains two sections:

     1.     A hydrozone information table for the landscape project.

     2.     A water budget calculation for the landscape project. For the calculation of the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the table below:

 

County and City NAPA

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Annual ETo

Carneros

0.8

1.5

3.1

4.6

5.5

6.6

6.9

6.2

4.7

3.5

1.4

1.0

45.8

*    The values in this table were derived from:

     1.     California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS);

     2.     Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, University of California, Davis - Dept. of Land, Air & Water Resources and California Dept. of Water Resources 1999;

     3.     Reference Evapotranspiration for California, University of California, Davis - Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987) Bulletin 1922;

     4.     Determining Daily Reference Evapotranspiration, Cooperative Extension University of California, Davis - Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987), Publication Leaflet 21426.

 

     B.     Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

     1.     The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS. The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

     2.     All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

     3.     All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as described below.

     4.     ETAF for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

     C.     Maximum Applied Water Allowance. The maximum applied water allowance shall be calculated using the equation:

 

       MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]

 

     D.    Estimated Total Water Use. The estimated total water use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed MAWA.

 

       Where:

       ETWU = Estimated Total Water Use per year (gallons)

       ETo = Reference Evapotranspiration (inches)

       PF = Plant Factor from WUCOLS (see Section 491)

       HA = Hydrozone Area [high, medium, and low water use areas] (square feet)

       SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)

       0.62 = Conversion Factor

       IE = Irrigation Efficiency (minimum 0.71)

(Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.070 Recycled water.
     A.    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption has been granted as described in subsection B.

     B.     Irrigation systems and decorative water features shall use recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the city stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available for the foreseeable future.

     C.     All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.

     D.    Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

19.22.080 Stormwater management.
     All landscape plans shall conform to Chapter 14.28 Stormwater and Pollution Discharge Control Program. (Ord. 2015-05 § 3, 2015)

 

Chapter 19.23 SIGN REGULATIONS
19.23.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of these sign regulations is to:

     1.     Encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city while avoiding visual clutter;

     2.     Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city’s ability to attract sources of economic development;

     3.     Protect and improve pedestrian and traffic safety;

     4.     Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and

     5.     Enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions and implement the goals and policies of the general plan and further the purposes of the zoning ordinance.

     B.     Intent. The intent of this chapter is to:

     1.     Establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial districts, and a limited variety of signs in other districts, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter;

     2.     Allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the sites on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement for permits;

     3.     Prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter;

     4.     Abate nonconforming signs; and

     5.     Provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.020 Applicability.
     A sign may be constructed, erected, placed, established, painted, created or maintained in the city only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.030 Definitions and interpretation.
     Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section but defined elsewhere in this title shall be given the meanings set forth in this title. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.

     “Abandoned sign” means a sign that was legally erected, but whose use has ceased, has not been used to identify an ongoing business, product, or service available on-site, or the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned or not maintained for a period of ninety days or more.

     “A-frame sign” means a freestanding sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter A. Such signs are usually designed to be portable, hence they are not considered permanent signs.

     “Alteration” means any change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction or support of any sign or advertising device.

     “Animated sign” means any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, or gives the visual impression of such movement.

     “Ancillary sign” means secondary or subordinate signage. See “Incidental sign.”

     “Architectural element” means an integrated component of the design of a building, including walls, windows, entryways, rafters, roofs, neon bands and other physical components.

     “Awning sign.” See “Canopy sign.”

     “Balloon” means a flexible, nonporous bag or similar object capable of being filled with air or gas such as helium. See also “Inflatable sign.”

     “Banner” means any sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political subdivision, and symbolic flags of any institution or business are not considered to be banners.

     “Beacon” means any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same site as the light sources; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.

     “Bench sign” means a sign located on any part of the surface of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to a public right-of-way.

     “Billboard” means a sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at the property on which the sign is located (also known as an off-site sign).

     “Cabinet sign” is a geometrically-shaped sign consisting of a rigid frame, which supports sign face panel(s) and/or a background constructed of plastic or similar material, and which may have an internal light source.

     “Canopy sign” means a sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.

     “Changeable copy sign” means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign.

     “Channel letters” mean individual letters or figures, illuminated or nonilluminated affixed to a building or freestanding sign structure.

     “Colonial post” means a temporary real estate sign constructed of a single vertical post, not to exceed six feet, with a horizontal crossbar from which a real estate identification sign is suspended.

     “Commercial center” means a commercial development consisting of two or more businesses. The businesses may be in individual buildings or clustered in multiple buildings.

     “Commercial message” means any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity.

     “Construction sign” means any structure, housing, device, figure, statuary, painting, display, message placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, which is designed, constructed, created, engineered, intended or used to advertise or to provide data or information on the nature of advertising for any of the following purposes: to designate, identify or indicate the name of the business of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is located; or, to advertise the business conducted, services available or rendered, or the goods produced, sold, or available for sale, upon the property where the advertising display is erected.

     “Damaged sign” or “sign in disrepair” means any sign which has sustained physical damage or deterioration by intentional or unintentional means or through normal exposure to the elements over time.

     “Design standards” mean detailed descriptions of prescribed sign type, size, illumination, location, construction, materials, text, font, and colors for a commercial center or specific site.

     “Directional sign” means a sign that is limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian and vehicular traffic, such as “no parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar directives, and contains no commercial message of any kind.

     “Director” means the community development director for the city of American Canyon or his or her duly authorized representative.

     “Directory sign” means a sign for listing the tenants or occupants of their suite numbers of a building center.

     “Double-sided sign” means a single structure designed with the intent of providing copy on both sides.

     “Drive-through signage” includes any signs associated with a drive-through feature of a development, including, but not limited to, menu boards, height clearance bars, directional signage, and speaker boxes.

     “Eave line” means the bottom of the roof eave or parapet.

     “Electronic message board sign” means any sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages wherein the sequence of messages and their rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes.

     “Flag” means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other entity.

     “Flashing sign” means any sign which contains or is illuminated by lights which are intermittently on and off, and change the intensity or create the illusion of flashing in any manner.

     “Freestanding sign” means a sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.

     “Fuel price sign” means a permanent sign subject to state regulation, usually of a monument type, containing the prices and grades of fuel for sale at an automobile service station.

     “Future facility sign” means a temporary sign denoting sale, lease, rental of a site that is under construction, or future use of a site or building.

     “Garage sale sign” means a temporary sign announcing the limited sale, from a private resident, of goods, furniture, clothing, or similar articles.

     “Government official signage” means a sign displaying information pertaining to services offered by city, county, state, or other official government agencies.

     “Hanging sign” means a sign hanging from a building canopy, arcade, or other structural member.

     “Holiday lighting” means strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background between the week of Thanksgiving and January 12th.

     “Human sign” means any person, live or simulated, attempting to attract the attention of a motorist by: (1) wearing a costume or uniform; (2) holding a sign or prop; or (3) making physical gestures.

     “Identification sign” means, generally, any sign that identifies the business, service, or specific type of land use.

     “Illegal sign” means any of the following: a sign erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use; a sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result of the adoption of a chapter; a sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe; a sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the city or county.

     “Incidental sign” means sign intended for informational purposes as opposed to commercial or advertising purposes. Typically smaller in size, examples of incidental signs include parking signs, restroom signs and entrance and exit signs. See “Ancillary sign.”

     “Incidental window/door sign” means incidental signs displaying business information (hours of operation, menus, credit card placards, phone number, or other nonprofit activities, etc.) and which do not constitute advertising.

     “Inflatable sign” means a sign made of flexible material or fabric that is made to take on a three-dimensional shape (to blow up like a balloon) when filled with a sufficient volume of air or gas. Commonly used as a temporary sign for special events or promotions. See also “Balloon.”

     “Interior sign” means a sign located more than three feet inside of a building (not a window sign).

     “Kiosk” means an off-premises sign used for directing people to the sales office or models of a residential subdivision project.

     “Logo” means a name, symbol, or registered trademark of a company, business or organization.

     “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record that is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.

     “Marquee” means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.

     “Marquee sign” means any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of, a marquee.

     “Mobile sign” means signs attached to or painted on vehicles used for the purpose of transporting personnel or goods as part of the day-to-day operations of a business. A sign attached to or printed on a vehicle not used for this purpose is considered a portable sign.

     “Monument sign” means an independent structure supported from grade to the bottom of the sign with the appearance of having a solid base.

     “Motion picture theater marquee” means a marquee associated with a building containing a motion picture theater (see “Marquee” and “Marquee sign”).

     “Multitenant” means a building occupied by more than one business or organization.

     “Municipal services sign” means any sign specifically sanctioned by the city council that serves a directional or informational purpose. Examples include decorative holiday banners on street lights and civic events such as a Fourth of July parade.

     “Mural” means a display or illustration painted on a building or wall within public view.

     “Neon band” means a neon light tube used to accent the lines of a sign or building, which follows the building form of the structure.

     “Neon sign” means any glass tube lighting in which a gas and phosphors are used in combination to create a colored sign.

     “Nonconforming sign” means a permanent sign legally erected, established and maintained in conformance with the applicable ordinances at the time of original installation, but which does not conform to the number, size, placement, or other physical requirements of this chapter.

     “Noncommercial sign” means a temporary banner sign located on private property that does not propose a commercial transaction and may not advertise a business.

     “Off-site sign” means any sign which advertises or informs in any manner businesses, services, goods, persons or events at some location other than that upon which the sign is located. Off-premises sign and off-site sign are equivalent terms.

     “On-site sign” means any sign which directs attention to an occupancy, business, service or activity conducted, sold or offered upon the premises where the sign is located.

     “Painted sign” means any sign which consists of paint or a similar substance applied directly to a building surface, such as a wall, window, rafter, canopy support, or applied directly to the surface of a sign face or structure.

     “Parapet” means an architecturally integrated low wall, railing, or screen to protect the edge of a building’s platform or roof.

     “Pennant” means any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.

     “Pole sign” means any sign which is elevated from grade by one supporting member, pole or structure higher than one foot mounted in or upon the ground and independent of support from any building.

     “Political signs” mean signs erected prior to an election to advise or identify a candidate, campaign issue, election proposition, or other related matters.

     “Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames upon approval of a sign permit; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.

     “Premises” mean any building, property or other area upon which business is conducted in the city of American Canyon including the parking area provided for customers.

     “Primary business façade” means the width of the exterior wall of a business most exposed to public view.

     “Projecting sign” means a sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends in a perpendicular manner more than twelve inches beyond the surface of such building or wall.

     “Public right-of-way” means any area of real property dedicated to or owned in fee by the city or the public or any other public body, or over which the city or the public or any other public body holds an easement for public street, alley, sidewalk, pedestrian, equestrian, or public utility purposes which is within the city boundaries excluding areas of real property which are on, or adjacent to, the side or rear yard of any parcel or any area within the curtilage of any parcel.

     “Pylon sign” means a sign with visible support structure or with the support structure enclosed with a pole cover.

     “Raceway” means an enclosed conduit that forms a physical pathway for electrical wiring.

     “Revolving sign” means a sign, which all or a portion of, may rotate either on an intermittent or constant basis.

     “Roof sign” means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.

     “Roof sign, integral” means a sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.

     “Seasonal decorations” means any lights, signs, or accessories which are applied or installed on a temporary basis for the purpose of acknowledging holidays or seasons, but not for advertising.

     “Sign” means any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.

     “Sign area.” See Section 19.23.080 of this chapter.

     “Sign copy” means any words, letters, numbers, figures, designs or other symbolic representations incorporated into a sign.

     “Sign face” means the surface, or that portion that is visible from a single point as a flat surface or a plane, and considered as such, together with the frame and the background.

     “Sign feature” means a unique, artistic, two- or three-dimensions image reflective of a company’s use, product or service.

     “Sign height” means the written dimension of a sign as computed by Section 19.23.080 of this chapter.

     “Single tenant building” means a building occupied by a single business or organization.

     “Site” means contiguous parcels that are linked by shared access and parking. Site also applies to contiguous parcels that share a sign program.

     “Snipe sign” means any sign, usually found off-site (except campaign signs), made of cloth, paper, cardboard, poster material, plastic, metal or other material affixed to or upon fences, posts, trees, buildings, people, or other structures or surfaces.

     “Special event sign” means a temporary sign used to publicize a special event, such as a grand opening, charitable or civic event, or promotional sales for a period no longer than thirty consecutive days and not more than twice a year on the same parcel. Special event signs require the approval of the community development director for conformance to the city’s zoning ordinance prior to installation.

     “Special sign district” means a specific geographic area that possesses a unique identity and warrants a cohesive sign program that defines the area as a distinctive economic district (i.e., commercial zone properties adjacent to Highway 29, and/or industrial zone properties).

     “Stake sign” means any sign supported by stake-like structures or supports that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent of any building or other structure.

     “Street” means a strip of land or way subject to vehicular traffic (as well as pedestrian traffic) that provides direct or indirect access to property, including, but not limited to, highways, alleys, avenues, boulevards, courts, drives, highways, lanes, places, roads, terraces, trails, or other thoroughfares.

     “Street frontage” means the distance for which a lot line of a lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting the street to the furthest distance lot line intersecting the same street.

     “Subdivision sales and model home directional sign” means a sign within a residential tract or a main street entrance providing direction to a residential land development project.

     “Suspended sign” means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy, eave or marquee and is supported by such surface.

     “Temporary sign” means any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted, such as signs to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or a special sale.

     “T-frame sign” means a portable sign constructed of wire and paper not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure that resembles a T shape due to the exterior wire frame.

     “Travel directory sign” means a sign to inform the motorist as to the route or direction to travel in order to arrive at the residential subdivision development project for sale or rent to which it pertains. See “Kiosk sign.”

     “Vehicle sign” means a sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked on or adjacent to any site, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or an activity or business located on such site.

     “Wall sign” means a sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface.

     “Window sign” means any sign, picture, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed within three feet inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.040 Regulation of political signs.
     In addition to those signs exempt from regulation pursuant to city code Section 19.23.050, political signs as defined by city code Section 19.23.030 shall also be exempt subject to compliance with all of the rules and all of the regulations set forth in subsection A of this section.

     A.    Regulations. The placement or installation of political signs in the city shall in all respects comply with the following:

     1.     No political signs shall be installed or displayed sooner than one hundred and twenty days preceding the election for which the sign is intended;

     2.     No political sign shall be lighted either directly or indirectly;

     3.     No political sign shall be placed on private property, vacant or otherwise, without the permission of the owner of the property;

     4.     No political sign shall be posted on any public property or in the public right-of-way;

     5.     No political signs shall be posted in violation of any other provisions of the municipal code;

     6.     All political signs shall be removed within ten days and recycled by the department of public works after the date of the election except that a sign on behalf of a candidate who is successful in a primary election may be retained for the general election. Removal of political signs shall be the responsibility of the property owner;

     7.     No political sign may be placed within twenty-five feet of any existing commercial or non-profit sign on any one property;

     8.     The city manager and/or designee shall have the right to immediately remove all signs which obstruct visibility on city streets or which constitute a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of any city or county or could contribute to a dangerous condition of public property consistent with the procedures for removal of hazardous political signs under subsection (A)(10) of this section;

     9.     The city manager and/or designee shall have the right to remove all signs placed contrary to any provisions of this section consistent with the procedures for removal of non-conforming political signs under subsection (A)(11) of this section;

     10.   When it is determined that the sign in question poses an imminent safety hazard or dangerous condition, such sign may be removed immediately and stored by the city manager and/or designee. As soon as possible following removal, the owner, if known, shall be given a notice of violation and the right to a hearing by requesting such hearing within five days of receipt of the notice of removal. The hearing shall be held before the city manager or designee within ten days of receipt of the written request for the hearing. The owner and the city shall be permitted to present evidence and cross examine each other’s witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager or designee shall prepare a written decision. This decision shall be delivered to the owner personally or by certified mail within ten days of the hearing. The city manager’s and/or designee decision shall be final. If the owner establishes such removal to be improper, the owner shall be entitled to a return of the signs without charge. In all other cases the sign will be returned to the owner only upon payment of removal and storage costs. If the sign is not claimed within thirty days after the decision becomes final, the sign may be destroyed. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign;

     11.   The city manager or designee shall remove or cause the removal of any political sign constructed, altered or maintained in violation of this section. Such removal may occur fifteen days after the date of mailing of registered or certified written notice to the owner of the sign, if known, at the last known address or to the owner of the property as shown on the latest assessment roll, or to the occupant of the property at the property address. The notice shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved, and indicate that the sign will be removed if the violation is not corrected within fifteen days. If the owner disagrees with the opinion of the city manager, the owner may, within the fifteen-day period, request a hearing before the city manager to determine the existence of a violation. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city manager or designee shall prepare a written decision. This decision shall be delivered to the owner personally or by certified mail within ten days of the hearing. The city manager’s decision shall be final. In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign;

     12.   The city council shall from time to time establish procedures by resolution providing for forfeitable deposits by candidates posting political signs within the city.

     B.     Unauthorized Removal of Political Signs. No person shall remove, destroy, relocate, or otherwise disturb any political sign without the permission of the party who erected the sign. It shall be presumed, as to signs for political candidates, that the political candidate or his or her representative is the party who erected the sign. It shall further be assumed that the committee who has registered with the Secretary of the State to support a position on a ballot proposition is the party who erected the sign taking the position on a ballot measure. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the owner of real property, or his or her authorized representative, from removing a sign from his or her property when the political sign has been erected without his or her consent; and provided, further, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the director of public works or his or her authorized representatives from taking action to abate sign violations pertaining to political signs pursuant to Section 19.23.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.050 Exempt signs.
     The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter:

     A.    Any government official sign, public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance, including, but not limited to, street signs, directional signs, mileposts, mile boards, guide boards or guideposts, warning signs, notices or sign;

     B.     Painting, cleaning, exact replacement and normal maintenance and repair of a sign;

     C.     Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, and not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel on which such sign is located;

     D.    Signs located within malls, courts, arcades, porches, patios and similar areas where such signs are not visible from any point on the boundary of the site. Such signs are not, however, exempt from structural, electrical or material specifications as set forth in the Uniform Building Code;

     E.     Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message placed no more than six weeks prior to, and ten days after the associated holiday;

     F.     Traffic control signs on private property with messages, such as “Stop,” “Yield,” and similar sign, the face of which meet California Department of Transportation standards and bear no commercial message;

     G.    Commemorative plaques of recognized historical societies and organizations;

     H.    Signs on vehicles that provide public transportation, including, but not limited to, buses and taxicabs;

     I.      Signs on licensed commercial vehicles, including trailers that are painted on the vehicle or attached to its doors; provided, however, that such vehicles are not utilized as parked or stationary outdoor display signs;

     J.      One sign attached to and parallel to the front of a building or occupant entrance of up to two square feet in sign area, that contains no commercial message;

     K.    One sign per residential unit not exceeding four square feet or three feet in height;

     L.     One unlighted real estate sign post per residential unit, not exceeding twelve and one-half square feet in sign area cumulative for all signs displayed on the sign post and no more than five feet in height;

     M.    Directional signs for directing prospective buyers to property offered for sale not exceeding four square feet in area and three feet in height. Such assigns shall be located outside of any public right-of-way and may be displayed for up to forty-eight hours;

     N.    Flags of the United States, state of California, city of American Canyon and any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction flown from a pole the height of which is no more than the maximum permitted height for structures in the applicable zoning district. Any flag not meeting any one of these conditions shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to regulation as such;

     O.    Notwithstanding any provisions in this chapter to the contrary, no commercial or special event signs will be allowed on public property or the public right-of-way except road signs, such as, but not limited to, directional, warning or information signs or structures required or authorized by law or the federal, state, county or city authority, or necessary for the ordinary operation of the city or other state or federal agencies, or necessary for the maintenance of the public safety or welfare. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.060 Prohibited signs.
     All signs not expressly permitted or exempt from regulation under this chapter are prohibited. Prohibited signs include, but are not limited to:

     A.    Abandoned signs;

     B.     Animated, moving and flashing signs;

     C.     Beacons;

     D.    Damaged signs;

     E.     Flashing signs;

     F.     Human signs;

     G.    Illegal signs, as defined in this chapter;

     H.    Inflatable signs and tethered balloons, except as allowed in this chapter;

     I.      Loudspeakers or signs which emit sound, odor, or visible matter, except as provided for within this chapter;

     J.      Off-site subdivision directional signs except as may be approved under a sign program;

     K.    Off-site signs identifying a use, facility or service other than those that may be expressly permitted by this chapter;

     L.     Roof signs;

     M.    Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt by this chapter;

     N.    Windblown devices, such as pennants, streamers, balloons, and permanent banners, or as expressly exempt by this chapter;

     O.    Monument signs with a translucent face;

     P.     Signs with exposed or exterior raceways;

     Q.    T-frame signs. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.070 Sign permit requirements.
     The following procedures shall govern the application for, and the issuance of, all sign permits under this chapter:

     A.    Permit Not Required. Signs that are regulated by this chapter but that do not require a permit include the following:

     1.     A-frame sign;

     2.     Construction sign;

     3.     Directional sign;

     4.     Future facility sign;

     5.     Garage sale sign;

     6.     Holiday lighting sign;

     7.     Incidental sign;

     8.     Interior sign;

     9.     Mobile sign;

     10.   Real estate: residence for sale, open house identification (on-site), open house directional (off-site), garage/yard sale identification (on-site), garage/yard sale directional (off-site), sales/rental/leasing office identification and ancillary signs (neighborhood watch, etc.);

     11.   Temporary subdivision and model home identification and directional sign;

     12.   Window sign.

     B.     Permit Required. The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance of all sign permits under this chapter, and the submission and review of sign programs.

     C.     Permit Applications. All applications for sign permits and for approval of a sign program shall be submitted to the community development department on forms specified by the community development director. An application shall be accompanied by any fee established by the city council.

     1.     Such applications shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design, structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a sign program in effect for the lot, along with such other information needed for the director or planning commission to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same lot or in the same project.

     2.     If plans submitted for a zoning clearance, development plan or conditional use permit include sign plans in sufficient detail that the permit-issuing authority can determine whether the proposed sign or signs comply with the provisions of this chapter, then issuance of the requested clearance, plan or permit may constitute approval of the proposed sign(s) or signage plan if so stipulated.

     D.    Review Authority. Sign permits and sign programs shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the director, except for the following, which shall be decided upon by the planning commission:

     1.     Freestanding signs that exceed eight feet in height;

     2.     Sign programs for projects of two acres or more;

     3.     Kiosk sign program for off-site subdivision directional signs;

     4.     Individual signs exceeding forty square feet in area;

     5.     Signs of unique design, character, and/or merit which are determined by the director to require special consideration;

     6.     Electronic reader boards, as defined herein, may be permitted upon approval of a use permit in each case. All messages or images shall be faded in and out only and any message or image must be scrolled rather than flashed, and otherwise conform to this chapter;

     7.     Referrals from the director;

     8.     Appeals of community development director decisions.

     E.     Decision of the Community Development Director. The community development director or designee shall accept and review sign applications for conformance with this chapter. Applications shall be referred to other departments as appropriate to provide opportunity for comments. If, after reviewing the application and receiving comments it is determined that the proposed application complies with provisions of this chapter, the community development director shall issue a permit to install the sign.

     F.     Required Findings by Planning Commission. Approval of a sign permit or sign program may be granted by the planning commission only if all of the following findings are made:

     1.     The application complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter and any applicable approvals granted for the project by any decision-making authority.

     2.     The application complies with any applicable design guidelines, plans and policies adopted by the planning commission or city council.

     3.     The application complies with any sign program in effect for the property.

     G.    Assignment of Sign Permits. A valid sign permit shall be freely assignable to a successor as owner of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises.

     H.    Additional Permits. Building, electrical and fire permits shall be obtained for signs as required by federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.080 Sign computation.
     The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height.

     A.    Height of a Sign. The height of a sign shall be computed by measuring the vertical distance from the midpoint, or average ground level, along the base of the sign structure, excluding any berming, to the highest point of the structure.

     B.     Maximum Total Wall Sign Area. The maximum total wall sign area allowed for a building or tenant shall be based on the lineal frontage (based on total horizontal width of business, exclusive of any jogs or variation to wall plane) of the business façade. A portion of this total sign area may be allocated to one or more secondary façades. If a business faces both Highway 29 and an arterial road, the signage for the wall facing the arterial road may be calculated separately under the wall signage ratio established for businesses without Highway 29 frontage.

 

Figure 19.23.080

Computation Examples

 



 

     C.     Distinct Border or Boundary. For signs with a distinct border or boundary, the sign area shall be computed by multiplying the length times the width of the entire surface within the border, boundary, sign board, or sign face.

     D.    No Distinct Border or Boundary. For signs with no distinct border or boundary, the sign area shall be calculated by computing the area of a simple rectilinear figure, consisting of not more than eight perpendicular lines, which contains all of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display on such sign.

     E.     Double-Sided Sign. The sign area of signs which have two identical faces, arranged back to back in parallel planes, shall be computed for one side only provided that the two sign faces are no more than eighteen inches apart.

     F.     Multiple-Sided Sign. Signs which have more than one side and are not double-sided signs have a sign area as computed for all sides.

     G.    Including Sign Structure or Support. Where a sign structure, support or other sign feature is designed in such a manner to make the sign more noticeable or appear larger (such as backlighting of an entire awning), as determined by the director or commission, the area of the structure or support shall be included in the sign area. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.090 Sign illumination.
     Permitted methods of illumination may be divided into several types as described below. All signs shall be engineered in compliance with applicable portions of the building and electrical codes. All electrical service to ground mounted signs shall be placed underground. Electrical service to all signs shall be concealed from public view.

     A.    Indirect Illumination. The sign has neither an internal light nor an external source, which is intended to specifically light that sign. Rather, the sign depends on the general lighting of the area (e.g., parking lot, traffic or pedestrian areas) for illumination.

     B.     Internal Message. The sign face is made of metal, wood or other material that is not translucent, and the message is cut out of the material and replaced with a translucent material. The sign’s light source is located inside the sign.

     C.     Externally Lit Signs. Spotlights specifically directed at it lights the sign. The spotlights shall be fully shielded so that they are not visible from roads or adjoining property.

     D.    Internally Illuminated Channel Letter Sign. Individual letter or figures affixed to a building or freestanding sign structure with the illumination source covered by a translucent material. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.100 Design, construction and maintenance.
     All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards:

     A.    All signs shall be consistent with any adopted design guidelines.

     B.     All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the city’s building and electric codes.

     C.     Except for banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.

     D.    Banners, canopies, suspended signs and flags shall maintain a vertical clearance of nine feet from any sidewalk, private driveway or parking area.

     E.     The illumination of a sign within three hundred feet of and visible from a residential district, measured along the radius of a one hundred eighty degree arc extending from a sign face, shall be the minimum necessary to provide readability.

     F.     All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, and in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.110 Sign programs.
     The purpose of a sign program is to integrate signs with building and landscaping design to form a unified architectural statement. No permit shall be issued for an individual sign within a center where a sign program has been established until it has been determined consistent with the applicable program.

     A sign program shall be required for:

     1.     All new commercial, office and industrial centers consisting of three or more tenant spaces;

     2.     A property owner(s) may also have the option of filing a sign program application for an existing multi-tenant building or buildings;

     3.     Contiguous parcels that do not share driveway access and parking;

     4.     A kiosk sign program;

     5.     Community/neighborhood project identification;

     6.     A special sign district.

     A.    Application. For any lot, site or building on which the placement of one or more signs requires a sign program the owner, developer or leasing agent shall submit to the director the following:

     1.     An accurate plot plan of the lot(s), at such scale as the director may reasonably require, showing the locations of pertinent buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such lot(s);

     2.     Locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed signs, including the height of monument and freestanding signs. Window signs may be shown by indicating the window areas to be covered by signs and the general type of materials to be used; the exact dimension or nature of every window sign need not be specified;

     3.     Exhibits showing the design, materials, colors and method of lighting for all signs;

     4.     The sign program shall specify standards for consistency among all signs on the lots affected by the plan with regard to location, sign proportions, materials, color schemes, lettering and graphic styles, and lighting;

     5.     If any new or amended sign program is filed for a site on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance, within one year, all signs not conforming to the proposed new or amended plan or to the requirements of this chapter in effect on the date of submission.

     B.     Sign programs approved by the planning commission include commercial centers containing five acres or more, kiosk sign programs, community/neighborhood project identification signs, and special sign districts. Sign area and heights may be greater than those specified in Table 19.23.120 as may be determined by the sign program subject to the findings set forth in Section 19.23.070(F).

     C.     Sign Programs for Contiguous Parcels. Owners of contiguous parcels may propose a sign program approved by the planning commission to link their properties with coordinated signage. Sign area and heights may be greater than those specified in Table 19.23.120 as may be determined by the sign program subject to the findings set forth in Section 19.23.070(F).

     D.    Kiosk Sign Program. Subdivision directional signs and commercial signs may be permitted under a kiosk sign program as approved by the planning commission. The commission review will include size, height, design, materials and colors of proposed kiosk, along with locations and maximum number of kiosk signs within the city. In addition, the following standards are applicable:

 

     1.     The panel and sign structure design shall be in accordance with this chapter.

     2.     No kiosk sign structure shall be located less than three hundred feet from an existing or previously approved kiosk site except in the case of signs on different corners of an intersection.

     3.     All kiosk signs shall be placed on private property with written consent of the property owner.

     4.     A kiosk sign location plan shall be prepared, showing the site of each kiosk directional sign, and shall be approved by the planning commission prior to the issuance of a sign permit.

     5.     There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards, or appurtenances, added to the kiosk signs as originally approved. No other nonpermitted directional signs, such as poster or trailer signs, may be used.

     6.     All nonconforming subdivision kiosk directional signs associated with the subdivision in question must be removed prior to the placement of directional kiosk sign(s).

     7.     The kiosk subdivision directional signs shall be removed when the homes in the subdivision are sold.

     8.     No more than eight kiosk signs may be permitted at any time within the city limits.

     E.     Optional Provisions. A sign program may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the lots may reasonably determine.

     F.     Binding Effect. After approval of a sign program, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted or maintained, except in conformance with such plan, and any such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this title. In case of any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this chapter, the chapter shall control.

     G.    Amendment. A sign program may be amended by filing a new plan that conforms with all requirements of this chapter then in effect. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.120 Permitted signs.
     This section specifies the criteria for:

     A.    Temporary signs;

     B.     Signs permitted for residential uses;

     C.     Signs Permitted for Nonresidential Uses. Signs shall be permitted in the City in accordance with the guidelines contained in Tables 19.23.120(A) through 19.23.120(C). In each instance and under the same conditions in which this chapter permits any sign, a sign containing any ideological, political or other noncommercial message and constructed to the same physical dimensions and characteristics shall be permitted in lieu of that sign.

     D.    Any sign located on private property requires consent of the property owner.

 

Table 19.23.120(A)

Temporary Signs Permitted

 

Type

Development Standards

Additional Standards

 

1. Temporary Promotional Wall Banner

Permit Required: Temporary banner permit

(a) Each promotional banner permit shall be renewed each calendar year.

 

Maximum Number: One sign per business

(b) A copy of the banner permit shall be kept on-site at all times.

 

(Commercial and Industrial Use: Multifamily Uses)

Maximum Size: 32 sq. ft. for building frontages up to 175 linear feet or 50 sq. ft. for building frontages greater than 175 linear feet

(c) Temporary banner shall be contained within the lineal frontage of the leased space.

(d) May be located freestanding within landscape areas subject to additional review by the director.

Maximum Height: Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building

(e) Must be kept in neat condition and replaced when torn or weathered.

 

Duration: At all times

 

2. Temporary Window

Permit Required: None

(a) Printed window copy shall be replaced or removed within six months.

Maximum Number: No limit

(Commercial and Industrial Use)

Maximum Size: 25% of window area up to 50 sq. ft. per business

(b) Credit card placards, sports calendars or other nonprofit activities placed adjacent to the door jamb shall not be included in the calculation of window sign area.

Maximum Height: Shall not exceed height of highest window

3. Temporary Outdoor Promotion Permit Banner

Permit Required: In conjunction with a temporary outdoor promotion permit

(a) A copy of the banner permit shall be kept on-site at all times.

Maximum Number: One sign per business

(b) Temporary banner shall be contained within the lineal frontage of the leased space.

Maximum Size: 32 sq. ft. for building frontages up to 175 linear feet or 50 sq. ft. for building frontages greater than 175 linear feet

(c) May be located freestanding within landscape areas subject to additional review by the director.

Maximum Height: Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building

(d) Must be kept in neat condition and replaced when torn or weathered.

4. Noncommercial Temporary Banner

Permit Required: Temporary banner permit

(a) A copy of the banner permit shall be kept on-site at all times.

Maximum Number: Two banners per site

(b) May be located freestanding within landscape areas subject to additional review by the director.

Maximum Size: 32 sq. ft. for building frontages up to 175 linear feet or 50 sq. ft. for building frontages greater than 175 linear feet

(c) Must be kept in neat condition and replaced when torn or weathered.

(d) Must be located on private property and have permission of property owner.

Maximum Height: Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of building 5 feet when mounted on 2 poles

(e) Must be located outside of the sight distance triangle at street intersections.

5. A-Frame Signs

Permit Required: None

(a) Locate on-site

Maximum Number: One per customer entrance for each tenant

(b) May not be located within public right-of-way.

(c) May not obstruct accessible path of travel.

Maximum Size: 7.5 sq. ft.

(d) May not be placed within landscape area.

Maximum Height: 3 feet

(e) Must be returned indoors during hours that business is closed.

6. Real Estate — Leasing or Sales (Residential Uses)

Permit Required: None

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number: One sign post per residence

Maximum Size: 12.5 sq. ft. cumulative for all signs displayed on the sign post

Maximum Height: 5 feet

Type: Freestanding sign

7. Real Estate — Leasing or Sales (Commercial or Industrial Uses)

Permit Required: None

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number: One sign per street frontage

Maximum Size: 32 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: 8 feet

Type: Either wall or freestanding sign

8. Open House Identification (On-Site)

Permit Required: None

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number: One sign site

(Residential Uses)

Maximum Size: 4 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: 4 feet

Type: Freestanding sign

9. Open House Directional (Off-Site)

Permit Required: None

(a) Open house directional signs may be displayed only between dawn and dusk.

(Residential Uses)

Maximum Number: Minimum necessary to locate home; one sign per intersection per open house

(b) Placement may be permitted in the public right-of-way.

(c) Placement on private property requires approval of the property owner.

Maximum Size: 4 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: 4 feet

Type: Freestanding sign

10. Individual Garage/Yard Sale Identification (On-Site)

Permit Required: None

(a) Sign shall not be placed any earlier than 72 hours prior to the event and all signs must be removed within 72 hours following date of event.

Maximum Number: One sign per garage sale residence

(Residential Uses)

Maximum Size: 4 sq. ft.

(b) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Height: 4 feet

Type: Freestanding sign

11. Garage/Yard Sale Directional (Off-Site)

Permit Required: None

(a) Garage/yard sale signs shall not be placed any earlier than 72 hours prior to the event and all signs must be removed within 72 hours following date of event.

Maximum Number: One sign per garage sale residence

(Residential Uses)

Maximum Size: 4 sq. ft.

(b) Garage/yard sale sign may be placed in the public right-of-way, but not in the street median.

Maximum Height: 4 feet

Type: Freestanding sign

12. Subdivision and Model Home Identification and Directional

Permit Required: None

None.

Maximum Number: One sign per garage sale residence

Maximum Size: 4 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: 4 feet

Type: Freestanding sign

 

Table 19.23.120(B)

Permanent Signs Permitted in Residential Districts

 

Type

Development Standards

Additional Standards

1. Community/Neighborhood Project Identification (single-family detached, single-family attached, condominiums)

Permit Required: Sign program

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number, Size and Height: Subject to planning commission review and approval of a sign program

Type: Wall or monument

2. Apartment Complex Project Identification

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number, Size and Height: Subject to planning commission review and approval of a sign program

Type: Wall or monument

3. Project Directory

Permit Required: Sign Permit

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number: One sign per site or minimum number necessary to provide adequate unit addresses and information

Maximum Size: 24 sq. ft.

Maximum Height:

Wall: Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of the building

Monument: 6 feet

Type: Wall or monument

4. Sales/Rental/Leasing Office Identification

Permit Required: None

(a) Placement shall be permitted on private property only.

Maximum Number: One sign per development

Maximum Size: 6 sq. ft.

Maximum Height:

Wall: Shall not exceed eave line or parapet of the building

Monument: 6 feet

Type: Wall or monument wall (permanent)

5. Ancillary (neighborhood watch, etc.)

Permit Required: None

None.

Maximum Number, Size and Height: Signs shall follow city police department specifications

 

Table 19.23.120(C)

Signs Permitted in Nonresidential Districts

 

Type

Development Standards

Additional Standards

1. Monument Signs for Shopping or Business/Industrial Centers (Multitenant use) or Single Tenant Sites with NO Highway 29 Frontage

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) Each commercial center is permitted one freestanding sign, regardless of frontage length.

Maximum Number: One sign per 300 feet of project street frontage

(b) May not create traffic hazard at corners of driveways.

Maximum Size: 40 sq. ft.

(c) Minimum 5-foot setback from public right-of-way.

Maximum Height: 6 feet above grade or 4 feet above top of planter or landscaped mound

(d) Planter base or landscaped area equal to four times the area of one sign face.

(e) The design of the monument sign must be consistent with any applicable building design standards per Section 19.23.100.

2. Monument Signs for Shopping or Business/Industrial Centers (Multitenant use) or Single Tenant Sites WITH Highway 29 Frontage

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) Each commercial center is permitted one freestanding sign, regardless of frontage length.

Maximum Number: One sign per 300 feet of project street frontage

(b) May not create traffic hazard at corners of driveways.

Maximum Size: 50 sq. ft.

(c) Minimum 10-foot setback from public right-of-way.

Maximum Height: 8 feet above grade or up to 12 feet above grade with planning commission approval

(d) Planter base or landscaped area equal to four times the area of one sign face.

(e) The design of the monument sign must be consistent with any applicable building design standards per Section 19.23.100.

3. Tenant Signs for Shopping or Business/Industrial centers (Multitenant use) or Single Tenant Sites

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) Wall signage must be centered vertically and horizontally within the lease space unless architectural design dictates otherwise.

Maximum Number: N/A

(b) The combined area of all signage on a building elevation shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage unless approved through a sign program.

Maximum Size: 1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of business façade. Up to 25 percent sign coverage of any window

Maximum Height: May not project above eave line

Letter and Logo Height:

0-49 lineal feet/24-inch letter height maximum

50-99 lineal feet/36-inch letter height maximum

Type: Wall sign, canopy sign and window sign (permanent)

4. Wall Signs for Multistory Buildings with a Centralized Entrance

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) Copy shall be arranged in a single line.

Maximum Number: Two signs per elevation

(b) All signs on the same elevation must be placed at the same height.

Maximum Size: 1 sq. ft. per lineal foot of business façade not to exceed 200 sq. ft.

(c) The combined area of all signage on a building elevation shall not exceed one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage unless approved through a sign program.

Maximum Height: May not project above eave line or parapet

Letter and Logo Height:

0-49 lineal feet/24-inch letter height maximum

50-99 lineal feet/36-inch letter height maximum

Type: Wall sign, canopy sign and window sign (permanent)

5. Suspended Sign

Permit Required: Sign permit

None.

Maximum Number: One per building entrance

Maximum Size: 6 sq. ft. above grade

Maximum Height: Minimum 8 feet, 6 inches, vertical clearance

Type: Suspended sign (permanent)

6. Drive-Through Signage

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) Shall not pose a hazard to on-site circulation.

Maximum Number: One per drive-thru tenant

(b) Shall face away from street where feasible.

Maximum Size: 30 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: Minimum 7 feet

Type: Freestanding menu board sign, directional sign, height clearance indicator, speakers (permanent)

7. Business Directory (Pedestrian)

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) May not block accessible path of travel.

Maximum Number: 2

Maximum Size: 10 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: 6 feet

Type: Wall or kiosk

8. Business Directory (Vehicle-Oriented)

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) May not be located within public right-of-way.

Maximum Number: Minimum number necessary to provide adequate information and direction

(b) May not block accessible path of travel.

Maximum Size: 20 sq. ft.

Maximum Height: 4 feet

Type: Monument

9. Service Station Identification and Pricing Information

Permit Required: Sign permit

(a) The total area for all signs on the premises shall not exceed 300 sq. ft.

Maximum Number: One monument sign per street frontage; not to exceed 2 per site

(b) Price signs allowed in accordance with state regulations.

Maximum Size: 20 sq. ft.

(c) Monument sign shall be designed consistent with applicable building design guidelines.

Maximum Height: 5 feet

Type: Monument

(d) For wall pricing information signs, see wall sign regulations Table 19.23.120(C).

 

10. Electronic Message Board

Permit Required: Conditional use permit

(a) Monument sign shall be designed consistent with applicable building design guidelines.

Maximum Height, Size and Number: Depends upon purpose and manner of display

Type: As determined through the conditional use permit

11. Movie Theater Marquee and Changeable Copy Sign

Permit Required: Conditional use permit

(a) Monument sign shall be designed consistent with applicable building design guidelines.

Maximum Height, Size and Number: Depends upon purpose and manner of display

Type: Marquee and monument

12. Kiosk Sign

Permit Required: Sign program

(a) Monument sign shall be designed consistent with applicable building design guidelines.

Maximum Number: 8 throughout the city

Maximum Size: 20 sq. ft.

(b) No kiosk sign structure shall be located less than 300 ft. from an existing or previously approved kiosk site except in the case of signs on different corners of an intersection.

Maximum Height: 5 feet

Type: Monument

 

(Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.130 Legal nonconforming signs.
     A.    Continuation and Abatement. Any sign determined by the city to be a legal, nonconforming sign, which is in existence on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may continue in existence so long as:

     1.     The requirements of the ordinance under which it was approved continue to be met and that the sign is maintained in a safe, neat and attractive appearance;

     2.     Changes to the sign copy and sign faces are permitted when there is no change to the primary use of the site or when only a portion of a multiple-tenant sign is being changed;

     3.     A nonconforming sign may not be expanded, moved or relocated.

     B.     The city council may at any time elect to require that certain existing legal, nonconforming signs comply with the provisions of this chapter provided the city offers the owner fair and adequate compensation in accordance with California Business and Professions Code Sections 5492 or 5493.

     1.     Categorical Abatement. Whenever the city council determines to bring existing legal, nonconforming signs into compliance with this chapter, the city council may determine a class or category of signs to be abated, or may order all nonconforming signs to comply with this chapter, based upon the recommendation of the planning commission.

     2.     Fair and Just Compensation—Notice and Hearing. The community development director shall notify all owners of the nonconforming signs for which a determination of nonconformity has been made, and present a determination of the proposed fair and just compensation level. If the owner of the nonconforming sign believes the compensation proposed is not fair and reasonable, the owner may request a hearing before a hearing officer. The city council may designate, by resolution thereof, the hearing officer for purposes of fair and just compensation under this chapter. Any request for a hearing must be filed with the city clerk within fifteen days of the date of the letter from the community development director to the owner. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive.

     3.     Incentive Programs. The city council may establish a program or programs to create incentives to all owners of nonconforming signs or to owners of any category of nonconforming signs to bring about conformance with this chapter in lieu of the just compensation provision. Participation in such program shall be voluntary.

     C.     Exceptions Authorizing Immediate Abatement. Notwithstanding the foregoing:

     1.     Abandoned or Ceased Use. Any nonconforming sign whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the display exists has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of not less than ninety days, shall be removed, altered or replaced so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter within six months from the date of receipt of a written order of abatement from the community development director. Use of the nonconforming sign shall not be reestablished after said ninety-day period. Costs incurred by the city in removing an abandoned sign or other display shall be borne by or charged to the legal owner of the real property upon which said sign is located.

     2.     Destruction. Any nonconforming sign that has been more than fifty percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and said structure cannot be repaired within thirty days from the date of its destruction shall be removed, altered or replaced so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter within six months from the date of receipt of a written order of abatement from the community development director.

     3.     Remodeling or Construction Projects. In the event a nonconforming sign is located on a site where an owner or tenant remodels, expands, or enlarges the building or land use upon which the nonconforming sign is located, and the cost of the remodeling, expansion, or enlargement exceeds fifty percent of the estimated cost of reconstruction of the building, or where the remodeling, expansion, or enlargement increases the total square footage of the building by fifty percent or more, any nonconforming signs on the site shall be removed, altered or replaced so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter in conjunction with the project.

     4.     Relocation of Signs. The relocation of any nonconforming sign shall be required to conform the relocated sign to the provisions of this chapter within six months from the date of receipt of a written order of abatement from the community development director.

     5.     Agreement. An agreement between the owner of a nonconforming sign and the city for its removal as of any given date shall require the owner to remove such sign in accordance with the provisions of said agreement. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.140 Sign removal.
     A.    The following signs shall be subject to removal:

     1.     Prohibited signs: any sign prohibited by this chapter;

     2.     Illegal signs: any sign erected or altered in violation of any ordinance or regulation in effect at the time of its erection or alteration;

     3.     Abandoned signs: a sign which advertises or identifies a business, lessor, owner, product, service, or activity which has been discontinued on the premises for a period of thirty days or more and which is hereby declared a public nuisance;

     4.     Damaged signs: any nonconforming sign which has been more than fifty percent damaged, and the damage cannot be corrected simply by copy replacement;

     5.     Any sign which is or may become a danger to the public or is unsafe;

     6.     Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of any city or county;

     7.     Any sign failing to comply with the design, construction and maintenance standards.

     B.     The community development director shall remove or cause the removal of any sign constructed, altered or maintained in violation of this chapter.

     1.     Except for subsection (A)(6) above, such removal may occur fifteen days after the date of mailing of registered or certified written notice to the owner of the sign, if known, at the last known address or to the owner of the property as shown on the latest assessment roll, or to the occupant of the property at the property address. The notice shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved, and indicate that the sign will be removed if the violation is not corrected within fifteen days.

     2.     If the owner disagrees with the opinion of the director, the owner may, within the fifteen-day period, request a hearing before the planning commission to determine the existence of a violation.

     3.     In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.

     4.     When it is determined that the sign in question poses an imminent safety hazard or dangerous condition or constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of any city or county, such sign may be removed immediately and stored by the community development director. As soon as possible following removal, the owner, if known, shall be given a notice of violation and the right to a hearing by requesting such hearing within five days of receipt of the notice of removal. The hearing shall be held before the community development director or designee within ten days of receipt of the written request for the hearing. The owner and the city shall be permitted to present evidence and cross examine each other’s witnesses. At the conclusion of the hearing, the community development director or designee shall prepare a written decision. This decision shall be delivered to the owner personally or by certified mail within ten days of the hearing. The owner may appeal the decision in accordance with subsection (B)(2). If the owner establishes such removal to be improper, the owner shall be entitled to a return of the signs without charge. In all other cases the sign will be returned to the owner only upon payment of removal and storage costs. If the sign is not claimed within thirty days after the decision becomes final, the sign may be destroyed. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

19.23.150 Exceptions.
     The planning commission may, at a duly noticed public hearing, approve an exception to any of the area, height and width standards set forth in this chapter upon making the following findings:

     A.    That the proposed sign or signs does not exceed any of the adopted area, height, and width standards by more than twenty percent; and

     B.     That the scale, mass, and proportion of the proposed sign is in keeping with any existing or contemplated development on the property; and

     C.     That the proposed increase in area, height or width will not result in an unsightly or obnoxious appearance; and

     D.    That the sign will not impair the visibility of any other permitted signs on the site or adjacent properties; and

     E.     That the location of the proposed sign will not interfere with sight distance from any access or egress point on the property; and

     F.     That the required amount of landscaping around the base of the sign is increased in an amount equal to the percentage of the exception (i.e., if the area of the sign is increased by twenty percent, the area of landscaping at the base must also be increased by twenty percent); and

     G.    That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity of the proposed sign. (Ord. 2011-03 § 2, 2011)

 

Chapter 19.24 SIGNIFICANT HABITATS
19.24.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of these provisions is to protect, preserve and enhance the significant biological habitats, plants and wildlife within the city, consistent with the American Canyon general plan. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.24.020 Applicability.
     These provisions shall apply to the following areas:

     A.    Riparian corridors, coastal saltmarsh, mixed hardwood forest, and oak savannah designated on published environmental maps and the generalized sensitivity maps of the American Canyon general plan;

     B.     Potential vernal pools designated on the generalized sensitivity maps in the general plan;

     C.     Wetlands, as defined by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.24.030 Required studies.
     A.    Applications for development that may impact any of the habitat areas contained in this chapter shall be accompanied by sufficient technical background data to enable an adequate assessment of the potential for impacts on these resources, and possible measures to reduce any identifiable impacts.

     B.     In instances where the potential for significant impacts exists, a biological assessment report prepared by a qualified professional who is selected by the city shall be prepared. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.24.040 Riparian corridors.
     A.    Permitted Uses. Uses within riparian corridors shall be limited to the following:

     1.     Education and research, excluding buildings and other structures;

     2.     Passive (nonmotorized) recreation, where not in conflict with the biological integrity of the riparian corridor;

     3.     Trails and scenic overlooks on public lands;

     4.     Fish and wildlife management activities;

     5.     Necessary water supply projects;

     6.     Resource-consumptive uses as provided for in the Fish and Game Code and Title 14 of the California Administrative Code;

     7.     Flood control projects where no other methods are available to protect the public safety;

     8.     Bridges when supports are not in significant conflict with riparian resources;

     9.     Underground utilities.

     B.     Protective Measures. Development and grading that alters the biological integrity of a riparian corridor shall be prohibited unless no feasible alternative exists and the damaged habitat is replaced with habitat of equivalent value. Development that is permitted within riparian corridors shall:

     1.     Minimize the removal of vegetation, erosion, sedimentation, and runoff;

     2.     Provide for sufficient passage of native and anadromous fish;

     3.     Minimize wastewater discharges and entrapment;

     4.     Prevent groundwater depletion or substantial interference with surface and subsurface flows;

     5.     Minimize the channelization of streams and other watercourses;

     6.     Provide habitat linkages (wildlife corridors) to adjacent open spaces, where appropriate and feasible;

     7.     Use fences, walls, vegetative cover, additional setbacks, or other measures to adequately buffer habitat areas, linkages, or corridors from the built environment;

     8.     Locate and design roads and utilities to avoid conflicts with biological resources, habitat areas, linkages, or corridors, where feasible;

     9.     Utilize appropriate open space or conservation easements in order to protect sensitive species or their habitats. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.24.050 Wetlands and vernal pools.
     A.    Development in wetland areas and areas of existing or potential vernal pools shall be designed and sited to preserve such areas in their natural condition, and all reasonable measures shall be taken to avoid significant impacts, including the retention of sufficient natural space, unless these actions result in an unfeasible project, in which case habitat shall be replaced in accordance with the natural resources element of the general plan.

     B.     Development in these areas shall be referred to the Army Corps of Engineers, the California Department of Fish and Game, and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service when appropriate for review and necessary approvals. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.24.060 Other significant habitats.
     Development of areas that encompass designated oak savannah, mixed hardwood forest, and coastal saltmarsh areas shall:

     A.    Maintain a buffer from the edge of a designated zone as may be recommended by a biological assessment report;

     B.     Maintain connectivity to surrounding habitats, where they exist;

     C.     Limit public access in areas where damage to habitat may occur. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.25 HILLSIDES (Reserved)
Chapter 19.26 FLOODPLAINS (Reserved)
Chapter 19.27 DENSITY BONUS
19.27.000 Purpose of chapter.
     This chapter is intended to implement the requirements of Government Code Section 65915 et seq., and the housing element of the general plan. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.005 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     “Affordable housing cost” has the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5.

     “Affordable rent” has the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50053.

     “Child care facility” means a facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age childcare centers.

     “Common interest development” has the definition set forth in California Civil Code Section 4100.

     “Concession” or “incentive” means any of the following:

     1.     A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission, as provided in Part 2.5 (the State Building Code commencing with Health and Safety Code Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements, and in the ratio of vehicular parking spaces that would otherwise be required, that results in identifiable and actual cost reductions.

     2.     Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with a housing project, if commercial, office, industrial or other land uses will reduce the cost of a housing development, and if the commercial, office, industrial or other land uses are compatible with the housing project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing project will be located.

     3.     Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city and approved by the city that result in identifiable and actual cost reductions.

     This definition does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for a housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements.

     “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning code provisions and the land use element of the general plan as of the date of application by the applicant to the city.

     “Development standard” means the site or construction conditions that apply to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or other city condition, law, policy, resolution or regulation.

     “Director” means the director of community development or the director’s designee.

     “Disabled veteran” has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 18541.

     “Equivalent size” means that the replacement dwelling units contain at least the same total number of bedrooms as the units being replaced.

     “Homeless person” has the definition set forth in 42 U.S.C. Section 11301 et seq.

     “Housing development” means a development project for five or more residential units, including mixed-use developments. “Housing development” also includes a subdivision or common interest development, or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in the number of residential units.

     “Lower income households” has the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.

     “Major transit stop” has the definition set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21155.

     “Maximum allowable residential density” means the density allowed under the zoning code, or if a range of density is permitted, the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range applicable to the project.

     “Moderate income households” has the definition for “persons or families of moderate income” set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093(b).

     “Multifamily dwelling” has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 65863.4(d).

     “Property containing existing affordable housing” means any property that includes any parcel on which rental dwelling units are or have been: (1) subject to any other form of rent or price control through a public entity’s valid exercise of its police power; (2) occupied by lower or very low income households; or (3) subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and households of lower or very low income. Such rental dwelling units include rental dwelling units that have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application seeking the density bonus.

     “Replace” has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 65915(c)(3)(B).

     “Senior citizen housing development” has the definition set forth in California Civil Code Section 51.3.

     “Special needs housing development” has the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 51312.

     “Specific, adverse impact” has the definition set forth in California Government Code Section 6559.5(d)(2).

     “Transitional foster youth” has the definition set forth in California Education Code Section 66025.9.

     “Unobstructed access” means access where a resident is able to travel without encountering natural or constructed impediments, as outlined in California Government Code Section 65915(p)(2).

     “Very low income households” has the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 50105. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.010 General density bonus provisions.
     A.    Application. Any person that desires a density bonus shall make an application on a form approved by the director at the time of submitting an entitlement application for the housing development for which a density bonus is requested. The density bonus provided by this chapter only applies to housing developments consisting of five or more dwelling units.

     B.     Incentives and Concessions. When an applicant seeks a density bonus for a housing development or for the donation of land for housing within the city, the city shall provide the applicant incentives or concessions for the production of housing units and childcare facilities as provided in this chapter.

     C.     Available Density Bonus Options. The planning commission or city council shall grant one density bonus, the amount of which shall be as specified in Section 19.27.030, and incentives or concessions as described in Section 19.27.020, when an applicant for a housing development seeks and agrees to construct a housing development, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter, that shall contain at least one of the following:

     1.     Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for lower income households.

     2.     Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very low-income households.

     3.     A senior citizen housing development.

     4.     Ten percent of the total dwelling units in a common interest development for moderate-income households, provided that all units in the housing development are offered to the public for purchase.

     5.     Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons to be provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units subject to a recorded affordability restriction of fifty-five years. As used in this subsection, “total units” or “total dwelling units” does not include units permitted by a density bonus awarded pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    Applicant’s Election of Basis for Bonus. For purposes of calculating the amount of the density bonus pursuant to Section 19.27.030, the applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this section must elect whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4) or (5) of subsection C of this section.

     E.     Continued Affordability.

     1.     Qualified Households. An applicant shall agree that the occupants of the low, very low, and moderate income units that are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in a housing development or common interest development shall be low, very low, or moderate income households, as applicable.

     2.     Term.

     a.     An applicant shall agree to set rents at affordable rent levels and to the continued affordability of all rental units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for a period of fifty-five years or a longer period of time if required by any applicable construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.

     b.     All for-sale units shall initially be sold at an affordable housing cost and shall remain subject to a resale affordable housing cost restriction for a period of fifty-five years or a longer period of time if required by any applicable construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or other subsidy program. The applicable resale affordable housing cost restriction period shall reset upon each sale of an affordable unit.

     3.     Equity Sharing. The city shall require an equity-sharing agreement for all for-sale units, unless such an agreement would be in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law.

     F.     Housing Development Involving Property Containing Existing Affordable Housing. An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or any other incentives or concessions under this chapter if the housing development is proposed on any parcel or parcels on which rental dwelling units that:

     1.     Have been vacated or demolished in the five-year period preceding the application;

     2.     Have been subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of lower or very low income;

     3.     Subject to any other form of rent or price control through a public entity’s valid exercise of its police power; or

     4.     Occupied by lower or very low income households, for a proposed housing development involving a property containing existing affordable housing, unless:

     a.     The proposed housing development replaces the existing affordable housing units. If the replacement units will be rental dwelling units, these units shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction for at least fifty-five years. If the proposed development is for-sale units, the units replaced shall be affordable as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, and

     b.     Either:

     i.      The proposed housing development, inclusive of the units replaced, contains affordable units at the percentages set forth in subsection C of this section, or

     ii.     Each unit in the development, exclusive of a manager’s unit or units, is affordable to, and occupied by, either a lower or very low-income household. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.015 Requirements for equity-sharing agreement.
     The following provisions shall be included in any equity-sharing agreement required under this chapter:

     A.    Upon resale, the seller of the unit may retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes that promote home ownership, as described in California Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e).

     B.     For purposes of this section, the city’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale, minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household, as applicable, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

     C.     For purposes of this section, the city’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the unit at the time of initial sale. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.020 Incentives and concessions.
     A.    An applicant for a density bonus pursuant to Section 19.27.010 may submit a proposal for the specific incentives or concessions that the applicant requests pursuant to this chapter, and may request a meeting with the director.

     B.     Subject to subsection C below, the applicant shall receive the following number of incentives or concessions:

     1.     One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten percent of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent for very low income households, or at least ten percent for moderate income households in a common interest development.

     2.     Two incentives or concessions for projects that include at least twenty percent of the total units for lower income households, at least ten percent for very low income households, or at least twenty percent for moderate income households in a common development.

     3.     Three incentives or concessions for projects that include at least thirty percent of the total units for lower income households, at least fifteen percent for very low income households, or at least thirty percent for moderate income households in a common interest development.

     C.     The planning commission or city council shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant, unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that:

     1.     The concession or incentive does not result in identifiable and actual affordable housing cost reductions, or rents for the targeted units will not be set as specified in Section 19.27.010(E);

     2.     The concession or incentive would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety, or the physical environment, or on any real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households; or

     3.     The concession or improvement would be contrary to state or federal law. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.025 Waiver or reduction of development standards.
     A.    An applicant may submit a proposal to the city and request a meeting with the director to waive or reduce development standards that the applicant believes will physically preclude housing construction that satisfies Section 19.27.010(C) criteria at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this chapter. Such proposal may not increase the number of incentives or concessions that the applicant is entitled to under Section 19.27.020.

     B.     The planning commission or city council shall waive or reduce an applicant’s development standard request, unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that:

     1.     The waiver or reduction would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety, or the physical environment, or on any real property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact; or

     2.     The waiver or reduction would be contrary to state or federal law. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.030 Calculation of density bonus.
     A.    The applicant is entitled to a density bonus that varies according to the percentage of affordable housing units that exceed the percentage established in Section 19.27.010(B).

     B.     For housing developments meeting the lower income household criteria of Section 19.27.010(C)(1), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 19.27.030(B)

Density Bonus for Lower Income Units

Percentage Low-Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

 

     C.     For housing developments meeting the very low income criteria of Section 19.27.010(C)(2), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 19.27.030(C)

Density Bonus for Very Low Income Units

Percentage Very Low Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

 

     D.    For housing developments meeting the criteria of Sections 19.27.010(C)(3), and 19.27.010(C)(5), (senior citizen and transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons), the density bonus shall be twenty percent.

     E.     For housing developments meeting the common interest development criteria of Section 19.27.010(C)(4), the density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

 

Table 19.27.030(E)

Density Bonus for Common Interest Development Units

Percentage Moderate Income Units

Percentage Density Bonus

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

 

     F.     All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     G.    A density bonus shall not require a general plan amendment, zoning change, other discretionary approval, or study other than those provided under California Government Code Section 65915(j)(1).

     H.    A density bonus shall not require the city to waive any unrelated development standard ordinance, except as provided for in Sections 19.27.020 and 19.27.025. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.035 Additional density bonus through donation of land.
     A.    When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development donates land to the city, as provided for in this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a fifteen percent increase above the maximum residential density under the applicable zoning and the land use element of the general plan for the entire development, as follows:

 

Table 19.27.035

Affordable Housing Land Donation

Percentage Very Low Income

Percentage Density Bonus

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

 

     B.     The land dedication density bonus shall be in addition to any increase in density mandated by Section 19.27.010(C), up to a maximum combined density increase of thirty-five percent, if an applicant seeks increases required pursuant to both this section and Section 19.27.010(C).

     1.     All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     2.     Nothing in this section shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the authority of the city to require a developer to donate land as a condition of development.

     C.     An applicant shall be eligible for an increased density bonus described in this section if all of the following conditions are met:

     1.     The applicant donates and transfers land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map or residential development application.

     2.     The developable acreage and zoning classification of the transferred land will provide at least ten percent of the residential units in the proposed development to be affordable to very low-income households.

     3.     The transferred land is at least one acre or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for development as affordable housing, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

     a.     The land must have appropriate zoning and development standards to make the development of the affordable units feasible.

     b.     No later than the final subdivision map, parcel map, or of the residential development approval date, the transferred land must have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land, except that the local government may subject the proposed development to subsequent design permit, to the extent authorized by California Government Code Section 65583.2(i), if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer.

     4.     The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with Section 19.27.010(E)(1) and (2), which restriction shall be recorded on the property at the time of the transfer.

     5.     The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to such housing developer.

     6.     The transferred land must be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the city agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

     7.     A proposed very low-income unit funding source shall be identified no later than the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application approval date. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.040 Additional density bonus or concession or incentive through provision of housing with a child care facility.
     A.    When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of Section 19.27.010(C) and includes a childcare facility located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the planning commission or city council shall grant either of the following:

     1.     An additional residential square footage density bonus equal to or greater than the child care facility square footage; or

     2.     An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the childcare facility construction.

     B.     The planning commission or city council shall require, as a condition of approving the housing development, that the following occur:

     1.     The child care facility must remain in operation as long as or longer than the density bonus units affordable term pursuant to Section 19.27.010(E).

     2.     Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households must equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households pursuant to Section 19.27.010(C).

     C.     Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the planning commission or city council is not required to provide a density bonus or concession for a childcare facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate childcare facilities.

     D.    Density bonus units do not have to be located in the same geographic area of the housing development.

     E.     Granting a concession or incentive shall not in and of itself, require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval.

     F.     Section 9.27.040 does not limit or require the city to provide direct financial incentives for housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city, county, or city and county, or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.045 City’s discretion in granting density bonus.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the planning commission or city council from granting a greater density bonus than what is described in this chapter, or from granting a proportionately lower density bonus for developments that do not meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.050 Parking requirements.
     A.    An applicant of a development meeting the criteria of Section 19.27.010(C) may request the city not require a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that exceeds the following ratios:

     1.     Zero to one bedroom: one on-site parking space.

     2.     Two to three bedrooms: two on-site parking spaces.

     3.     Four and more bedrooms: two and one-half parking spaces.

     B.     An applicant of a development project meeting the criteria of Section 19.27.010(C), that is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, and has unobstructed access to the major transit stop may apply for a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that does not exceed one-half on-site parking space per bedroom.

     C.     An applicant of a development project that consists solely of rental units affordable lower income households (exclusive of a manager’s unit) may apply for a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that does not exceed one-half on-site parking space per unit, and is either:

     1.     Located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, and has unobstructed access to the major transit stop; or

     2.     A for-rent housing development for individuals who are sixty-two years of age or older that complies with Sections 51.2 and 51.3 of the Civil Code, and has either paratransit service, or unobstructed access to a fixed bus route service that is within one-half mile and operates at least eight times per day.

     D.    An applicant of a special needs rental housing development project affordable to lower income households (exclusive of a manager’s unit), may apply for a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that does not exceed one-third on-site parking space per unit, when the development has either paratransit service, or unobstructed access to a fixed bus route service that is within one-half mile and operates at least eight times per day.

 

     E.     If the total number of parking spaces required for a development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a development may provide “on-site parking” through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking.

     F.     An applicant that meets the requirements of Section 19.27.010(C) may request additional parking incentives or concessions beyond those provided in this chapter, subject to Section 19.27.020.

     G.    Notwithstanding subsections B and C, the city may impose a higher vehicular parking ratio, not to exceed the ratio described in subsection A, based upon substantial evidence found in a parking study prepared at city expense by the city or an independent consultant in the last seven years that includes:

     1.     An analysis of parking availability;

     2.     Differing levels of transit access;

     3.     Walkability access to transit services;

     4.     The potential for shared parking;

     5.     The effect of parking requirements on the cost of market-rate and subsidized developments; and

     6.     The lower rates of car ownership for low- and very low-income individuals, including seniors and special needs individuals.

     The city may make findings, based on a parking study completed in conformity with this section, supporting the need for the higher parking ratio. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

19.27.060 Denial to grant a requested density bonus, incentive, or concession.
     A.    The applicant may initiate judicial proceedings if the city refuses to grant a requested density bonus, incentive, or concession. If a court finds that the refusal to grant a requested density bonus, incentive, or concession is in violation of this section, the court shall award the plaintiff reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to require a local government to grant an incentive or concession that has a specific, adverse impact, as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5 of the Government Code, upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to require a local government to grant an incentive or concession that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

     B.     The city shall bear the burden of proof for the denial of a requested concession or incentive. (Ord. 2019-01 § 1, 2019)

 

Chapter 19.28 INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REQUIREMENTS
19.28.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to implement the inclusionary housing program set forth in the housing element of the American Canyon general plan. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.020 Definitions.
     Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the definitions in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

     “Above moderate-income households” are those households with income of more than one hundred twenty percent of area median income for Napa County, as published by the state of California Department of Housing and Community Development, and its successors.

     “Affordable housing nexus fee” is an impact fee to fund affordable housing demand created by new market-rate housing and new nonresidential development.

     “Apartment” is a multifamily development residential project that creates residential dwelling units that cannot be sold individually.

     “Financially infeasible” is a residential project, once all costs for development are established, (i.e. land acquisition, entitlements, site development fees, and construction costs), the developer (and/or their creditors) would not achieve an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of at least six percent.

     “Gross square feet” is the area included within the surrounding walls of a structure as calculated by the building division in accordance with its standard practice. This area does not include garages or carports.

     “Inclusionary units” are those that are required to be provided at affordable rents or sales prices to specified households.

     “Lower income households” are those households with income of no more than eighty percent of the area median income for Napa County, adjusted for household size, as published by the state of California Department of Housing and Community Development, and its successors.

     “Market rate units” means dwelling units in a residential project which are not affordable units or target units.

     “Maximum residential density” means the maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a residential project by the city’s zoning ordinance and by the land use element of the general plan on the date that the application for the residential project is deemed complete, excluding any density bonus. If the maximum density allowed by the zoning ordinance is inconsistent with the density allowed by the land use element of general plan, the land use element density shall prevail.

     “Median income” means the median income, adjusted for family size, applicable to Napa County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community Development.

     “Moderate income households” are those households whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to Napa County as published annually pursuant to Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations, Section 6932 (or its successor provision) by the California Department of Housing and Community Development.

     “Nonresidential development” means any development in the city for which a discretionary permit or building permit is required, other than those developments involving solely residential projects, that includes an addition, the new construction of gross square feet of nonresidential space, the conversion of a residential use to a nonresidential use, or the conversion of one nonresidential use to another nonresidential use.

     “Residential ownership project” means any residential project that includes the creation of one or more residential dwelling units that may be sold individually. A residential ownership project also includes the conversion of apartments to condominiums.

     “Residential project” means any development for which a discretionary permit or building permit is required that includes the creation of one or more additional dwelling units, an addition to a dwelling unit, conversion of nonresidential uses to dwelling units, or a condominium conversion.

     “Residential rental project” means any residential project that creates residential dwelling units that cannot be sold individually.

     “Senior citizen residential project” means a senior citizen housing development with at least thirty-five dwelling units as defined in Civil Code Section 51.3, or a mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for older persons pursuant to Civil Code Sections 798.76 or 799.5.

     “Stacked Flat means a multi-family residential building with single-level dwelling units, stacked on top of each other in a multi-story building.

     “Target unit” means a deed-restricted dwelling unit within a residential project which is reserved for sale or rent, at an affordable rent or affordable sales price, to very low, low, or moderate income households, and which qualifies the residential project for a state density bonus and incentives pursuant to Chapter 19.27.

     “Very low income households” are those households with income of no more than fifty percent of the area median income for Napa County, adjusted for household size, as published by the state of California Department of Housing and Community Development, and its successors. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.030 Applicability.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:

     1.     Residential projects containing five or more residential parcels or units whose initial sales prices or rents will be affordable (as defined in Chapter 19.04, Definitions) to above moderate-income households.

     2.     Residential rental projects containing five or more rental dwelling units.

     3.     Nonresidential projects.

     B.     These provisions shall not apply to:

     1.     Any subdivision for which the final or parcel map was recorded, or any residential project subject to discretionary approval by the city for which a building permit has been issued by the city prior to the effective date of this chapter, unless approval or conditional approval of the subdivision or project was expressly conditioned upon participation in an inclusionary program such as that established by this chapter, or such participation was expressly required as an environmental mitigation measure for the subdivision.

     2.     New residential development that is owned and operated by a nonprofit entity.

     3.     New residential development that is deed restricted to be affordable to lower income households.

     4.     New nonresidential development with a bona fide tax-exempt status. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.040 Inclusionary requirements.
     A.    Required Number and Type of Inclusionary Units.

     1.     Ownership projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall provide a number of inclusionary units equal to at least ten percent of applicable project units (per this chapter) at prices or rents affordable to lower-income households, unless one of the alternative actions set forth in this chapter is approved. Such inclusionary units may be either ownership units or rental units.

     2.     Rental projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall provide a number of inclusionary units equal to at least five percent of applicable project units (per this chapter) at prices or rents affordable to very low-income households, five percent  affordable to low-income households, and five percent to moderate income households unless one of the alternative actions set forth in this chapter is approved. The inclusionary units shall be rental units.

     3.     In determining the number of inclusionary units to be provided, any decimal fraction of 0.3 or more shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number, and any decimal fraction of less than 0.3 shall be rounded down to the nearest whole number.

     4.     Where an even number of inclusionary units are required of a rental housing project, a larger number of units affordable to very low-income households shall be provided (e.g., if the inclusionary requirement equals four units, two shall be affordable to very low-income households and one shall be affordable to a lower-income household and one shall be affordable to a moderate income household). If only one inclusionary unit is required, such unit must be affordable to a very low-income household.

     B.     Development Standards for Target Units.

     1.     Inclusionary units should be constructed concurrently with market rate units unless both the city and the developer/applicant agree within the housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development.

     2.     Inclusionary units shall be evenly distributed throughout the project, except that the decision-making body may waive this requirement if it finds that such distribution is infeasible for one or more of the following reasons:

     a.     Significant topographic or other constraints exist rendering such distribution infeasible.

     b.     Substantially improved site design will result from such waiver.

     c.     Substantially improved building design and an improved unit amenity level will result from such waiver.

     d.     Significant economic hardships will result from such distribution that does not apply to other projects in the city.

     e.     Significant economic hardships will result from such distribution for the developer of the inclusionary units receiving financial assistance from federal, state, or local governmental agencies if such waiver is not granted.

     3.     Where feasible, the number of bedrooms of the inclusionary units should be equivalent to the bedroom mix of the market rate units of the housing development; except that the developer may include a higher proportion of inclusionary units with more bedrooms.

     4.     The design and appearance of the inclusionary units shall be compatible with the design of the total housing development.

     5.     The applicant may reduce the size or interior amenities of the inclusionary units as long as there are not significant differences between inclusionary and market rate units visible from the exterior of the dwelling units and the size and design of the dwelling units are reasonably consistent with the market rate units in the project, provided that all dwelling units conform to the requirements of the applicable building and housing codes.

     6.     Inclusionary units shall comply with all applicable development standards, except those which may be modified as provided by this chapter.

     C.     Continued Affordability of Ownership Units. Inclusionary units shall remain restricted and affordable to the targeted household(s) for a period of at least fifty-five years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Covenants evidencing these restrictions shall be recorded against the property.

     D.    Continued Affordability of Rental Units. Inclusionary units shall remain restricted and affordable to the targeted household(s) for a period of at least fifty-five years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Covenants evidencing these restrictions shall be recorded against the property.

     E.     Determination of Affordable Rents and Sales Prices. In determining the maximum affordable rent or affordable sales price of inclusionary units, the following household and unit size assumptions shall be used, unless the project is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations:

 

SRO (residential hotel) unit

75% of 1 person

0 bedroom (studio)

1 person

1 bedroom

2 person

2 bedroom

3 person

3 bedroom

4 person

4 bedroom

6 person

 

     F.     Housing Agreement. A housing agreement consistent with this chapter shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits (e.g., tract maps, parcel maps, site plans, planned development or conditional use permits) for a project that provides inclusionary units.

     G.    In the event a project exceeds the total number of inclusionary units required in this chapter, the project owner may request inclusionary unit credits that may be used to meet the inclusionary unit requirements of another project, subject to the approval of the city manager. Inclusionary unit credits are issued to and become the possession of the project owner and may only be transferred to another project owner subject to the approval of the city council. The number of inclusionary unit credits awarded for any project is subject to the approval of the city council. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.050 Inclusionary alternatives.
     A.    It is the intent of these provisions that the inclusionary units be provided within each project in order to disperse such units throughout the community.

     B.     The following alternatives to providing inclusionary units on-site may be approved by the decision-making body if it finds that evidence presented by the applicant shows that on-site inclusionary units are financially infeasible due to project size, location or site characteristics, or that the alternative would further housing opportunities for lower-income households to an equal or greater extent:

     1.     The provision of some or all of the required inclusionary units at an off-site location.

     2.     The dedication of suitable land to the city, or entity acceptable to the city, for the construction of the inclusionary units. The acceptability of such dedication shall be based on the suitability of the site in terms of location, size, zoning, timing of construction and other applicable factors. The acceptability of such dedication shall also be based on the fair market value of the dedicated land, in comparison to the amount of in-lieu contribution as calculated above.

     3.     Acquisition and rehabilitation of existing rental units.

     a.     The term of existing rental unit affordability shall be extended fifty-five years longer than any existing affordability term.

     b.     The existing units shall be affordable to the same income groups as the on-site inclusionary units that they replace.

     4.     Incorporate attached or detached accessory dwelling units (ADUs) into the project.

     5.     Provide an affordability term longer than fifty-five years for fewer than fifteen percent of the units.

     6.     Provide fewer than fifteen percent inclusionary units, but increase the number of bedrooms in the inclusionary units that are provided.

     7.     Provide fewer than fifteen percent inclusionary units, but increase the percentage of lower-income units.

 

     8.     Provide greater than fifteen percent inclusionary overall, but a smaller percentage of lower-income units.

     9.     Extend the affordability terms of existing inclusionary units.

     10.   Any combination of the above alternatives.

     11.   Other alternatives that achieve inclusionary housing not listed above.

     12.   As a last resort, the developer may be allowed to pay in-lieu nexus fees.

     a.     The in-lieu contribution shall be paid to the city at the issuance of the building permit for each unit.

     b.     Such contribution shall be deposited in the city housing fund and can only be used to provide housing affordable to very low and low-income households. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2009-09 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.060 City assistance.
     The following development concessions may be approved by the decision-making body if it finds that evidence presented by the applicant shows that on-site inclusionary units are financially infeasible due to project size, location or site characteristics, or that the alternative would further housing opportunities for lower-income households to an equal or greater extent. Possible assistance includes the following:

     A.    A reduction of site development standards or a modification of zoning code or architectural design requirements which exceed the minimum building standards provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code for the inclusionary units. These may include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:

     1.     Increase the allowable density limits of the zoning district (i.e., a density bonus);

     2.     Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions;

     3.     Reduced minimum lot setbacks;

     4.     Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area;

     5.     Increased maximum lot coverage;

     6.     Increased maximum building height and/or stories;

     7.     Reduced on-site parking standards, including the number or size of spaces and garage requirements;

     8.     Reduced minimum building separation requirements;

     9.     Reduced street standards, e.g., reduced minimum street widths;

     10.   Waived, reduced, or deferred planning, plan check, building permit, and/or development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, or traffic fees); or

     11.   Any development standard concession not listed above. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.070 Application procedures.
     In addition to the application contents required for any associated permits or approvals, an applicant proposing to include inclusionary units in a project shall provide the following information:

     A.    The number of proposed inclusionary units and an indication of the target households;

     B.     Proposed sales prices or rents for the inclusionary units;

     C.     The location, unit size (square feet), and number of bedrooms of inclusionary units;

     D.    A description of any proposed differences between the inclusionary units and other project units in terms of construction, appearance, or amenities;

     E.     A schedule for completion and occupancy of the inclusionary units compared to a schedule for completion and occupancy of market rate units in the subject development;

     F.     An offer to reserve inclusionary units for target households for at least fifty-five years when ownership and fifty-five years when rental. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord.

2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.080 Housing agreement.
     A.    Where required by this chapter, applicants/developers shall draft and agree to enter into a housing agreement with the city. The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the community development director, who shall formulate a recommendation to the decision-making body for final approval.

     B.     The housing agreement shall include at least the following:

     1.     The number of inclusionary units, bedroom counts for the inclusionary units and their target households;

     2.     The standards for determining the affordable rent or affordable sales price and housing cost for the inclusionary units;

     3.     The location, unit size (square feet), and number of bedrooms of the inclusionary units;

     4.     The tenure of use restrictions for the inclusionary units;

     5.     A schedule for completion and occupancy of the inclusionary units and market rate units;

     6.     A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the city may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement);

     7.     Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter.

     C.     In the case of for-sale inclusionary units, the housing agreement shall include the following conditions governing the sale and use of inclusionary units during the applicable use restriction period:

     1.     The inclusionary units shall be sold to and owner-occupied by eligible lower-income households at an affordable sales price and housing cost.

     2.     The initial and subsequent purchasers of an inclusionary unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the city restricting the sale of the inclusionary unit in accordance with this chapter during the applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be recorded against the parcel containing the inclusionary unit and shall contain such provisions as the city may require to ensure continued compliance with this chapter.

     3.     The city shall establish maximum resale prices for inclusionary units during the applicable use restriction period, taking into consideration such factors as cost-of-living increases, any improvements made to the unit, and customary closing costs.

     4.     The owner of an inclusionary unit who wishes to sell the unit shall provide the first right of refusal to purchase the unit to the city and send written notice to the city of their intent to sell not less than sixty calendar days prior to the intended date of sale of the unit. Upon receipt of the owner’s notice, the city shall have sixty calendar days to purchase the unit or to assign its right of refusal.

     5.     The owner shall share with the city any amount received by the owner as a result of the first sale following expiration of the applicable use restriction period that is above the maximum resale price. The city shall deposit its share of any such proceeds in its housing fund.

     D.    In the case of rental inclusionary units, the housing agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of inclusionary units during the use restriction period:

     1.     The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining inclusionary units for qualified tenants;

     2.     Provisions requiring owners of the rental project to verify tenant incomes on an annual basis and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter;

     3.     Provisions requiring owners of the rental project to submit an annual report to the city which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying the inclusionary units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each inclusionary unit.

     E.     Following execution of the agreement by all parties, the completed housing agreement, or memorandum thereof, shall be recorded and the conditions therefore filed and recorded on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of inclusionary units. The approval and recordation shall take place prior to final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such parcels or units. The housing agreement shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.28.090 Nonresidential inclusionary requirements.
     Nonresidential projects subject to the provisions of this chapter shall provide the applicable affordable housing nexus fee for each square foot of new construction. The affordable housing nexus fee shall be adopted by resolution by the city council. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016)

 

19.28.100 Waiver.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the requirements of this chapter shall be waived, adjusted or reduced if the applicant shows that there is no reasonable relationship between the impact of a proposed residential project and the requirements of this chapter, or that applying the requirements of this chapter would take property in violation of the United States or California Constitution. To receive a waiver, adjustment or reduction under this section, the applicant must make a showing under this section when applying for a first approval for the residential project, and/or as part of any appeal which the city provides as part of the process for the first approval. (Ord. 2019-10 § 1, 2019; Ord. 2016-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 2006-09 § 1, 2006; Ord. 2006-08 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 19.29 HOME OCCUPATIONS
19.29.010 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for home occupations in order to achieve compatibility with other permitted uses, and with the residential character of the neighborhood in which they are located.

     B.     In recognition of the unique rural nature of neighborhoods in the rural residential district, including larger lot sizes and greater separation between dwellings, modifications to some of these standards may be allowed, as noted in this chapter. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.29.020 Definition.
     As used in this chapter, a “home occupation” is an accessory use of a dwelling for employment and/or business purposes that is incidental to and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit as a residence, and that is so located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence. Large family child care homes are exempt from this definition. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.29.030 Home occupation standards.
     A.    A home occupation shall comply with the following minimum standards:

     1.     No person other than those persons who are residents of the premises shall be engaged in such occupations.

     2.     The use of the dwelling for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.

     3.     There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation.

     4.     A home occupation may be conducted only within an enclosed building, whether the building constitutes part of the main building or in an accessory building.

     5.     There shall be no sales in connection with such home occupation other than sales of merchandise produced on the premises or directly related to the services offered.

     6.     No pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.

     7.     No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable off the lot to the normal senses. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or audible interference upon any radio or television receivers off the premises, or cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. A home occupation shall not cause any adverse impacts such as offensive odors or excessive noise, lighting, or traffic that are incompatible with the residential area, or in violation with the provisions of any applicable laws or regulations.

     8.     No vehicle over one ton carrying capacity may be used in conduct of a home occupation.

     9.     Every home occupation shall fully comply with all city, county, state and federal codes, ordinances, rules and regulations.

     B.     The above standards may be modified as follows for home occupations in the rural residential district:

     1.     Up to twenty-five percent of the rear yard may be used for outside storage of operable vehicles, equipment and materials associated with the home occupation.

 

     2.     Vehicles and other wheeled equipment shall be stored on an all-weather surface such as asphalt, cement, crushed rock or on grass surfaces in rear yards.

     3.     All vehicles, equipment and materials stored in the rear yard shall not be visible off-site. Where necessary, an opaque screen or enclosure (such as a wall, fence or evergreen landscaping) shall be provided to achieve compliance with the standard.

     4.     Storage of vehicles in excess of one ton may be considered subject to review and approval by the community development director.

     C.     The director may impose additional standards and restrictions on home occupations reasonably related to the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of persons or property in the neighborhood of the home occupation or the city. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.29.040 Home occupation permits.
     A.    Applicability. No person shall commence or carry on any home occupation within the city without first having obtained a home occupation permit.

     B.     Application.

     1.     An application for a home occupation permit shall be filed in writing with the community development department by the person who intends commencing or carrying on a home occupation. Where the applicant is not the owner of the property on which the home occupation is proposed to be conducted, the application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or his or her agent.

     2.     The application shall be upon forms furnished by and in a manner prescribed by the community development director and shall be accompanied by any applicable filing fee established by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Review and Approval.

     1.     Within ten working days after the filing of an application for a home occupation permit, the community development director shall review the application and approve, conditionally-approve or deny the permit. The director may approve or conditionally-approve an application for a home occupation permit if he or she finds it consistent with the purpose and standards of this chapter.

     2.     The director shall serve a notice of such action upon the applicant by mailing a copy of such notice to the applicant at the address appearing on the application.

     3.     Any person aggrieved by the action of the director upon an application for a home occupation permit may appeal such an action by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within the ten days after the date of the mailing of such action. The director shall refer all appeals to the planning commission. The commission shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest available date. The applicant shall be given notice of the time and date set for such consideration.

     4.     An appeal of a commission decision may be made by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The notice shall comply with the requirements of Section 2.04.110 of the municipal code except that the notice of appeal shall be filed within ten days after the decision of the commission and appeal shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.04 of the municipal code.

     D.    Suspension and Revocation.

     1.     Any home occupation permit may be suspended or revoked when it is determined that the home occupation authorized by the permit has been or is being conducted:

     a.     In violation of any city, county and/or state code, ordinance, rule or regulation;

     b.     In a disorderly manner;

     c.     To the detrimental of the general public; or

     d.     In a different form than which the permit was issued.

     2.     Any home occupation permit that has been issued shall not be revoked or suspended unless a hearing shall first have been held by the community development director. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least ten days prior to the date set forth for such hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for revoking or suspending the permit. The notice shall be served by mailing, by registered mail, a copy of such notice to the permittee at the address appearing on the permit.

     3.     Any person aggrieved by the action of the director upon an application for a home occupation permit may appeal an action by filing a written notice of appeal to the director within ten days after the date of mailing of the director’s action on the suspension or revocation of the permit. Appeals shall be processed as set forth in subsection C of this section.

     E.     Transferability. No home occupation permit shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall the permit authorize any person, other than the person named therein, to commence or carry on the home occupation for which the permit was issued.

     F.     Existing County Home Occupation Permits. Those home occupations already operating under a home occupation permit previously issued by the county of Napa shall not be required to obtain a new home occupation permit from the city. Such a previously-issued home occupation permit shall remain in full force and effect until such time as it is suspended or revoked under the provisions of subsection D of this section or expires under provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.29.050 Business license required.
     Every home occupation permittee shall obtain a business license. If the business license is not renewed annually, the home occupation permit shall automatically expire. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.30 TEMPORARY MOBILE STRUCTURES
19.30.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to conditionally permit the temporary use of mobilehomes, mobile offices, mobile classrooms and recreational vehicles in connection with new subdivisions, construction sites and existing uses of land. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.30.020 Approval process.
     Temporary mobile structures may be approved by the community development director by temporary trailer use permit. Applications for such permits shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.30.030 Length of use.
     The applicant shall specify the length of time the mobile structure will be on the premises. The approval granted by the community development director will include a date on which the mobile structure will have been removed from the site. Any additional time requested shall be subject to a new application and fee. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1(part), 2001)

 

19.30.040 Conditions of approval.
     The community development director may include such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate or necessary, including, but not limited to, the following:

     A.    The requirement of a cash deposit or other security provided by the applicant to assure the timely removal of the temporary mobile structure or its conversion to a permitted or approved use;

     B.     The provision of adequate sanitary facilities for the temporary mobile structure;

     C.     For temporary mobile structures that are visible from a public right-of-way, landscaping shall be provided, either planted or in containers (other than shipping and growing containers);

     D.    All parking areas with direct access to a public street or highway right-of-way shall be paved to prevent tracking gravel, mud, or dirt onto the public road; and

     E.     For temporary mobile structures without direct access to a public street or highway, compacted rock or similar material may be used, subject to the review and approval by the Public Works Director; Fire Chief, and Building Inspector. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.31 ANIMAL KEEPING REGULATIONS
19.31.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of these standards is to ensure that animals permitted in Chapter 19.05, Use Classifications, are maintained in a manner compatible with residential uses. (Ord. 2002-06 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.31.020 Animal keeping standards.
     The following standards shall apply to the keeping of animals in all districts in order to ensure that animals are maintained in a manner compatible with surrounding uses:

     A.    Maintenance.

     1.     All buildings housing animals, all animal enclosures and all pasture areas shall be maintained free from litter, garbage and the accumulation of manure.

     2.     The premises shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary manner.

     3.     Reasonable measures shall be taken by the owners of animals subject to these provisions to ensure that noise, odors, flies, vermin and other nuisances related to animal keeping do not negatively impact adjacent properties.

     4.     If animals are not maintained in compliance with these standards, or are otherwise allowed to become a nuisance, the city shall initiate enforcement proceedings as provided by Chapter 19.02, Enforcement and Penalties.

     B.     Permitted Animals.

     1.     Pets. Domestic creatures commonly sold in pet stores and kept as household pets may be kept upon any lot in any zone where the principal use upon such lot is residential, so long as animals do not constitute a nuisance and are adequately provided with food, care and sanitary facilities.

     2.     Livestock. Large animals, including equines, bovines, sheep, and goats, but excluding swine, may be kept for personal purposes where “livestock keeping” is permitted as an accessory use in each underlying zoning district.

     3.     Other animals, including those of a species normally considered wild, may be kept in any nonresidential zone upon approval of a use permit in each case and provided that adequate space is available and that the animals are confined in a secure enclosure that precludes a risk to the public and that keeping such species of animal is not prohibited by the laws of the State of California or the United States of America.

     4.     Anyone keeping an animal that is of a species for which a license or permit to keep such animal is required by state or federal law must have the license or permit present upon the property and at a reasonable day and time allow the Code Enforcement Officer of the city to view that license or permit and to verify that the animals are being kept in compliance with any and all conditions of the license or permit.

     5.     Indemnification and Notification Policy. In conjunction with the furnishing of evidence of compliance with the laws of the State of California or the United States of America, any person keeping an animal subject to this Section 19.31.020(B)(4) shall notify the city of the keeping of such animal and indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents in a manner satisfactory as to form and content to the city attorney.

     6.     Insurance. In addition to the indemnification requirements of Section 19.31.020(B)(5), any person keeping an animal subject to Section 19.31.020(B)(4) shall maintain at all times during the keeping of such animal an insurance policy from an underwriter acceptable to the city’s risk manager and authorized to do business in the State of California naming the city, its elected and appointed officials, employees and agents as additional insures in an amount of not less than one million dollars per occurrence in a manner satisfactory as to form and content to the city attorney.

     C.     Minimum Lot Size. A minimum lot area of twenty thousand square feet is required for livestock keeping, as defined by Chapter 19.05, Use Classifications, at least seventy-five percent of which is accessible to and usable by the large animal(s).

     D.    Setbacks. All buildings and areas use house or confine nondomestic animals, including barns, stables, lofts, coops, corrals, pens, feed a paddocks, uncovered stables and similar enclosures and accessory structures shall be located behind residence on the lot and shall maintain side and setbacks in accordance with the underlying zone district. Additionally, such areas or structures maintain a distance of fifty feet from any of structure used for human occupancy or habits Structures related to the keeping of horses shall be located no closer than fifty feet to any property closer than fifty feet to any dwelling on the sit closer than one hundred feet to any other dwells

     E.     Disclosure. Where development or subdivision of property is proposed to occur adjacent to an where “livestock keeping” is permitted as an accessory use in the underlying zoning district, the d of properties included in such development or subdivision shall contain notification of possible lives keeping on adjacent property.

     F.     Pre-Existing Animal Keeping. Any prop upon which animal keeping existed and was ongoing at the time of adoption of the animal keeping regulations and which did not comply with the minimum lot size or setback standards is considered legal conforming and may continue to exist providing there can be no increase in the number of anima the amount of nonconformance with setback an size requirements. (Ord. 2002-06 Exh. A (part) 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.32 MOBILEHOME PARK CONVERSION ORDINANCE
Article I. General Provisions
19.32.010 Purpose and intent.
     The stated purpose and intent of the mobilehome park conversion ordinance is to ensure that any proposed conversion of an existing mobilehome park to any other use is preceded by adequate notice, that the social and fiscal impacts of the proposed conversion are adequately defined prior to consideration of a proposed conversion and that relocation and other assistance is provided park residents, consistent with the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter and Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

     “Commercial coach” means a structure transportable in one or more sections, designed and equipped for human occupancy for industrial, professional or commercial uses and shall include a trailer coach as defined in Section 635 of the Vehicle Code.

     “Comparable housing” means housing that is comparable in floor area and number of bedrooms to the mobilehome to which comparison is being made, which housing meets the minimum standards of the state Uniform Housing Code.

     “Comparable mobilehome park” means any other mobilehome park substantially equivalent in terms of park conditions, amenities and other relevant factors.

     “Conversion” means changing the use of a mobilehome park for a purpose other than the rental, or the holding out for rent, of two or more mobilehome sites to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation. Such a conversion may affect an entire mobilehome park or any portion thereof. A conversion shall include, but is not limited to, a change of any existing mobilehome park or any portion thereof to condominium, stock cooperative, planned unit development, or any form of ownership wherein spaces within the mobilehome park are to be sold, and the cessation of use of all or a portion of the park as a mobilehome park, whether immediately or on a gradual basis, or the closure of the park. “Conversion” shall not include the purchase of the park by its existing residents.

     “Date of application for change of use” means the date of filing of an application for a rezoning, general plan amendment, use permit, subdivision, planned unit development plan, design permit, or any other discretionary land use application approval under Title 18, the Subdivision Code, and/or Title 19, the Zoning Code, of the city of American Canyon Municipal Code, which application seeks approval of a change of use of or at a mobilehome park.

     “Eligible mobilehome owner” means a mobilehome owner whose mobilehome was located in a mobilehome park on the date of application for a change of use.

     “Home owner” means the registered owner or owners of a mobilehome, who has a tenancy in a mobilehome park under a rental or lease agreement.

     “Mobilehome” means a structure designed for human habitation and for being transportable on a street or highway under permit pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 35790, and as defined in Section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code. “Mobilehome” does not include a recreational vehicle, as defined in Civil Code Section 799.24, or a commercial coach, as defined herein and in Section 18001.8 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Mobilehome park” means an area of land where two or more mobilehome sites are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobilehomes used for habitation. For purposes of this chapter, “mobilehome park” shall not include a mobilehome subdivision, stock cooperative, or any park where there is any combination of common ownership of the entire park or individual mobilehome sites.

     “Mobilehome space” means any area, tract of land, site, lot, pad, or portion of a mobilehome park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobilehome.

     “Mobilehome tenant” means a person who occupies a mobilehome within a mobilehome park pursuant to a bona fide lease or rental agreement with the mobilehome owner and who, during his or her tenancy, was not the owner or member of the immediate household of the mobilehome owner.

     “Resident” means a person lawfully residing in a mobilehome park, and includes a mobilehome owner, mobilehome tenant or member of the immediate household of the mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.030 Vacancy rate in excess of twenty percent—Notice required.
     The following shall apply when any mobilehome park in the city has a vacancy rate of twenty percent or greater of the total number of spaces in existence in the mobilehome park:

     A.    Whenever twenty percent or more of the total number of mobilehome sites or mobilehomes at a mobilehome park are vacant or otherwise uninhabited and such situation was not caused by physical disaster, including but not limited to fire, flood, storm, earthquake, landslide, or by another natural condition beyond the control of the owner or operator of the mobilehome park, the owner or operator of the park shall file with the community development director a written notice informing the city of the current vacancy rate at the park. For purposes of this chapter, a mobilehome site is “uninhabited” or “vacant” when it is either:

     1.     Unoccupied by a mobilehome; or

     2.     Occupied by a mobilehome in which no persons reside;

     3.     A mobilehome shall not be considered vacant for purposes of this chapter if rent is being paid pursuant to a bona fide rental or lease agreement and the mobilehome is merely unoccupied.

     B.     The written notice to the community development director from the owner or operator of the mobilehome park shall clearly state any known reasons for the vacancy rate to be in excess of twenty percent and whether or not the property owner intends in the immediate future to convert the mobilehome park to another use.

     C.     If it is determined that the owner of the mobilehome park intends to apply for a conversion of the mobilehome park to another use, the community development director shall immediately inform the property owner of the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.040 Use permit required.
     In addition to any other necessary discretionary land use permit applications such as a subdivision or a design permit, the conversion of any existing mobilehome park to any other use shall require the review of a use permit application by the planning commission, which shall forward a recommendation on the discretionary permits and use permit to the city council for final action. At a minimum, each application for a use permit to convert a mobilehome park to any other use shall include the following and any additional information as may be required by this chapter and the community development director:

     A.    A detailed narrative description of the proposed use to which the mobilehome park is to be converted;

     B.     The proposed timetable for implementation of the conversion and development of the site;

 

     C.     Evidence that any tenant’s rent had not been increased within the two months prior to the filing of an application for conversion of a mobilehome park, and a statement from the applicant that the rent at the mobilehome park shall not be increased for two years from the date of filing of the conversion application or until the date of the commencement of relocation activities;

     D.    A report on the impact of the conversion of the mobilehome park on its residents and a disposition/relocation plan addressing the availability of replacement housing for existing tenants of the mobilehome park consistent with Section 65863.7 of the California Government Code;

     E.     Upon filing an application for a use permit for conversion, the community development director shall inform the applicant of the requirements of Civil Code Section 798.56 and Government Code Section 65863.8 regarding notification of the mobilehome park residents concerning the proposed conversion. The community development director shall specify in writing to the applicant the information that must be submitted in order to adequately notify all existing tenants as required by the California Government Code, the California Civil Code, and this chapter.

     F.     No use permit application for the conversion of a mobilehome park to another use shall be deemed complete and processing for consideration will not commence until the conversion impact report and relocation plan as required by this chapter have been reviewed by the community development director for substantial conformance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.050 Conversion impact report required.
     Any person filing an application for a use permit to convert a mobilehome park to another use shall file a conversion impact report on the impact of the change of use upon the residents of the mobilehome park. At a minimum the conversion impact report shall include the following, as well as any other information deemed necessary and appropriate by the community development director:

     A.    A detailed description of the mobilehome spaces within the mobilehome park including, but not limited to:

     1.     The total number of mobilehome spaces in the park and the number of spaces occupied,

     2.     The length of time each space has been occupied by the present resident(s) thereof,

     3.     The age, size, and type of mobilehome occupying each space,

     4.     The monthly rent currently charged for each space, including any utilities or other costs paid by the present resident(s) thereof,

     5.     Name and mailing address of the primary resident(s) of each mobilehome within the mobilehome park on three sets of gummed labels for the mailing of notice of public hearings;

     B.     A list of all comparable mobilehome parks within the city and Napa County. This list shall include the age of the mobilehome park and the mobilehomes therein, a schedule of rents for each park listed and the criteria of the management of each park for acceptance of new tenants and used mobilehomes. Information pertaining to the availability of medical and dental services, shopping facilities, and all nearby social and religious services and facilities shall also be included;

     C.     A detailed analysis of the economic impact of the relocation on the tenants including comparisons of current rents paid and rents to be paid at comparable mobilehome parks within the city or Napa County, the estimated costs of moving a mobilehome and personal property, and any direct or indirect costs associated with a relocation to another mobilehome park;

     D.    A list of the names, addresses and telephone numbers of one or more housing specialists, with an explanation of the services the specialists will perform at the applicant’s expense for the residents to be displaced. These services shall include, but not be limited to, assistance in locating a suitable replacement mobilehome park; coordination of moving the mobilehome and personal property, and any other tasks necessary to facilitate the relocation to another comparable mobilehome park. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.060 Relocation plan required.
     A relocation plan for tenants of a mobilehome park shall be submitted to the planning commission and city council for approval as a part of the application for a use permit to convert a mobilehome park to another use. The relocation plan shall provide, at a minimum, for the following:

     A.    The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fee schedules of persons in the area who are qualified MAI appraisers of mobilehomes;

     B.     The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fee schedules of persons in the area qualified as mobilehome movers;

     C.     The relocation plan shall provide specifically for relocation assistance to full-time, very-low, low, and moderate-income residents and senior citizens over the age of sixty-two residing in the park for a minimum period of twelve months following closure of the mobilehome park.

     D.    The relocation plan shall specifically provide guarantees that all tenants sixty-two years of age or older and all tenants who are medically proven to be permanently disabled shall not have to pay an increase in rent over the amount currently paid for a period of two years following relocation;

     E.     The relocation plan shall provide for the applicant to pay all reasonable moving expenses to a comparable mobilehome park within the city or Napa County to any tenant who relocates from the park after city approval of the use permit authorizing conversion of the park. The reasonable cost of relocation and moving expenses shall include the cost of relocating a displaced homeowner’s mobilehome, accessories, and possessions, including the costs for disassembly, removal, transportation, and reinstallation of the mobilehome and accessories at the new site, and replacement or reconstruction of the blocks, skirting, siding, porches, decks, awnings, storage sheds, cabanas, or earthquake bracing if necessitated by the relocation; indemnification for any damage to personal property of the resident caused by the relocation; reasonable living expenses of displaced park residents from the date of actual displacement to the date of occupancy at the new site; payment of any security deposit required at the new site; and the difference between the rent paid in the existing park and any higher rent at the new site for the first twelve months of the relocated tenancy. When any tenant has given notice of his intent to move prior to city approval of the use permit, eligibility to receive moving expenses shall be forfeited;

     F.     If the city council determines that a particular mobilehome cannot be relocated to a comparable mobilehome park within the city or Napa County, and the mobilehome owner has elected to sell his or her mobilehome, the relocation plan shall Identify those mobilehomes, the reasons why the mobilehomes cannot be relocated as provided in subsection (E) of Section 19.32.060, then the city council may, as a part of the reasonable cost of relocation as provided in Government Code Section 65863.7(e) require the applicant to provide for purchasing the mobilehome of a displaced home owner at its in-place market value. Such value shall be determined after consideration of relevant factors, including the value of the mobilehome in its current location including the blocks and any skirting, siding, porches, decks, storage sheds, cabanas, and awnings, and assuming the continuation of the mobilehome park in a safe, sanitary, and well-maintained condition, and not considering the effect of the change of use on the value of the mobilehome. If a dispute arises as to the in-place value of a mobilehome, the applicant and the homeowner shall have appraisals prepared by separate qualified MAI appraisers with experience in establishing the value of mobilehomes. The city council shall determine the in-place value based upon the average of the appraisals submitted by the applicant and mobilehome owner. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.070 Required findings for conversion.
     In approving a use permit for a mobilehome park conversion, the city council shall find that the proposed conversion meets the following requirements in addition to the other requirements of this chapter:

     A.    The proposed use of the property is consistent with the general plan and any and all of its elements, any applicable specific plan or planned unit development plan or similar mechanism provided for in state law or city ordinance, and this chapter.

     B.     The residents of the mobilehome park have, been adequately notified of the proposed conversion including information pertaining to the anticipated timing of the proposed conversion.

     C.     There exists land zoned for new or replacement comparable mobilehome parks or adequate space is available in other comparable mobilehome parks within the city or Napa County for the residents who will be displaced.

     D.    The conversion will not result in the displacement of very low, low, or moderate income, mobilehome residents or senior citizens over the age of sixty-two who cannot afford rents charged in other mobilehome parks within the city or Napa County, unless otherwise approved by the city council.

     E. The age, type, size, and style of mobilehomes to be displaced as a result of the conversion will be able to be relocated into other comparable mobilehome parks within the city or Napa County, or that the applicant has agreed to purchase any mobilehome that cannot be relocated at its in-place value as provided for in this chapter.

     F.     Any mobilehome residents displaced as a result of the conversion shall be compensated by the applicant for all reasonable costs incurred as a result of their relocation.

     G.    The relocation plan mitigates the impacts of the displacement of individuals or households for a reasonable transition period and mitigates the impacts of any long-term displacement. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.080 Conditions of approval.
     The city council shall impose any necessary and appropriate conditions of approval to satisfy and implement the intent, purpose, and content of this chapter. In addition, any other necessary and appropriate conditions of approval to protect the health and safety of the residents of the city may be imposed. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.090 Effective date of conversion.
     The city council shall establish the date on which the use permit for conversion will become effective. Such date shall not be less than two years from the decision of the city council, provided that conversion at an earlier date may be approved if the city council receives a written petition requesting an earlier date signed by a majority of those persons residing in the subject mobilehome park at the time of the city council public hearing to consider the conversion application. The effective date of the approval in such a case shall be the date set forth in the petition. Conversion at the earlier date may be approved only if the city council makes specific findings that the applicant has complied with all the provisions of an approved relocation plan and submitted evidence of such compliance to the community development director as provided for in Section 19.32.060. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.100 Issuance of grading and/or building permits.
     No building permit shall be issued for the development of or on any real property which is being converted from a mobilehome park pursuant to this chapter unless and until the applicant has filed with the community development director a verified statement made under penalty of perjury that all conditions of approval have been met or otherwise incorporated into the final project plans including the payment of all required relocation assistance required pursuant to this chapter. Such statement shall identify in itemized form each payee, the amount paid, the date of payment, and the type of relocation or other assistance for which each such payment was made. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

 

19.32.110 Violations.
     In addition to any remedies or penalties for noncompliance with any city ordinance as provided elsewhere in the municipal code, any park owner or applicant who violates any rights of any mobilehome owner or mobilehome tenant established under this chapter shall be liable to the person for actual damages caused by such violation, plus costs and attorney’s fees. In addition, no park owner shall take any wilful action to threaten, retaliate against or harass any park resident with the intent to prevent such residents from exercising his or her rights under this chapter. (Ord. 2001-05, 2001)

Article II. Relocation Assistance
19.32.120 Statement of purposes.
     The provisions of this article are intended to update the provisions of Chapter 19.32 that provide relocation assistance to tenants of mobilehome parks facing eviction due to the owner’s intent to convert the mobilehome park to another use. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

19.32.130 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this article, the definitions in Section 19.32.020 of this code, and in Article 1 of the California Mobilehome Residency Law (California Civil Code, Section 798, et seq.), and the following definitions shall apply:

     “Notice to quit” means in the case of a tenant, the Notice required by Section 798.55(b) of the California Civil Code. In the case of non-tenant resident, the notice required by an applicable provision of law.

     “Qualified resident” means any resident, as that term is used in California Civil Code Section 798.11, who satisfies any of the following criteria on the date such resident receives a notice to quit as defined above:

     1.     Has attained age sixty-two;

     2.     Is handicapped as defined in Section 50072 of the California Health and Safety Code;

     3.     Is disabled as defined in Title 42 United States Code 423; or

     4.     Is a person residing with and on whom is legally dependent (as determined for federal income tax purposes) one or more minor children; or

     5.     Is a person whose income is within the low-income category as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for its Section 8 program as confirmed by the State Department of Housing and Community Development in amendment to Section 6932 of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

     “Qualified tenant” means any tenant who satisfies any of the following criteria on the date such tenant receives a notice to quit as defined above:

     1.     Has attained age sixty-two;

     2.     Is handicapped as defined in Section 50072 of the California Health and Safely Code;

     3.     Is disabled as defined in Title 42 United States Code 423; or

     4.     Is a person residing with and on whom is legally dependent (as determined for federal income tax purposes) one or more minor children; or

     5.     Is a person whose income is within the low-income category as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development for its Section 8 housing program as confirmed by the State Department of Housing and Community Development in annual amendments to Section 6932 of Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.

     “Tenant” means a homeowner, as defined in California Civil Code Section 798.9. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

19.32.140 Relocation assistance required.
     A.    General Rule. The management of a mobilehome park shall provide relocation assistance in connection with the change of use, as defined in Civil Code Section 798.10, of the mobilehome park, or any portion thereof.

     B.     Exception. This section shall not apply where:

     1.     The change of use results from the city’s refusal to extend a conditional use permit, or similar permit, upon good faith request of the management for such extension;

     2.     Where the California Department of Housing and Community Development suspends or revokes a permit pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18510; or

     3.     Where the tenant or resident, received actual written notice from management prior to entering into oral or written agreement to become a resident or tenant that an application to convert the mobilehome park to another use was on file with the city or had already been approved. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

19.32.150 Manner of providing relocation assistance.
     Relocation assistance, where required by the Section 19.32.140, shall be provided in accordance with the following provisions.

     A.    Management’s Responsibility.

     1.     Management shall:

     a.     Make available to each resident, at no cost, a reasonably complete and current list of vacant and available mobilehome park spaces or mobilehomes within the city and Napa County; and

     b.     Make a reasonable and good faith effort to assure that residents without cars are driven, at no cost, and residents with cars are assisted, in order to inspect replacement spaces or homes; and

     c.     Hire an ambulance or similar vehicle, at no cost to the resident, and otherwise take reasonable steps to assist any disabled or handicapped tenants with relocation-related activities; and

     d. i.  Pay a relocation fee in order to assist the recipient in meeting costs of relocation, higher rents for replacement mobilehome park spaces or mobilehomes, and related expenses. For the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2006 and all subsequent fiscal years, the fee amounts shall be automatically increased by the cost of living increase as determined by the United States Labor Department for the San Francisco/Oakland/Bay Area on an annual basis The adjusted amount shall be rounded to the nearest fifty-dollar increment.

     ii.     This payment shall be made as follows:

     (A)   In the case of a tenant residing in the mobilehome subject to the tenancy agreement who has not located a comparable replacement mobilehome park space by the time the fee is due under this section, a fee of eight thousand dollars to qualified tenants and three thousand two hundred dollars to all other tenants;

     (B)   In the case of a tenant residing in the mobilehome subject to the tenancy agreement who has located a comparable replacement mobilehome park space by the time the fee is due under this section, a fee of three thousand two hundred dollars;

     (C)   In the case of a tenant who does not reside in the mobilehome subject to the tenancy agreement, and who has not located a comparable replacement mobilehome park space by the time the fee is due under this section, a fee of four thousand eight hundred dollars to qualified tenants and three thousand two hundred dollars to all other tenants;

     (D)   In the case of a tenant who does not reside in the mobilehome subject to the tenancy agreement and who has located a comparable replacement mobilehome park space by the time the fee is due under this section, a fee of three thousand two hundred dollars;

     (E)   In the case of a resident who is not also a tenant, a fee of three thousand two hundred dollars;

     (F)    The entire fee shall be paid to a person who is the only tenant or resident in a mobilehome. If a mobilehome is occupied by two or more persons, any one of whom is qualified, then each person shall be paid a pro rata share of the fee due. If a mobilehome is occupied by two or more persons, none of whom is qualified, then each person shall be paid a pro rata share of the fee due.

     2.     In lieu of the assistance provided for in subsection (A)(1) of this section, management may elect to relocate any tenant or resident into a comparable replacement mobilehome park space or mobilehome, satisfactory to the tenant or resident and pay all actual costs of relocation. A tenant or resident may not unreasonably withhold approval of a replacement mobilehome park space or mobilehome.

     B.     When Assistance Is to Be Provided.

     1.     General Rule. Where the notice to quit is served after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the relocation assistance specified above shall be provided at the following times:

     a.     The assistance specified in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (d) of this section shall be made available on or before service of the notice to quit.

     b.     The assistance specified in subsections (A)(1)(b) and (c) of this section shall be made for at least a sixty-day period prior to the period specified in the notice to quit.

     c.     The assistance specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section shall be made available on or before service of the notice to quit.

     2.     Special Transition Rule. Where the notice to quit was served on or before the effective date of said ordinance, the relocation assistance specified above shall be provided at the following times:

     a.     The assistance specified in subsections (A)(1)(a) and (d) of this section shall be made available either before the effective date of said ordinance or within thirty days thereafter.

     b.     The assistance specified in subsections (A)(1)(b) and (c) of this section shall be made available for at least a thirty-day period commencing on or before the effective date of said ordinance.

     c.     The assistance specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section shall be made available at any time prior to the first day of trial of any action by the management to recover possession of the mobilehome space or mobilehome. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

19.32.160 Affirmative defense.
     In an action by management to recover possession of a space occupied by a mobilehome or to recover possession of a mobilehome, the defendant may raise as an affirmative defense the failure of management to provide relocation assistance as required by this section. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

19.32.170 Applicability.
     This section shall apply to judicial proceedings to recover possession of a space occupied by a mobilehome or to recover possession of a mobilehome, commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

19.32.180 Notification to city.
     A.    The management shall serve, by personal service or by United States mail, written notice on the city community development director of the proposed termination of mobilehome park use, accompanied by such information and in a form designated for such purpose by the city community development director. Upon publication of this subsection in the newspaper, the city community development director shall forthwith notify the management of all mobilehome parks within the city limits of the requirements of this subsection.

     1.     Where the notice to quit is served on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection, the notice to the city community development director shall be served on or before the thirtieth day prior to the expiration of one period stated in the notice to quit.

     2.     Where the notice to quit is served prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection, the notice to the city community development director shall be served on or before the tenth day prior to the expiration of the period stated in the notice to quit.

     B.     The notice referred to in subsection A of this section shall be accompanied by a statement that the management has provided all relocation assistance required by law, accompanied with proof of such assistance in the form of notarized signed acknowledgments from the recipients thereof or a notarized sign waiver of assistance.

     C.     If management fails to substantially comply with this section, as determined by the city community development director, the city community development director shall forthwith notify all other appropriate city departments and officials of such noncompliance. These departments and officials shall not issue, grant or approve any application or request for any permit, license or other entitlement of use (including but not limited to a building permit, conditional use permit, zone change, variance, certificate of occupancy, tract or parcel map) for any change of use. (Ord. 2006-05 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 19.33 LARGE FAMILY CHILD CARE HOMES
19.33.010 Purpose.
     The purpose for establishing these operational standards is to allow the establishment and operation of large family child care homes consistent with state law, while maintaining the residential character of neighborhoods and promoting compatibility with adjacent residences. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2005-02, 2005)

 

19.33.020 Limitations.
     Large family child care homes may care for up to fourteen children if the following conditions are met:

     A.    The operator of a family child care home obtains and maintains a state license throughout the operation of the child care home. The operator shall annually provide the community development department with a copy of the state receipt for payment of annual fees.

     B.     The licensee obtains a permit in accordance with Section 19.33.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2005-02, 2005)

 

19.33.030 Operational standards.
     Large family child care homes shall be operated in accordance with the following standards:

     A.    Large family child care homes shall arrange staggered times for clients to drop off and pick up children.

     B.     Any side or rear yard areas intended for child care use shall be surrounded by a solid fence or wall with a minimum height of six feet.

     C.     Outdoor recreational equipment and play areas shall be set back a minimum of five feet from perimeter property lines. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2005-02, 2005)

 

19.33.040 Large family child care homes permit.
     A ministerial permit from the community development department shall be required prior to commencing a large family childcare operation, in accordance with the following:

     A.    An application for a large family child care home permit shall be filed with the community development department on forms provided by the department, accompanied by the applicable fee, and a current copy of the state license.

     B.     The application shall contain a written list of the purpose, limitations, and standards listed in this chapter, and the operator shall sign an agreement to operate the childcare home consistent with these requirements.

     C.     Within five calendar days after filing the application, the community development director or designee shall approve or deny the permit, based on the ability and agreement of the applicant to meet the purpose, limitations, and standards of this ordinance.

     D.    Any large family child care home permit may be suspended or revoked by the community development director if and when it is determined that the operation is being conducted:

     a.     In violation of any city, state, or federal code, ordinance, or regulation;

     b.     To the detriment of the public’s health, safety, or welfare;

     c.     Inconsistently with the purpose, limitations, and standards of this chapter.

     E.     No large family child care home permit shall be transferred or assigned to another location or person. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2005-02, 2005)

 

Chapter 19.34 CONVERSIONS OF SENIOR HOUSING TO NON-SENIOR HOUSING
19.34.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish necessary and appropriate policies related to conversion of senior housing projects to non-senior housing projects. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.020 Findings.
     A.    California’s Unruh Civil Rights Act (Civil Code Section 51.1 et seq.) expressly allows private parties to establish housing for senior citizens and the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. Section 3601 et seq.) expressly allows for “housing for older persons.”

     B.     State law encourages “senior citizen housing developments.” Specifically, Government Code Section 65915 requires cities to provide “senior citizen housing developments” density bonuses for development of such facilities and provide lower parking standards. Therefore, by law, “senior only” housing facilities may receive concessions and incentives that non-senior facilities do not receive.

     C.     On average, senior citizens make less impact on the environment than do non-seniors. Occupancy rates for seniors are significantly less than non-senior occupancy rates. Seniors make substantially fewer trips than non-seniors. Seniors drive fewer vehicles, and therefore require fewer parking spaces per housing unit than do non-seniors. This chapter acknowledges these facts when it applies a lower parking requirement for certain senior housing facilities than would have otherwise applied.

     D.    Because, on average, senior citizens occupy few persons per dwelling unit than non-senior citizen residents, seniors use substantially less water per household than non-seniors. Therefore, if there is no discretionary process to administer changes from senior to non-senior mobilehome parks, the city’s zero water footprint policy will not be applied to such land use changes. This will further jeopardize the city’s ability to supply water to its residents in accordance with the fee structure adopted by the city council.

     E.     Based on the foregoing, newly created or authorized non-senior facilities have a greater impact on the environment than do existing senior facilities. Therefore, the city determines that all conversions, as defined in this chapter, are “projects” within the meaning of Public Resources Code Section 21065.

     F.     Government Code Section 65595 et seq., permit all of the following developments to pay lower developer fees to schools: developments which qualify as “senior citizen housing,” “multilevel facility for the elderly” or as a “residential care facility for the elderly,” and manufactured homes and mobilehomes in certain communities limited to older persons.

     G.    Government Code Sections 65595.1 and 65595.2 demonstrate that cities should often disallow these senior housing uses from converting to non-senior housing uses until the full amount of school fees that would have otherwise been required to be paid were, in fact, paid.

     H.    If a previously approved facility obtained concessions or incentives because it indicated that it would qualify and operate as a senior housing project but subsequently lost its qualifying status, the development facility should mitigate the impacts on the community, including but not limited to offsetting the concessions and incentives previously received.

     I.      If the city applied reduced public park dedications for senior restricted developments, or lowered fees for vehicular parking, transportation, and/or schooling because the project originally qualified as a senior housing project and then that project later converted to non-senior housing, the public would be harmed to the extent that the converted project did not provide the full amount of mitigation that would have been otherwise required. If a conversion occurs, the city should require that all impacts from the conversion are mitigated. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.030 Definitions.
     The following terms shall have the following meanings for the purposes of this chapter:

     A.    “Concessions or incentives” mean any concession or incentive issued or awarded to a project by the city by virtue of the project qualifying as a senior housing project. Concessions and incentives shall include, but are not limited to: (1) utilization of the lesser parking standards described in Municipal Code Chapter 19.21 or similar ordinance; (2) receipt of a density bonus, incentive, or lower parking requirements consistent with Government Code Section 65915(b)(3); (3) any preference received on account of qualifying as “housing for older persons” under federal law, having been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens” under state law, or qualifying as a “senior citizen housing development” as defined under Civil Code Section 51.3 or 51.11, or similar authority; (4) any development which received any benefit pursuant to Section 65995 et seq. (relating to lowered developer fees to fund school construction); or (5) any other reduction in design or development standards, financial assistance, or other development related concession or incentive that the project received from the city on account of the project intending to become, or for actually becoming a senior housing project.

     B.     “Convert” or “conversion” means changing from existing senior housing or a senior housing project to a housing project that could not qualify as a senior housing project.

     C.     “Director” shall mean the city of American Canyon director of community development.

     D.    “Senior citizen” shall mean any individual who is fifty-five years or older.

     E.     “Senior housing project” means any project qualifying as senior housing under state or federal law that, at the time of initial city approval, received a concession or incentive. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.040 Duty to obtain conversion permit.
     No senior housing project shall convert to a non-senior housing project unless the project first obtains a conversion permit pursuant to this chapter, and consistent with the procedures outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.050 Procedure to obtain a conversion permit.
     Consistent with this chapter, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on all complete applications for conversion permits. The planning commission shall issue a conversion permit if it makes findings consistent with the following:

     A.    The proposed use of the property as something other than a senior housing project is in accord with the objectives of this chapter and the purposes of the zone in which the project site is located.

     B.     The new use and operation is consistent with the general plan.

     C.     The project will comply with all parking requirements of Municipal Code Chapter 19.21 which apply to non-senior facilities. If the city, however, in its sole and reasonable discretion determines that requiring parking spaces pursuant to this subsection would be detrimental to the public welfare, the applicant shall instead provide reasonable alternative parking accommodations. As part of the city’s determination of whether the public welfare would be harmed, the city shall consider the ability of the applicant to provide additional parking without unreasonably degrading the appearance of the real property surrounding the structure.

     D.    The applicant has paid or is required to pay as a condition of granting the conversion permit all required fees, including those required by Government Code Sections 65995 et seq., and Education Code Section 17620 relating to developer fees paid to school districts, and the city has received any authorization required to have been filed by the Napa Valley Unified School District pursuant to Government Code Section 65595.1, or any other section.

     E.     All required notices were given, including those required by Government Code Section 65995.2 relating to school impact fees for mobilehome conversions, and Civil Code Section 798.25 relating to six-month notice of changes of regulations of mobilehome parks.

     F.     The applicant has complied with all actions required by the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.) including any duty to assess impact on the environment and resulting mitigation. These mitigation measures will address identified impacts to traffic, public transportation, noise, parking space, and vehicle parking and such other impacts as are identified by appropriate environmental review. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.060 Conversion permit applications.
     New Applications. An application for a conversion permit shall be filed with the director or the director’s designee by the property owner or an authorized agent on a form(s) prescribed by the director, and shall include information and/or maps which are deemed by the director to be necessary to enable the approving authority to make the required findings. The director or the director’s designee shall make available, in writing, a listing of the information and/or maps which are required to be submitted. Concurrent applications may be filed and processed. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.070 Application fees and refunds.
     A.    An application fee for a conversion permit shall accompany the application submittal requirements which are filed with the director. The fee(s) shall cover the costs of processing the applications in accordance with a schedule adopted from time to time by city council resolution.

     B.     Application fee refunds shall be authorized by the director for applications that are withdrawn upon written request and proof of payment by the applicant, in accordance with a refund schedule adopted from time to time by city council resolution.

     C.     Portions of application fees paid to another jurisdiction or agency for services to be rendered in connection with the application shall not be refunded by the city. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit another jurisdiction or agency from refunding fees directly to the applicant. If fees have been paid out to another jurisdiction or agency, the administrative fee related to coordinating the review of applications by other jurisdictions or agencies is nonrefundable. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.080 Investigation.
     The director shall investigate and prepare a written report on all applications. Copies of the report shall be provided to the approving authority and the applicant at least three calendar days prior to a hearing on the application. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.090 Hearing and notice procedure required.
     A.    Responsible Parties. The director, in the case of the planning commission and city clerk, in the case of the city council, shall set the time and place of the required public hearings. The hearing body, i.e., the planning commission or city council, may change the time or place of their hearing, or may continue their hearing from time to time.

     B.     Public Hearing Notice. Notice of public hearings shall be given in accordance with Title 7 of the California Government Code, as amended, except as indicated below:

     1.     For applications that have adjacent parcels which are five acres or larger, the notification radius shall be one thousand feet up to a maximum of twenty-five lots, whichever is greater.

     2.     For applications that the director deems to have greater effect than the normal three hundred-foot radius, the director may increase the notification radius to one thousand feet or other appropriate distance. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.100 Review of applications and approving authority.
     A.    Planning Commission. The planning commission shall be responsible for the review and approval of conversion permits.

     B.     City Council. The city council shall be responsible for the review and approval of conversion permits only upon appeal by an interested party when an appeal is filed in accordance with Section 19.34.120. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.110 Findings required.
     No conversion permit shall be issued unless all the findings required by Section 19.34.020 were made. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.120 Appeals.
     An appeal of a planning commission decision may be made by an interested party to the city council. The appeal shall be filed within ten calendar days of the commission decision by filing a letter of appeal with the director on forms furnished by the director. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council.

     The director shall schedule the appeal for a hearing before the city council within thirty calendar days. Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in this chapter not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision.

     The city council may affirm, modify, attach additional conditions to the decision which was appealed, or reverse any planning commission decision, making findings required by this chapter and/or state law. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.130 New application following a denial.
     An application for a conversion permit on the same property or substantially the same property following the same request, shall not be accepted within one calendar year of the date of denial. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.140 Expiration and time extensions.
     A conversion permit approval shall expire twenty-four months after final approval unless:

     A.    The new use has commenced; or

     B.     Where improvements are required, applicable permits were issued, and construction has commenced; or

     C.     An application for a time extension is filed prior to the expiration of the permit and the planning commission granted the application. If an application for extension is filed prior to the expiration of the permit, one additional year may be granted by the planning commission. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.150 Modifications and/or revisions.
     Modifications or revisions to an approved application shall require re-application and shall conform to all of the submittal requirements and fees in effect at the time of application. Only the approving authority shall approve modifications or revisions to approved applications and only after the hearings required in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.160 Applications to shall run with the land.
     Approved conversion permit applications shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the application. All conditions of the application shall continue to apply to the new owner. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

19.34.170 Suspension and/or revocation.
     Suspension for Violation. Upon violation of any applicable provision of this chapter, or, if the application was granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, the application shall automatically be suspended. The approving authority shall, within forty calendar days of the suspension of the conversion permit, hold a hearing in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 19.40. (Ord. 2009-06 § 4, 2009)

 

Chapter 19.35 OUTDOOR SALE OF SEASONAL AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
19.35.010 Outdoor sale of seasonal agricultural products.
     A temporary stand for the outdoor sale of seasonal agricultural products shall be permitted in any agricultural, commercial or industrial district or in similar areas and specific plans, unless otherwise prohibited, and on all church and school sites and on vacant residential property abutting an arterial or highway subject to the following requirements:

     A.    Establishment of Use/Time Limit. Prior to beginning sale of any product, the applicant shall obtain a seasonal sales permit from the city of American Canyon. The seasonal sales permit shall be good for a period of time not to exceed one hundred twenty days from date of issuance.

     B.     Merchandise to be Sold. The activity shall be limited to the sale of agricultural products.

     C.     Electrical Permit. The applicant shall secure an electrical permit from the community development department if the facility is to be energized.

     D.    Fire Prevention Standards. The facility shall comply with the fire prevention standards as approved and enforced by the fire chief and/or American Canyon fire protection district.

     E.     Removal of Facility. The facility shall be removed and the premises cleared of all debris and restored to the condition prior to the establishment of the facility within fourteen days of the expiration of the time limit.

     F.     Temporary Outdoor Permit. In lieu of the above requirements, an approved temporary outdoor permit per Chapter 5.05 shall be required when the sales facility meets the definition of a special event per Section 5.05.020. (Ord. 2010-07 § 3, 2010)

 

Chapter 19.36 COTTAGE FOOD OPERATIONS
19.36.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to implement requirements of Assembly Bill 1616 (Chapter 415, effective January 1, 2013), which amended state law, including, but not limited to, California Governments Code 6.1 Part 1 of Division of Title 5, Sections 109947, 110050, 110460, 11955, 113789, 114021, 114023, 114390, 114405, and 114409 and California Health and Safety Code Part 7 of Division 104 to allow for cottage food operations, establish standards for cottage food businesses as an accessory use to dwelling units, and to ensure compatibility with the residential character of the neighborhoods in which such businesses are located. (Ord. 2013-07 § 4, 2013)

 

19.36.020 Definition.
     “Cottage food operations (CFO)” means an enterprise as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758, holding a permit or registration issued by the county of Napa and the city of American Canyon in accordance with this chapter, and is generally an accessory business located within a residence where non-potentially hazardous food products are prepared or packaged for direct, indirect, or direct and indirect sale to consumers. (Ord. 2013-07 § 4, 2013)

 

19.36.030 Applicability.
     A cottage food operation is an accessory use permitted in any legally established dwelling, subject to standards in Section 19.36.040(D) and (E), and is a distinct use different than a home occupation. Cottage food operations are not required to comply with the requirements of home occupations as defined in Chapter 19.29. (Ord. 2013-07 § 4, 2013)

 

19.36.040 Standards.
     Cottage food operations are permitted accessory uses to residences provided that all of the following standards are met:

     A.    Size. The use is confined to the registered or permitted area, as defined by Section 113758 of the California Health and Safety Code and shall not exceed two hundred square feet or twenty-five percent of the principal dwelling, attached or detached garage, or any other accessory structure. A garage may be used for storage only when sufficient parking spaces remain available to meet current residential parking standards.

     B.     Indoors. The use, including any storage, is conducted entirely indoors within the principal dwelling, garages, or accessory structures.

     C.     Employees. The use is carried on only by an immediate family member or household member occupying the dwelling, with no more than one nonresident, non-family member person employed.

     D.    Traffic. The operation shall not invite customers to the residence and the operation shall not transact business with customers at the residence.

     E.     Traffic. No pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood.

     F.     Signage. No on-site signage or advertisement identifying the CFO is permitted.

     G.    Vehicle. No vehicle over one ton carrying capacity may be used in conduct of a CFO.

     H.    Parking. One parking space that may be covered or uncovered shall be available for each employee of the cottage food operator that is a nonresident family member or nonfamily member employee.

     I.      Deliveries. Merchandise produced on the premises may be delivered to customers or clients. The subsection does not prohibit the operation from the delivery of merchandise from the residence to customers or the pick-up or delivery by commercial parcel service companies.

     J.      Noise. No equipment or process shall be used in such CFO that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable off the lot to the normal senses. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used that creates visual or audible interference upon any radio or television receivers off the premises, or cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. A CFO shall not cause any adverse impacts such as offensive odors or excessive noise that are incompatible with the residential area or in violation with the provisions of any applicable laws or regulations.

     K.    No On-Site Dining. On-site dining or tasting events for customers are prohibited.

     L.     County Authorization Required. The applicant shall furnish to the city evidence of the application for, or issuance of, the necessary permits and/or registration for operation from the county of Napa. (Ord. 2013-07 § 4, 2013)

 

19.36.050 Cottage food operation permits.
     A.    Applicability. No person shall commence or carry on any cottage food operation within the city without first having obtained a cottage food operation permit.

     B.     Application.

     1.     An application for a cottage food operation permit shall be filed in writing with the community development department by the person who intends commencing or carrying on a home occupation. Where the applicant is not the owner of the property on which the cottage food operation is proposed to be conducted, the application shall be accompanied by the written consent of the owner or his or her agent.

     2.     The application shall be upon forms furnished by and in a manner prescribed by the community development director and shall be accompanied by any applicable filing fee established by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Review and Approval.

     1.     Within ten working days after the filing of an application for a cottage food operation permit, the community development director shall review the application and approve, conditionally-approve or deny the permit. The director may approve or conditionally-approve an application for a cottage food operation permit if he or she finds it consistent with the purpose and standards of this chapter.

     2.     The director shall serve a notice of such action upon the applicant by mailing a copy of such notice to the applicant at the address appearing on the application.

     3.     Any person aggrieved by the action of the director upon an application for a cottage food operation permit may appeal such an action by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within the ten days after the date of the mailing of such action. The director shall refer all appeals to the planning commission. The commission shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest available date. The applicant shall be given notice of the time and date set for such consideration.

     4.     An appeal of a commission decision may be made by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk. The notice shall comply with the requirements of Section 2.04.110 of the municipal code except that the notice of appeal shall be filed within ten days after the decision of the commission and appeal shall be subject to the procedures set forth in Chapter 2.04 of the municipal code.

     D.    Suspension and Revocation.

     1.     Any cottage food operation permit may be suspended or revoked when it is determined that the cottage food operation authorized by the permit has been or is being conducted:

     a.     In violation of any city, county and/or state code, ordinance, rule or regulation;

     b.     In a disorderly manner;

     c.     To the detriment of the general public; or

     d.     In a different form than which the permit was issued.

     2.     Any cottage food operation permit that has been issued shall not be revoked or suspended unless a hearing shall first have been held by the community development director. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least ten days prior to the date set forth for such hearing. The notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for revoking or suspending the permit. The notice shall be served by mailing, by registered mail, a copy of such notice to the permittee at the address appearing on the permit.

     3.     Any person aggrieved by the action of the director upon an application for a cottage food operation permit may appeal an action by filing a written notice of appeal to the director within ten days after the date of mailing of the director’s action on the suspension or revocation of the permit. Appeals shall be processed as set forth in subsection C of this section.

     E.     Transferability. No cottage food operation permit shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall the permit authorize any person, other than the person named therein, to commence or carry on the home occupation for which the permit was issued. (Ord. 2013-07 § 4, 2013)

 

19.36.060 Business license required.
     Every cottage food operation shall obtain a business license. If the business license is not renewed annually, the cottage food operation permit shall automatically expire. (Ord. 2013-07 § 4, 2013)

 

Chapter 19.37 MOBILE SERVICES AND VENDORS
19.37.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies that support the safe operation of mobile services and vendors within American Canyon. Mobile services and vendors help foster job growth, serve as incubators for entrepreneurs seeking to establish a brick-and-mortar business, help promote a sense of identity and community, and provide additional product and service choices for residents and consumers. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

     “Class 1 mobile vendor,” also referred to as an “ice cream truck,” means a motor vehicle engaged in the curbside vending or sale of frozen or refrigerated desserts, confections, ice cream, or prepackaged candies, prepackaged snack foods, or soft drinks, primarily intended for the sale to children under twelve years of age. Class 1 mobile vendors typically roam residential neighborhoods in search of customers.

     “Class 2 mobile vendor,” also referred to as a “food truck,” means any vehicle, as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped and primarily used for preparing, cooking, and selling food. These vehicles are not necessarily limited to edible items and may also sell non-food sundries as an accessory item to food sales. This type of vendor may roam among sites for less than one hour per stop or may remain in one location for one hour or more.

     “Class 3 mobile vendor” means a mobile business that sells non-edible goods or provides services to multiple customers in a business day at a single location. Examples of this type of vendor include mobile florists, mobile salons, or mobile dog grooming. All Class 3 vendors must obtain a temporary outdoor promotion permit (Municipal Code Section 5.05.045).

     “Fixed location” means a place on private property that the mobile vendor is parked for more than one hour.

     “Mobile vending vehicle” means any vehicle that is used for the purposes of providing sales of products or services as defined in this chapter.

     “Mobile vendor” means an individual or business that owns or operates a mobile service or vending vehicle.

     “Operator” means any person or entity that:

     1.     Owns, controls, manages, and/or leases a mobile service or vending vehicle; and/or

     2.     Contracts with any person(s) to drive, operate, prepare food in, and/or vend from, a mobile vending vehicle; and/or

     3.     Drives, operates, prepares food in, or vends from, a mobile vending vehicle.

     “Permit” means the business license or entitlement approval required under this chapter or any other chapter of this code.

     “Person” means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other legal entity of any kind or nature.

     “Restocking” means the transfer of food, goods or merchandise to a mobile vending vehicle from any other person or vehicle and includes, but is not limited to, loading and delivery of food, goods and merchandise.

     “School” means any public and/or private school in which instruction is given in any or all grades through grade twelve.

     “Vend” or “vending” means soliciting, displaying, or offering produce, prepared or unprepared food, non-food sundries, and/or services of any kind for sale or barter or exchange from a mobile vending vehicle in a public place within the city. “Vend” or “vending” includes the movement or standing of a food vending vehicle for the purpose of searching for, obtaining and/or soliciting retail sales or produce, prepared food, or non-food sundries, including, but not limited to, goods, wares, or merchandise. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.030 Operational requirements.
     A.    The following table defines the general operation requirements:

 

Table 19.37.030

Requirement

Class 1 – Ice Cream Trucks

Class 2 – Food Trucks

Class 3 – Other Mobile Vendors

Days of the week

All

M – F (may be extended to Saturday and Sunday with approval of a temporary outdoor promotion permit)

All

Time of operation

9:00 a.m. – 8:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever occurs first

6:00 a.m. – 6:00 p.m. (may be extended at the discretion of the community development director)

7:00 a.m. – 7:00 p.m. (or as defined by temporary outdoor promotion permit)

Maximum time in one location

10 minutes

4 hours

6 hours

May occupy a fixed location

No

Yes

Yes

Permitted zones

All

Light Industrial (LI), General Industrial (GI) with mobile service vendor (MSV) permit – other zoning districts with approval of a temporary outdoor promotion permit

All zoning districts require approval of a temporary outdoor promotion permit

Cleaning requirement

50′1

50′1

50′1

School limitation

No sales citywide from 15 minutes before and until 1 hour after the end of the public school day

No limitation

No limitation

Vending allowed in public right-of-way

Yes

No

No

May use amplified sound

Yes, but amplified sound must cease when vehicle is stopped to sell ice cream

No

No

         1            Fifty feet represents the minimum cleaning radius, but temporary outdoor promotion permits (Municipal Code Section 5.05.045) may be required to extend this area.

 

     B.     All operators shall comply with the following additional regulations:

     1.     Each operator shall conspicuously display a city of American Canyon business license inside each mobile vending vehicle.

     2.     All mobile service and vendor staff shall carry legal identification.

     3.     Every mobile vending vehicle shall permanently affix the name, address, and telephone number of the business on the left and right sides of the vehicle with four-inch letters that contrast in color to the vehicle paint.

     4.     Vending may not occur until the mobile vending vehicle has been brought to a complete stop and lawfully parked (Vehicle Code Section 22456).

     5.     A mobile vending vehicle may not be restocked while the vehicle is on any public or private street.

     6.     A mobile vending vehicle may not receive electrical power or other utilities from any public or private property.

     7.     Class 1 and Class 2 mobile vendor operators shall conspicuously display a food handling permit or other health permit as required by law inside each food vending vehicle.

     8.     All mobile vendors shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all trash and refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle. The operator of the mobile vending vehicle shall pick up all trash and refuse generated by the operator’s vending during the time the vehicle is stopped, that is within not less than a fifty-foot radius of the vehicle, before the vehicle is moved, or throughout the day as necessary to maintain clean surroundings. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.040 Mobile service and vendor permit.
     A.    A person desiring to engage in a mobile vendor operation shall obtain a mobile service and vendor permit. Each mobile vendor and services applicant shall submit the following information:

     1.     A written application.

     2.     An application fee.

     3.     A city of American Canyon business license.

     4.     A copy of a current Napa County environmental health permit, if applicable.

     5.     Current business mailing address.

     6.     Legal names of the mobile vendor and all persons operating or vending or providing service out of the mobile vending vehicle.

     7.     Proof of current vehicle registration.

     8.     Proof of automobile insurance as required by the Vehicle Code.

     9.     A photograph of the front, rear and each side of each mobile vending vehicle.

     10.   Dimensioned sample or rendering of proposed signage.

     11.   A signed affidavit agreeing to the operational standards in Section 19.37.030.

     B.     If the mobile vendor is proposed at a fixed location, the mobile vendor shall provide the following in addition to the submittal requirements in subsection A:

     1.     A site plan depicting the location of the primary use and operation of the mobile vending vehicle.

     2.     A table identifying the number of required parking spaces, and the number of provided parking spaces.

     3.     A note identifying the hours and days of week of operation.

     4.     An affidavit in a form approved by the city from the property owner (if other than self) permitting the mobile food vendor to locate on the site and allowing the use of on-site restroom facilities.

     C.     Class 2 mobile vendors shall also provide written proof of a current contract with a commissary. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.050 Renewal permit.
     A.    Each mobile vendor shall submit the following information for an annual mobile service and vendor permit renewal:

     1.     A written application.

     2.     An application fee.

 

     3.     A city of American Canyon business license.

     4.     A copy of a current Napa County environmental health permit, if applicable.

     5.     Current business mailing address.

     6.     Legal names of the mobile vendor and all persons operating or vending out of the mobile vending vehicle.

     7.     Proof of current vehicle registration.

     8.     Proof of automobile insurance as required by the Vehicle Code.

     9.     A photograph of the front, rear and each side of each mobile vending vehicle (if vehicle or graphics on the vehicle have changed in the past year).

     10.   Dimensioned sample or rendering of proposed signage (if vehicle or graphics on the vehicle have changed in the past year).

     11.   A signed affidavit agreeing to the operational standards in Section 19.37.030.

     12.   Class 2 mobile vendors must also provide written proof of payment to a commissary within the prior twelve months. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.060 Exemptions.
     The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter as specified below.

     A.    Mobile vending conducted in connection with:

     1.     The operations of a state certified farmers’ market.

     2.     An event authorized by a temporary outdoor promotion permit, encroachment permit, or other permit or entitlement issued by the city, such as an authorized street fair or a design permit.

     3.     An event at a private school facility.

     4.     A public park with prior written authorization from the parks and recreation director.

     5.     A construction site of one acre or larger with active grading or building permits.

     6.     A private event or party on the site of the event with no retail sale to the general public.

     7.     A single request for service or sales where the mobile vendor conducts no retail sales to the general public. Examples of these services include delivery vehicles, mobile windshield repair, caterers, etc., that provide deliveries or services to more than one business or residential address in the course of a business day. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.070 Penalty for violation.
     Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction and/or by administrative citation and penalty, including fines and/or revocation of business license and permits. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.080 Permit denial.
     Any one of the following may constitute grounds for denial of a permit to operate or renewal application:

     A.    The proposed mobile vending activity does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the applicable building, zoning, fire, safety, and health regulations.

     B.     The applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a permit to operate.

     C.     The mobile service and vendor permit application and/or renewal permit application was incomplete.

     D.    The director of community development concludes that such business has been, will be, or is apt to become a public nuisance or in any way detrimental to the public interest. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

19.37.090 Appeal.
     Any person aggrieved by any decision of the director of community development made pursuant to this chapter may appeal the decision to the planning commission pursuant to the provisions of Sections 2.04.070 through 2.04.100 of this code. (Ord. 2015-04 § 2, 2015)

 

Chapter 19.38 EMERGENCY SHELTERS
19.38.010 Location of emergency shelters.
     Emergency shelters are permitted as an allowed use in the community commercial (CC) and light industrial (LI) subject to the location restrictions identified in this section. Emergency shelters are also permitted within the medium density residential (RM), high density residential (RH) with approval of a conditional use permit and subject to the location restrictions identified in this section. Emergency shelters shall not be located within less than three hundred from any other existing emergency shelter facility. (Ord. 2014-06 § 6, 2014)

 

19.38.020 Standards.
     In addition to the development standards in the underlying zoning district, emergency shelters shall comply with the standards set forth in this section. In the event of conflict between these standards and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply.

     A.    Physical Characteristics.

     1.     Compliance with applicable state and local uniform housing and building code requirements.

     2.     The facility shall have on-site security during all hours when the shelter is open.

     3.     Facilities shall provide exterior lighting on pedestrian pathways and parking lot areas on the property. Lighting shall reflect away from residential areas and public streets.

     4.     Facilities shall provide secure areas for personal property.

     B.     Limited Number of Beds per Facility. Emergency shelters shall not exceed forty beds.

     C.     Limited Terms of Stay. The maximum term of staying at an emergency shelter is six months in a consecutive twelve-month period.

     D.    Parking. The emergency shelter shall provide on-site parking at a rate of two spaces per facility for staff plus one space per six occupants allowed at the maximum capacity.

     E.     Emergency Shelter Management. A management plan is required for all emergency shelters to address management experience, good neighbor issues, transportation, client supervision, client services, and food services. Such plan shall be submitted to and approved by the community development department prior to operation of the emergency shelter. The plan shall include a floor plan that demonstrates compliance with the physical standards of this chapter. The operator of each emergency shelter shall annually submit the management plan to the planning, inspections and permitting department with updated information for review and approval. (Ord. 2014-06 § 6, 2014)

 

Chapter 19.39 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
19.39.010 Purpose of the chapter.
     The purpose of this chapter is to increase the supply of smaller units and rental housing units by allowing accessory dwelling units on lots containing a single-family dwelling in various residential districts as shown on Table 19.10.040, and to establish design and development standards for accessory dwelling units to ensure that they are compatible with existing neighborhoods and consistent with the general plan and its elements. Accessory dwelling units contribute needed housing to the community’s housing stock. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter apply to all lots that are occupied with a single-family dwelling unit and multifamily dwelling and zoned residential. Accessory dwelling units do not exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which the accessory dwelling unit is located, and are a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designation for the lot. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.030 General plan consistency.
     An accessory dwelling unit that conforms to this chapter shall be deemed to be an accessory use or an accessory building and shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for the lot. The accessory dwelling units shall not be considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.2(a)(8). (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.040 Definitions.
     “Accessory dwelling unit” means one additional attached or detached residential dwelling unit one thousand two hundred square feet or less that is on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling, and provides permanent and independent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation for one or more persons. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:

     1.     An efficiency unit, as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

     2.     A manufactured home, as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Junior accessory dwelling unit” means one accessory dwelling unit that is five hundred square feet or less that is contained entirely in the primary residence.

     “Primary residence” means the residential dwelling that existed on the single-family parcel before or constructed concurrent with the accessory dwelling unit. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.050 Development standards—Generally.
     A.    The addition of an accessory dwelling unit to a primary residence requires the primary residence to remain in compliance with the applicable development standards for that home.

     B.     Each accessory dwelling unit requires approval of a building permit.

     C.     The applicant of each accessory dwelling unit building permit application shall identify the anticipated rent and household size of the new accessory dwelling unit.

     D.    One detached accessory dwelling unit and one junior accessory dwelling unit are permitted per single-family parcel.

     E.     A single-family primary residence dwelling must exist on the parcel before the accessory dwelling unit is built or it shall be built concurrently with the accessory dwelling unit.

     F.     Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the lot area, yard setback, height, and building coverage standards of the applicable residential zoning district as described in Section 19.10.050 except for the following:

     1.     The accessory dwelling unit is built in the garage and the garage setback is closer than the setback for the primary residence.

     2.     If the accessory dwelling unit is built in an existing accessory structure, the existing accessory structure setbacks apply and not the setbacks for a single-family house.

     3.     Existing setbacks apply to existing structure conversions.

     4.     Development standards shall be waived to permit a detached accessory dwelling unit that is no greater than eight hundred square feet, sixteen feet in height, and has four-foot setbacks.

     5.     The applicant shall not be required to correct pre-existing nonconforming zoning conditions as conditions of approval.

     G.    Accessory Dwelling Living Area Standard.

     1.     Detached accessory dwelling units shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet and sixteen feet in height.

     2.     Attached accessory dwelling units may occupy up to fifty percent of the primary residence living area but shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet.

     3.     Junior accessory dwelling units shall not exceed five hundred square feet.

     H.    Fire Sprinkler Requirements.

     1.     Accessory dwelling units shall comply with all applicable fire safety provisions of state law as well as locally adopted building and fire codes under Title 16. Examples include, but are not limited to, standards such as water supply and fire department access.

     2.     Under state law, in general, accessory dwelling units shall not be required to be equipped with fire sprinklers unless fire sprinklers are required for the primary residence. For purposes of this requirement, the following standards shall apply:

     a.     When the primary residence has fire sprinklers, the accessory dwelling unit shall be constructed with fire sprinklers.

     b.     When the primary residence does not have fire sprinklers, the junior accessory dwelling unit and attached accessory dwelling unit do not require fire sprinklers unless the junior accessory dwelling unit or attached accessory dwelling unit increases the size of the house by at least fifty percent.

     c.     Detached accessory dwelling units require fire sprinklers unless the primary residence does not have fire sprinklers.

     I.      Deed Restrictions. Prior to issuing a building permit for an accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall file with the county recorder, in a format with language approved by the city, a declaration of restrictions containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the present owner and stating that:

     1.     The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately.

     2.     The restrictions are binding upon any successor in ownership of the property.

     3.     The property owner must occupy as a primary residence one of the two dwelling units on the property, either the primary or accessory dwelling unit except accessory dwelling unit and junior accessory dwelling unit applications submitted between January 1, 2020 to January 1, 2025.

     J.      Impact Fees.

     1.     Accessory dwelling units less than seven hundred and fifty square feet are exempt from all city impact fees.

     2.     Impact fees for accessory dwelling units equal or greater than seven hundred and fifty square feet are exempt from water and sewer capacity fees. All remaining impact fees shall be charged proportionately in relation to the square footage of the primary dwelling unit.

     K.    Accessory Dwelling Units on Multifamily Dwellings. The building division shall review and approve ministerially accessory dwelling units under the following conditions.

     1.     Non-habitable area within an existing multifamily dwelling structure, including, but not limited to: storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements or garages, may be converted to one or more accessory dwelling units if each accessory dwelling unit complies with state dwelling unit building standards.

     2.     An existing multifamily dwelling shall be permitted to accommodate additional accessory dwelling units in an amount up to twenty-five percent of the existing multifamily dwelling units.

     3.     An existing multifamily dwelling is permitted up to two detached accessory dwelling units on the same lot. Each detached accessory dwelling unit shall subject to a height limit of sixteen feet and four-foot rear yard and side yard setbacks.

     L.     CC&Rs. As defined in California Civil Code Section 4751 or any successor statute, any covenant, condition, and restriction (CC&R) or contained in any deed, contract, security instrument, or other instrument affecting the transfer or sale of any interest in a planned development, and any provision of a governing document, that effectively prohibits or unreasonably restricts the construction or use of an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit on a lot zoned for single-family residential use that meets the above-described minimum standards (subsections F and G) established for those units shall be void and unenforceable. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.060 Junior accessory dwelling unit standards.
     A.    Each junior accessory dwelling unit shall comply with the following building standards.

     1.     Electric service may not exceed one hundred twenty volts.

     2.     No appliances may be fueled with natural gas or propane.

     3.     The dwelling must have its own exterior entrance.

     4.     The kitchen must include a sink, cooking appliance, counter surface, and storage cabinets that meet minimum building code standards.

     5.     The kitchen sink waste line may not exceed one and one-half inches.

     6.     The bathroom may be included in the unit or shared with the primary residence.

     7.     Junior accessory dwelling units are exempt from the building code wall separation requirements with the primary residence. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.070 Parking standards.
     A.    When accessory dwelling unit parking is required by this chapter or provided at the discretion of the homeowner, parking spaces may be covered or uncovered, provided as tandem parking on an existing driveway or on a paved surface in a setback or yard area.

     B.     Primary Residence. Parking for the primary residence must comply with Chapter 19.21.

     C.     Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit.

     1.     A minimum of one on-site parking space is required.

     2.     Notwithstanding subsection (C)(1), on-site parking is not required if the detached accessory dwelling unit is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit or within one block of a car-sharing pickup/drop-off location.

     D.    Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit. No on-site parking is required.

     E.     Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit. No on-site parking is required.

     F.     When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the city shall not require replacement of the off-street parking spaces.  (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.080 Operational standards.
     A.    The accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separately from the primary residence.

     B.     Owner-Occupancy. The property owner shall reside in either the primary residence or the accessory dwelling unit except accessory dwelling unit and junior accessory dwelling unit applications submitted between January 1, 2020 to January 1, 2025.

     C.     An accessory dwelling unit may not be rented for transient occupancy (less than thirty consecutive days). (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.090 Design standards.
     Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the following design standards that are intended to maximize the compatibility of accessory dwelling units with the neighborhoods in which they are located.

     A.    The accessory dwelling unit shall be designed so the site appearance remains that of a single-family residence, insofar as possible.

     B.     Where feasible, any new entrance to an accessory dwelling unit attached to the primary residence shall be located on the side or rear of the structure.

     C.     The accessory dwelling unit shall be aesthetically compatible with the primary residence and the surrounding neighborhood, including coordinating colors, materials, roofing, building height, other architectural features, and landscaping.

     D.    The accessory dwelling unit location and orientation shall not materially reduce the privacy otherwise enjoyed by residents of adjacent parcels. The community development director shall consider, but is not limited to considering, the placement of windows, decks and balconies, landscape screening, height, and number of stories in determining if privacy will be materially reduced.

     E.     An accessory dwelling unit connected to an onsite water treatment system requires a percolation test completed within the last five years, or, if the percolation test has been recertified, within the last ten years. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020; Ord. 2017-05 § 2, 2017)

 

19.39.100 Review and approval process.
     Permits for accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units shall be reviewed ministerially through the building division in accordance to Government Code Section 65852.2 (a) through (e).

     A.    The building division shall act on the application to create an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit within sixty days from the date the building division receives a completed application if there is an existing single-family or multifamily dwelling on the lot.

     B.     If the permit application to create an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit is submitted concurrently with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling on the lot, the building division may delay acting on the accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit permit application until the building division acts on the new single-family dwelling permit application, but the application to create the accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit shall be considered ministerial without discretionary review or a hearing. If the applicant requests a delay, the sixty day time period shall be tolled for the period of the delay. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020)

 

19.39.110 Code enforcement.
     For accessory dwelling units built before January 1, 2020, the property owner may request delayed enforcement of building standards for five years.

     A.    There shall be no delays granted after January 1, 2030.

 

     B.     There shall be no delays granted if the delay of the correction will cause a violation needed to protect health and safety. (Ord. 2020-04 § 1, 2020)

DIVISION 3. ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 19.40 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
19.40.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish review and approval procedures for permits and other approvals provided for by this title. Findings and other criteria for the approval of specific permits are contained in the appropriate chapters of this title. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.40.020 Community development director approvals.
     A.    Authority.

     1.     The following may be approved without a public hearing by the community development director, as specified elsewhere in this title:

     a.     Sign permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.23.

     b.     Home occupation permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.29.

     c.     Design permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.41.

     d.     Temporary trailer permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.30.

     e.     Classifications of use, pursuant to Chapter 19.05.

     f.      Minor modifications, pursuant to Chapter 19.45.

     g.     Minor variations, pursuant to Chapter 19.44.

     h.     Reasonable accommodation, pursuant to Chapter 19.52.

     2.     The following may be approved following a public hearing by the community development director, as specified elsewhere in this title:

     a.     Conditional fence permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.10.

     b.     Minor use permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.42.

     3.     The director may refer any of the above entitlements to the planning commission for review because of unique circumstances or a need for policy direction.

     B.     Application.

     1.     An application subject to the approval of the community development director shall be submitted to the community development department on forms specified by the director, and shall be accompanied by all maps, plans, and other information deemed necessary by the director.

     2.     An application shall be accompanied by any fee established by the city council.

     3.     The director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. If such additional information is not provided within ninety days, the application shall be considered withdrawn, and any unused fees shall be refunded to the applicant. At the director’s discretion, an additional thirty days may be granted to complete an application.

     C.     Public Hearings.

     1.     When a public hearing is required for an application, upon acceptance of the application as complete and following completion of any environmental review, a public hearing shall be set before the community development director.

 

     2.     Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the manner specified in this chapter.

     3.     A public hearing shall be held before the director at the time and place specified by the public notice. The director may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the director shall announce the time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

     D.    Decision.

     1.     The director shall comply with the time limits stipulated in California Government Code Section 65950 when making a decision on an application.

     2.     When a public hearing is required for an application, the director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application following the close of the public hearing, or within ten days thereafter. When a public hearing is not required, the director shall take such action within ten days of finding the application complete for processing. In both cases, such decision shall include any findings required by this title.

     3.     Written notice of the director’s decision, including any conditions of approval, shall be given by mail within five calendar days of the decision to the applicant and any person who has filed a written request for notice of the decision.

     4.     The director’s decision, including any conditions of approval, is final on expiration of ten calendar days following the decision unless a notice of appeal is filed with the director with such time. The date of the decision shall not be counted in determining the final date for filing an appeal. Should an appeal period end on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the final day for filing an appeal shall be the following Monday, or the next business day following a holiday.

     5.     Conditions of approval may be deleted or modified through a minor or major modification (Chapter 19.45), depending on the extent of the proposed change.

     E.     Appeal Procedures.

     1.     Any decision of the community development director made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant or any other person aggrieved by the director’s decision. Such appeal may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the director prior to the time the decision becomes final, on forms furnished by the director. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council.

     2.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in this chapter not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision.

     3.     The commission may affirm wholly or partly, reverse, modify, or attach additional conditions to the decision which was appealed.

     F.     Permit Issuance. No permit shall be issued prior to the expiration of any appeal period for an entitlement. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2009-10 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § l, 2001)

 

19.40.030 Planning commission approvals.
     A.    Authority. The following may be approved by the planning commission, as specified elsewhere in this title:

     1.     Conditional use permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.42;

     2.     Variances, pursuant to Chapter 19.43;

     3.     Sign permits and programs, pursuant to Chapter 19.23;

     4.     Planned community development permits, pursuant to Chapter 19.16;

     5.     Major modifications of previous planning commission approvals, pursuant to Chapter 19.45;

     6.     Applications and entitlements normally subject to community development director approval when filed in conjunction with any of the applications listed above;

     7.     Applications referred to the commission by the community development director because of unique circumstances, potential public controversy, or a need for policy direction.

     B.     Application.

     1.     An application subject to the approval of the planning commission shall be submitted to the community development department on forms specified by the commission, and shall be accompanied by all maps, plans, and other information deemed necessary by the director.

     2.     An application shall be accompanied by any fee established by the city council.

     3.     The director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. If such additional information is not provided within ninety days, the application shall be considered withdrawn, and any unused fees shall be refunded to the applicant. At the director’s discretion, an additional thirty days may be granted to complete an application.

     C.     Public Hearings.

     1.     Upon acceptance of an application as complete and following completion of any environmental review, a public hearing shall be set before the commission.

     2.     Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the manner specified in this chapter.

     3.     A public hearing shall be held before the commission at the time and place specified by the public notice. The commission may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. Any hearing may be continued provided that the time and place to which it is continued is announced prior to adjournment or recess.

     D.    Decision.

     1.     The commission shall comply with the time limits stipulated in California Government Code Section 65950 when making a decision on an application.

     2.     The commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application following the close of the public hearing on an application, or within thirty days thereafter, by resolution. Such resolution shall include any findings required by this title.

     3.     Written notice of the commission’s decision, including any conditions of approval, shall be given by mail within five calendar days of the decision to the applicant and any person who has filed a written request for notice of the decision.

     4.     The commission’s decision, including any conditions of approval, is final on expiration of ten calendar days following the decision unless a notice of appeal is filed with the community development director within such time. The date of the decision shall not be counted in determining the final date for filing an appeal. Should an appeal period end on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, the final day for filing an appeal shall be the following Monday, or the next business day following a holiday.

     5.     Requests to delete or modify a condition of approval, or to modify a project may be considered following the expiration of the appeal period at a properly-noticed public hearing before the commission.

     E.     Appeal Procedures.

     1.     Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council by the applicant or any other person aggrieved by the commission’s decision. Such appeal may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director prior to the time the decision becomes final, on forms furnished by the director. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council.

     2.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in this chapter not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision.

     3.     The city council may affirm wholly or partly, reverse, modify, or attach additional conditions to the decision which was appealed. The council’s decision shall be final on adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given.

     F.     Permit Issuance. No permit shall be issued prior to the expiration of any appeal period for an entitlement. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.40.040 City council approvals.
     A.    Authority. The following entitlements may be approved by the city council, as specified elsewhere in this title:

     1.     Zoning map and ordinance text amendments, pursuant to Chapter 19.48;

     2.     Planned community conceptual master plans, pursuant to Chapter 19.16;

     3.     Specific plans, pursuant to Chapter 19.17;

     4.     Development agreements;

     5.     Entitlements otherwise subject to community development director or planning commission approval when filed in conjunction with any of the applications listed above.

     B.     Applications.

     1.     An application for an entitlement subject to the approval of the city council shall be submitted to the community development department on forms specified by the council, and shall be accompanied by all maps, plans, and other information deemed necessary by the director.

     2.     An application shall be accompanied by any fee established by the council.

     3.     The director shall inform the applicant in writing within thirty calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that additional information is needed to complete the application. If such additional information is not provided within ninety days, the application shall be considered withdrawn, and any unused fees shall be refunded to the applicant. At the director’s discretion, an additional thirty days may be granted to complete an application.

     C.     Planning Commission Review.

     1.     Upon acceptance of an application subject to city council approval as complete and following completion of any environmental review, the application shall be referred to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The commission shall hold a public hearing on the matter in accordance with Section 19.40.030, and shall transmit to the council a written recommendation for approval, conditional approval or denial, including reasons for the recommendation.

     2.     Should the commission fail to act upon the referral within a reasonable time, the council may, by written notice, require the commission to render its report within forty days after the reference or such longer period as may be designated by the council. Upon receipt of the written notice, the commission, if it has not done so, shall conduct a public hearing. Failure to so report to the council within the stipulated time period shall be deemed to be a recommendation for approval of the application.

     D.    Public Hearings.

     1.     Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission, the city clerk shall set the application for a public hearing before the council. However, if the commission has recommended against approval of a referred application, the city council need not take further action unless an interested party files a request for a hearing with the city clerk within five days after the planning commission files its recommendation with the city council.

     2.     Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the manner specified in this chapter.

     3.     A public hearing shall be held before the council at the time and place specified by the public notice. The council may establish rules for the conduct of such hearings. Any hearing may be continued provided that the time and place to which it is continued is announced prior to adjournment or recess.

     E.     Decision.

     1.     The council may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission on an application, by resolution, following the close of the public hearing, or within thirty days thereafter. Such resolution shall include any findings required by this title.

     2.     Any modification of the application by the council not previously considered by the commission during its hearing, shall first be referred to the commission for a report and recommendation, but the commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the commission to report within forty days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification.

     3.     Written notice of the council’s decision, including any conditions of approval, shall be given by mail within five calendar days of the decision to the applicant and any person who has filed a written request for notice of the decision.

     4.     The council’s decision, including any conditions of approval, is final on adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination.

     5.     Subsequent requests to delete or modify a condition of approval, or modify a project may be considered at a properly-noticed public hearing before the council. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.40.050 Notice of public hearing.
     When a public hearing is required by this chapter, notice of the hearing shall be given in the manner specified in this section.

     A.    Contents of Notice. A required public hearing notice shall contain at least the date, time, and place of the hearing; the identity of the hearing body, and the nature and location of the application in sufficient detail for a member of the public to be able to understand the nature, intent and scale of the project or request.

     B.     Method of Noticing. At least ten calendar days before the date of any public hearing, required notice shall be given through all of the following actions:

     1.     Publishing such notice once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, or if none, in a newspaper of general circulation within the county of Napa; and

     2.     Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to all of the following:

     a.     The property owner,

     b.     The applicant,

     c.     The owners of all property within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is the subject of the application, and

     d.     Any person who has filed a written request for such notice;

     3.     For the purposes of this mailed or delivered notice, the last known names and addresses of property owners on the last county assessment roll shall be used. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered is greater than one thousand, a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation may be published at least ten days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.40.060 Permit revocation and modification.
     Any entitlement granted pursuant to this chapter may be modified or revoked by the official or decision-making body that originally granted the entitlement through the same procedures under which the entitlement was granted, for any of the following causes:

     A.    Any term or condition of the entitlement has not been complied with.

     B.     The property or portion thereof subject to the entitlement is used or maintained in violation of a statute, ordinance, law, or regulation.

     C.     The use for which the entitlement was granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety or as to constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 2002-07 Exh. A, 2002; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.40.070 Indemnification as condition of discretionary land use and development permits and approvals.
     Except where otherwise expressly prohibited by state or federal law, an applicant for any discretionary land use or development permit, license, authorization, entitlement, or other approval from the city of American Canyon or any of the city of American Canyon elected officials, officers, employees, attorneys, representatives, boards, commissions, volunteers, and agents shall as a prerequisite for the approval agree to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city of American Canyon, its elected officials, officers, employees, attorneys, representatives, boards, commissions, volunteers and agents from and against all claims, actions, including actions to arbitrate or mediate, damages, losses, judgments, liabilities, expenses and other costs, or proceedings against the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, attorneys, representatives, boards, commissions, volunteers, or agents to attack, modify, set aside, void, or annul an approval, conditional approval, permit, entitlement, environmental document, environmental clearance, mitigation plan, or any other document or any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made prior to granting of such approval, conditional approval, permit, entitlement, environmental clearance, environmental document, mitigation plan, or other document, by the city, including, without limitation, an action against an advisory agency, appeal board, or legislative body within the applicable limitation period.

     Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city has the right to participate in the defense of any claim, action, or proceeding provided the city bears its own costs and attorneys’ fees directly associated with such participation and defends the action in good faith. The applicant will not be required to pay or perform any settlement unless the applicant agrees to the settlement. (Ord. 2010-04 § 1, 2010)

 

19.40.080 Scope of indemnification requirement.
     A.    The obligation to defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless shall include the payment of all costs in connection with the defense of any claim, action, or proceeding challenging the entire or a portion of an approval, conditional approval, permit, entitlement or any other document of any related claim. Such defense costs include legal costs, attorneys’ fees (including a third party award of attorneys’ fees), and fees of persons and consultants retained by the city, arising out of, resulting from, or in connection with the city’s act or acts leading up to and including approval of any environmental document, environmental clearance, or mitigation plan granting approvals to the applicant, incurred on behalf of, or by, the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, representatives, attorneys, boards, commissions, volunteers and agents.

     B.     The obligation to defend, indemnify, and hold the city harmless shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of preparation of any administrative record by the city, staff time, copying costs, court costs, or attorneys’ fees arising out of a suit or challenge contesting the adequacy of a permit, approval, conditional approval, entitlement, environmental document, mitigation plan, environmental clearance, or any other document or approval related to the applicant’s project.

     The city will promptly notify the applicant of any claim, action, or proceeding and will cooperate fully in the defense. If the city fails to promptly notify the applicant of any claim, action, or proceeding, or the city fails to cooperate fully in the defense, the applicant shall not be responsible to defend, indemnify, or hold harmless the city.

     C.     In the event a legal challenge to a city permit, approval, conditional approval, environmental document, environmental clearance, mitigation plan, entitlement or any other document, proceeding, determination, or action related to the applicant’s project is successful, and an award of attorneys’ fees is granted against the city, the applicant shall be responsible to timely pay the full amount of such an award. (Ord. 2010-04 § 1, 2010)

 

Chapter 19.41 DESIGN PERMITS
19.41.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to:

     A.    Provide for a review process that promotes excellence in site planning and architectural design, consistent with general plan design policies;

     B.     Encourage the harmonious appearance of buildings and sites;

     C.     Ensure that new and modified uses and development are compatible with existing and potential uses in the surrounding area;

     D.    Produce an environment of stable, desirable character. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.41.020 Applicability.
     Design permit approval by the community development director or planning commission is required for the following:

     A.    New structures, except single-family detached dwellings and their attendant accessory structures constructed on a parcel of land. However, when a builder constructs three or more single-family dwellings in a single subdivision in one year, or on a single block in one year if the lots are not located within a subdivision, the dwelling units shall be subject to approval of a design permit.

     B.     Enlargements and exterior alterations of structures, including repainting and color changes of commercial, industrial and multi-family structures, but excluding enlargements and alterations of single-family dwellings for which a design permit was not originally required, unless required as a condition of another approval.

     C.     Alterations of land in commercial or industrial districts, and/or of sites of more than one acre in residential districts. (Ord. 2009-10 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.41.030 Design permit approval.
     Except as provided in this chapter, no building or structure may be erected, and no building may be enlarged or altered, and no site may be altered until a design permit application has been approved by the community development director or planning commission, as required below. Such review and approval may take place concurrently with the review of any other required approvals.

     A.    Community Development Department Director Approvals. The community development director may approve the following design permit applications. No public hearing shall be required unless the design permit is being processed concurrently with other applications for which a hearing is required. In this case, the design permit shall be considered at the same public hearing.

     1.     Two-family dwellings and appurtenant accessory structures.

     2.     Multifamily projects containing fewer than five units.

     3.     Commercial structures containing less than five thousand square feet total, industrial structures containing less than twenty thousand square feet total, and subsequent substantial changes of use to these structures.

     4.     Enlargements or alterations to a project originally approved by the planning commission involving an area of less than five percent of the project’s floor or site area, that the director deems to be compatible with the original approval and an insignificant alteration to the project’s appearance.

     5.     Any visible enlargements or alterations to projects, as determined by the community development director.

     6.     Changes in use to structures or property which cause a project to not meet design standards contained in this title for landscaping, parking, signage, screening, etc.

 

     B.     Planning Commission Approvals. The planning commission may approve the following design permit applications following a public hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 19.40:

     1.     Multifamily dwelling projects containing five or more units.

     2.     The construction in one year by a single builder of three or more single-family dwellings in a single subdivision, or on a single block if the lots are not located within a subdivision, except such construction in the PC zone district.

     3.     Commercial structures containing five thousand total square feet or more and industrial structures containing twenty thousand square feet or more, and/or substantial changes of use to these structures.

     4.     Enlargements and/or exterior alterations of projects and/or sites involving an area of more than five percent of the project’s floor and/or site area, or lesser changes that the community development director has determined potentially represent a significant alteration to a project’s and/or site’s appearance.

     5.     Sign programs requiring commission approval, pursuant to Chapter 19.23.

     6.     Small-cell antenna facilities that do not comply with standards described in Chapter 19.53.

     7.     Design permit applications referred to the commission by the director because of unique circumstances, potential public controversy or a need for policy direction. (Ord. 2018-05 § 7, 2018; Ord. 2009-10 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.41.040 Scope of design permit review.
     The following areas of design shall be considered in reviewing design permits:

     A.    Site Planning.

     1.     Appropriateness of setbacks, site coverage, building heights, and outdoor use areas,

     2.     Adequacy of parking, and vehicular and pedestrian circulation,

     3.     Relationship to abutting or adjacent sites and land uses; minimization of impacts on residential districts,

     4.     Preservation of natural site amenities,

     5.     Use of landscaping, outdoor lighting, and outdoor furniture,

     6.     Usability of public and private open spaces;

     B.     Structural Design.

     1.     Scale, mass, bulk, and proportions,

     2.     Compatibility with the desirable qualities of the area and/or streetscape,

     3.     Compatibility of building materials and detailing for all structures,

     4.     Relationship to other structures and accessory elements on a site,

     5.     Screening of utility and mechanical facilities,

     6.     Design of fences and walls,

     7.     Use of architectural elements that contribute to visual interest and variety, including variation to wall planes, multiple roof lines and defined entries. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.41.050 Required findings.
     Approval of a design permit application may be granted by the appropriate decision making authority only if all of the following findings are made:

     A.    The project complies with all applicable provisions of this title and any applicable approvals granted for the project by any decision making authority.

     B.     The project and its design complies with any applicable design guidelines.

     C.     The project and its design complies with all applicable general plan policies.

     D.    The project complies with applicable policies of the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan.

     E.     The project’s quality and character are compatible with the surrounding area, unless physically deteriorated or blighted, and will not be materially detrimental to existing development.

     F.     The proposed design is compatible with existing development in the area in terms of scale, height, bulk, proportion, materials, cohesiveness, color, and the preservation of privacy.

     G.    The design improves the community’s appearance by avoiding both excessive variety and monotonous repetition.

     H.    The proposed design promotes a harmonious transition in terms of scale and character between areas of different general plan land use designations and zoning districts.

     I.      The proposed design provides for adequate and safe on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation. (Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.41.060 Expiration of approval.
     A.    If the project for which a design permit has been approved pursuant to this chapter has not been inaugurated within two years of the granting of the design permit, the approval shall become null and void and of no effect. This provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the associated period.

     B.     An extension of time may be granted by the community development director upon the written request by a responsible party before the expiration of the two-year period, provided that:

     1.     There have been no changes in the approved plans; and

     2.     There has been no change of circumstances which would prevent any of the required findings of approval to be made. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.42 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
19.42.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and general standards for the review and approval of conditional use permits and minor conditional use permits (referred to as “minor use permits” in this chapter and elsewhere in this title) required by various sections of this title, including uses listed in the zoning district chapters as a use permitted subject to the securing of a conditional use permit, or minor use permit. (Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.42.020 Review and approval procedures.
     A.    Application.

     1.     Applications for conditional use permits and minor use permits shall be filed with the community development department. Submittals shall include a completed application form, along with related information and filing fees established by the city.

     2.     If other approvals are necessary, an application for a conditional use permit or minor use permit may be filed and processed concurrently with the related entitlement request(s), and shall be acted upon simultaneously by the planning commission.

     3.     Following the denial or revocation of a conditional use permit or minor use permit application, no application for such permit for the same or substantially the same use and design, or use of the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year from the date of denial or revocation.

     B.     Approval Authority.

     1.     The community development director may approve minor use permits for those uses designated “M” in this title. Applications for such permits shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 19.40.020, Community development director approvals.

     2.     The planning commission may approve conditional use permits for those uses designated “C” in this title. Applications for such permits shall be reviewed in accordance with Section 19.40.030, Planning commission approvals.

     C.     Terms and Conditions. Any minor use permit or conditional use permit may include such terms and conditions deemed appropriate or necessary by the decision-making authority to make the findings required by subsection D of this section. If no terms or conditions are specified, the use permit shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite period, unless the use is abandoned.

     D.    Required Findings. The planning commission may approve or conditionally approve an application for a conditional use permit or minor use permit if it makes all of the following findings:

     1.     The proposed use is consistent with the policies and programs of the general plan and any applicable master or specific plan.

     2.     The proposed use is consistent with the purpose(s) and standards of the applicable zoning district(s).

     3.     The proposed use complies with applicable policies of the Napa County Airport land use compatibility plan.

     4.     The project site is physically suitable for the type and intensity of land use being proposed.

     5.     The proposed use will not be a nuisance or materially detrimental to the general health, safety, and welfare of the public or to property and residents in the vicinity.

     6.     The site for the proposed use has adequate access, and meets parking and circulation standards and criteria.

     7.     There are adequate provisions for water and sanitary services, and other public utilities to ensure that the proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety.

     E.     Required Findings—Homeless Shelters. In addition to the findings required by subsection (D) of this section, the planning commission shall make the following findings of fact in approving a conditional use permit for a homeless shelter:

     1.     The applicant has demonstrated that the type and size of homeless shelter proposed directly fulfills the needs of city residents.

     2.     Approval of the permit will not result in an over concentration of homeless shelters in the vicinity.

     3.     The land uses and development in the immediate vicinity of the project will not constitute an immediate or potential hazard to occupants of the shelter.

     4.     The shelter will have ready access to public transportation and planned or existing support services.

     F.     Required Findings—Accessory Dwelling Units. In addition to the findings required by subsection (D) of this section, the planning commission shall make the following findings in approving a conditional use permit for accessory dwelling units:

     1.     Access separate from the on-site commercial use(s) is provided for the accessory dwelling unit(s).

     2.     Noise levels within the accessory dwelling unit(s) will not exceed any adopted noise standards.

     3.     The accessory dwelling unit(s) will be protected from any obnoxious odors generated on-site or in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2009-12 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2009-07 § 4, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.42.030 Expiration of approval.
     A.    Expiration of Approval. If the use for which a conditional use permit has been approved pursuant to this chapter has not been initiated within one year of the granting of the use permit, the use permit shall become null and void and of no effect.

     B.     Time Extensions.

     1.     An extension of time for initiation of the approved use may be granted by the community development director upon the written request by a responsible party before the expiration of the one-year period, provided that:

     a.     There have been no changes in the approved plans; and

     b.     There has been no change of circumstances which would prevent any of the required findings of approval to be made.

     2.     Only one such extension for a period not to exceed one year from the expiration of the original period shall be granted.

     3.     An additional extension not to exceed two years from the initial expiration of the original extension period may be granted by the community development director where the state unemployment rate exceeds nine percent, as per the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (Ord. 2010-09 § 2, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.42.040 Revocation and modification.
     A.    The planning commission may periodically review any use permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with conditions of approval and/or in a manner that is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the commission deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a public hearing before the appropriate decision-making body shall be set for modification or revocation.

     B.     Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Chapter 19.40 of this title, following a public hearing held in accordance with Chapter 19.40.

     C.     Minor and major modifications to approved conditional use permits may be approved in accordance with Chapter 19.45 of this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.42.050 Existing conditional uses.
     A conditional use established prior to enactment of this title may continue, provided it is operated and maintained in accordance with any conditions prescribed in the conditional use permit. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.43 VARIANCES
19.43.010 Purpose.
     Variances may be granted in order to prevent or to lessen practical difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships that would result from strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain regulations of this title. A practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the unique size, shape, or dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon; from singular geographic, topographic, or other physical conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity; or from population densities, street locations, or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity. Cost to the applicant of strict or literal compliance with a regulation shall not be the sole reason for granting a variance. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.43.020 Allowable variances.
     A.    Variances may be granted to site development regulations and standards prescribed by this title, such as lot area, width, depth, and coverage; front, rear, and side yards; floor area ratio; height of structures; distances between structures; signs; and off-street parking and loading facilities.

     B.     The power to grant variances does not extend to allowing variations to the use regulations contained in Chapter 19.05, Use Classifications and Section 19.05.020, Permitted and conditionally permitted uses. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.43.030 Review and approval procedures.
     A.    Application. An application for a variance shall be filed with the community development department on forms prescribed by the planning commission, along with any plans, maps, or additional information required by the community development director. The application shall include, in part, evidence supporting the findings required by subsection (C) of this section.

     B.     Review and Approval Authority. A variance application shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures.

     C.     Required Findings. The planning commission may approve or conditionally approve a variance application if it makes all of the following findings:

     1.     Special circumstances exist applicable to the subject property, including size, shape, topography, location, existing improvements, or surroundings, such that the strict application of this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and in the same zoning district(s).

     2.     Granting of the variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zoning district(s) in which such property is located.

     3.     Granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the vicinity.

     4.     Granting of the variance does not allow a use or activity that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel.

     5.     Granting of the variance will not result in an inconsistency with the general plan, including policies related to airport compatibility.

     D.    Terms and Conditions. Any variance approval may include such terms and conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the planning commission to affect the purposes of this title. If no additional terms or conditions are specified, the variance shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite period. (Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.43.040 Expiration of approval.
     A.    One-Year Expiration. If the project for which a variance has been approved pursuant to this chapter has not been inaugurated within one year of the granting of the variance, the variance shall become null and void and of no effect. This provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the associated permit.

     B.     Extensions. An extension of time for project inauguration may be granted by the community development director upon the written request by a responsible party before the expiration of the one-year period, provided that:

     1.     There have been no changes in the approved plans; and

     2.     There has been no change of circumstances which would prevent any of the required findings of approval to be made.

     3.     Only one such extension for a period not to exceed one year from the expiration of the original period shall be granted.

     4.     An additional extension not to exceed two years from the initial expiration of the original extension period may be granted by the community development director where the state unemployment rate exceeds nine percent, as per the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (Ord. 2010-09 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.43.050 Variance revocation and modification.
     Any variance issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.44 MINOR VARIATIONS
19.44.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to provide limited relief from the strict application of development standards specified in this title where the granting of a minor variation would promote uniform development or relieve an unreasonable hardship, but would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the area.

     B.     It is the intent of the city to limit the use of minor variations to new and expanded commercial and industrial development and to additions to residential structures on lots created prior to the effective date of the city’s incorporation, January 1, 1992. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.44.020 Applicability.
     A.    A minor variation to the following standards may be approved:

     1.     Off-street parking and loading requirements in commercial and industrial districts: ten percent maximum waiver of the number of parking spaces required or the amount of landscaped parking area required by Chapter 19.21, Parking and Loading Standards;

     2.     On an existing residential lot created prior to the effective date of the incorporation of the city, January 1, 1992, a ten percent maximum waiver to setback, lot coverage, separation between buildings, and building height requirements may be granted for additions to existing structures;

     3.     In commercial and industrial districts, a ten percent maximum waiver to setback, lot coverage, separation between buildings, lot dimension, and building height requirements may be granted only in conjunction with the approval of a design permit or use permit approved by the planning commission or city council;

     4.     Sign area and height: ten percent deviation from the standards set forth in Chapter 19.23, Sign Regulations.

     B.     Any minor variation request that exceeds the prescribed limitation set forth in this chapter shall require the filing of a variance application, pursuant to Chapter 19.43. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.44.030 Review and approval procedures.
     A.    Application. An application for a minor variation shall be filed with the community development department on forms prescribed by the director, along with any plans, maps, or additional information required by the director. The application shall include, in part, evidence supporting the findings required by this chapter.

     B.     Review and Approval Authority.

     1.     A minor variation application shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the community development director in accordance with Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures, if no other entitlements are required.

     2.     If other approvals are necessary, the minor variation shall be filed concurrently with the related entitlement(s) requests, and shall be acted upon by the appropriate decision-making authority for the related entitlement(s).

     C.     Required Findings. The community development director, planning commission, and city council may approve or conditionally approve a minor variation application if the following findings are made:

     1.     The granting of the minor variation will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to property or residents in the vicinity.

     2.     The granting of the minor variation will not result in any inconsistencies with the general plan.

     3.     The minor variation does not exceed the maximum waiver permitted by this chapter, or allow a use or activity that is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel.

     4.     Either of the following:

     a.     The minor variation will promote uniformity in development on the lot or in the area.

     b.     The minor variation will alleviate an unreasonable hardship on the property owner or applicant that would result from strict application of the requirements of this title.

     D.    Terms and Conditions. Any minor variation approval may include such terms and conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the community development director, planning commission, and city council to affect the purposes of this title. If no additional terms or conditions are specified, the minor variation shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite period. (Ord. 2009-10 § 3, 2009; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.44.040 Terms and conditions.
     A.    One-Year Expiration. If the project for which a minor variation has been approved pursuant to this chapter has not been inaugurated within one year of the granting of the minor variation, the minor variation shall become null and void and of no effect. This provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the associated permit.

     B.     Time Extensions. An extension of time for project inauguration may be granted by the community development director upon written request by a responsible party before the expiration of the one-year period, provided that:

     1.     There have been no changes in the approved plans; and

     2.     There has been no change of circumstances, which would prevent any of the required findings of approval to be made.

     3.     Only one such extension for a period not to exceed one year from the expiration of the original period shall be granted.

     4.     An additional extension not to exceed two years from the initial expiration of the original extension period may be granted by the community development director where the state unemployment rate exceeds nine percent, as per the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (Ord. 2010-09 § 4, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.44.050 Revocation and modification.
     Any minor variation issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.45 MINOR AND MAJOR MODIFICATIONS
19.45.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for minor and major modifications to previously-approved plans or permits, based on the degree of change from a previously-approved plan or permit. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.45.020 Definitions.
     A.    A minor modification is defined as a nonsubstantive change of a previously-approved plan or permit. Examples of changes typically considered minor in nature include:

     1.     To allow the minor reconfiguration of an architectural feature or features that individually or cumulatively do not modify the previously-approved design theme or plan for the project;

     2.     To allow minor changes to approved building footprints within the buildable area of a project site;

     3.     To allow the minor reconfiguration or striping of parking lots that will not decrease the number of parking spaces for an approved project;

     4.     To allow minor changes in building materials and colors for an approved project;

     5.     To allow the addition of minor structures or structural additions to an approved project, provided that such structures will not increase the total buildable area by more than five percent;

     6.     To allow the fulfillment of a condition of approval in a manner that may vary from that specified in the original conditions, provided that the intent and purpose of such original condition is fully met;

     7.     To allow minor changes to conditions of approval;

     8.     Other requests similar to the above-listed minor modifications, as determined by the community development director.

     B.     A major modification is defined as a significant revision of a previously-approved plan or permit. Examples include:

     1.     An increase in the number of dwelling units proposed in a residential subdivision or development;

     2.     A greater than five percent increase in the square footage of an approved structure or use;

     3.     A change to the overall architectural design concept of an approved building;

     4.     A significant reduction in site landscaping or open space shown on an approved development plan;

     5.     A significant reconfiguration of roadway or parking lot design;

     6.     A significant increase in grading and earth moving activities;

     7.     Significant changes to or deletions of conditions of approval;

     8.     Other similar changes of a substantive nature as determined by the community development director. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.45.030 Review and approval procedures.
     A.    Application. An application for a minor or major modification shall be filed with the community development department on forms prescribed by the director, along with any plans, maps or additional information required by the director. The application shall include, in part, a narrative description of the proposed change(s) and an explanation of why the change(s) is/are sought.

     B.     Review and Approval Authority.

     1.     A minor modification application shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the community development director in accordance with Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures.

     2.     A major modification application shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the original decision making authority in accordance with Chapter 19.40.

     C.     Terms and Conditions. Any minor or major modification approval may include such terms and conditions as deemed necessary or appropriate by the director or commission to affect the purposes of this title. If no additional terms or conditions are specified, the minor or major modification shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite period.

     D.    Required Findings. The director or commission may approve or conditionally approve a modification application if all of the following findings are made:

     1.     The modification is in substantial conformity with the previously approved plan or permit, or if the change is substantive, that the revised project is equivalent to the original project design concept in terms of consistency with city design and development standards and policies.

     2.     The modification will not create impacts substantially different from those of the previously approved project.

     3.     The granting of the modification will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to property or residents in the vicinity.

     4.     The proposed modification is consistent with the policies and exhibits contained in the general plan. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.45.040 Revocation and modification.
     Any modification issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Chapter 19.40. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.46 ZONING CLEARANCES AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
19.46.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that all new uses and structures and changes or alterations in uses or structures comply with the requirements of this title prior to any building construction, initiation of use, or building occupation. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.46.020 Applicability.
     No parcel of land shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used until a zoning clearance or a certificate of occupancy, as applicable, have been issued by the community development, building official or other appropriate city official. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.46.030 Review and approval procedures.
     A.    Zoning Clearances.

     1.     Prior to the issuance of a business license or building permit for any establishment of use or construction of a building or structure, a zoning clearance shall be issued by the planning director, certifying that the business license or building permit complies with all provisions of this title and any discretionary approvals, and with the Napa County Airport compatibility plan policies and regulations where applicable.

     2.     Prior to the issuance of a zoning clearance, the applicant shall provide evidence to the director of approval from any appropriate agencies and city departments.

     B.     Certificates of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all of the provisions of the municipal code and all other building codes applicable to occupancies within the city. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file at the city offices and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the affected building or land.

     1.     Building Certificates of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for a new building or the alteration of an existing building shall be applied for concurrently with the application for a final inspection permit. The certificate shall be issued after final inspection has been completed and it has been determined that construction conforms to the municipal code’s building regulations, as well as to the provisions of this title.

     2.     Use Certificates of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for a change in the use of a building or structure shall be applied for concurrently with an application for a business license before any such new use commences. The certificate shall be issued within ten days after the application has been made, provided that such use is in conformity with the provisions of this title and with the Napa County Airport compatibility plan policies and regulations where applicable. (Ord. 2010-03 § 3, 2010; Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.47 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
19.47.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide procedures for the processing and review of applications for development agreements by the city. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.020 Qualifications and standards for filing application for development agreement.
     A.    Only a qualified applicant may file an application for a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the development agreement, or an authorized agent of a person who has legal or equitable interest. The community development director may require an applicant to submit a title report or other evidence satisfactory to the community development director to verify the applicant’s interest in the real property and the authority of the agent to act for the applicant.

     B.     Applications from qualified applicants for development agreements for property in unincorporated areas within the city’s sphere of influence will be processed as provided in this section. However, the agreement shall not become operative unless annexation proceedings annexing the property to the city are completed within the period of time specified by the agreement. If the annexation is not completed within the time specified in the agreement or any extension of the agreement, the agreement shall be null and void.

     C.     An application for a development agreement may be filed concurrently with other application(s) having a direct relationship to the property which is the subject of the proposed agreement. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.030 Application procedure.
     A.    An application for a development agreement shall be made in the form of a written request submitted to the community development department. The community development department shall provide an application form for this purpose.

     B.     A draft of the proposed development agreement may be submitted along with the application. The agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney and shall contain all information required under Section 65865.2 of the Government Code. If deemed appropriate by the city, or if agreed upon prior to submittal, the city attorney may draft the initial agreement for review by the parties thereto.

     C.     The application shall be accompanied by an application fee in the amount (if any) established by a resolution adopted by the city council.

     D.    Any legal fees incurred by the city in drafting or reviewing a development agreement shall be paid by the applicant prior to its becoming effective.

     E.     The community development director, city manager, and/or city attorney may require additional information to supplement the application, if deemed necessary to conduct the environmental analysis required by the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.) and/or to enable the planning commission and city council to determine whether the development agreement is consistent with the objectives of the city’s general plan and any applicable specific or community area plan, the effect of the proposed agreement on capital facilities, and/or whether the proposed agreement otherwise meets the city’s standards for approval. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.040 Contents of development agreements.
     A.    A development agreement shall specify the duration of the agreement, the permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes. The development agreement may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The agreement may provide that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.

     B.     The agreement may also include terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public facilities and subsequent reimbursement over time. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.050 Rules, ordinances, regulations and official policies of city applicable to property subject to development agreement.
     Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, ordinances, regulations, and official policies of the city applicable to the development of property subject to a development agreement shall be those rules, ordinances, regulations and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. A development agreement shall not prevent the city in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, ordinances, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those applicable to the property as set forth in the development agreement, nor shall a development agreement prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, ordinances, regulations, and policies. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.060 Action by the planning commission.
     A.    The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing on an application for a development agreement. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

     B.     Following the close of the public hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether the proposed development agreement is consistent with the required findings for approval as contained in Section 19.47.080, and shall recommend to the city council that the application for a development agreement be either approved, approved as amended, or denied. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.070 Action by the city council.
     A.    Upon receiving a recommendation from the planning commission on a proposed development agreement, the city council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in Sections 65090 and 65091 of the Government Code. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

     B.     Following the closing of a public hearing, the council shall determine if the development agreement is consistent with the findings contained within Section 19.47.080 of this chapter. If determined to be consistent, the city council shall make such findings and introduce an ordinance adopting the development agreement. Such ordinance shall become effective thirty days after its adoption. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.080 Required findings for approval.
     Before taking action to approve or recommend approval of a development agreement, the city council or planning commission shall find as follows:

     A.    The proposal for which the development agreement is requested conforms with the maps and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific, community, or area plans.

     B.     The proposal for which the development agreement is requested complies with the requirements of California Government Code Sections 65865 through 65869.5, and any other applicable state law.

     C.     The proposal for which the development agreement is requested is consistent with the zoning ordinance and all applicable codes and ordinances.

     D.    The proposal for which the development agreement is requested will not be detrimental to or cause adverse effects on adjacent property owners, residents, or the general public.

     E.     The proposal for which the development agreement is requested provides clear and substantial benefit to the residents of the city. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.090 Recordation of development agreement.
     No later than ten days after entering into a development agreement, the city clerk shall record with the Napa County recorder a copy of the agreement. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.100 Ongoing review/termination of development agreement.
     The city shall periodically review, at least every twelve months, all approved development agreements to determine whether the applicant, or successor in interest thereto, is demonstrating good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement as established under Section 65865.1 of the Government Code. If, as a result of periodic review, the city finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor in interest thereto has not complied in good faith with terms or conditions of the agreement, the city may initiate proceedings to terminate or nullify the agreement. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.110 Amendments to approved development agreements.
     A.    Any proposed amendments to previously approved development agreements shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter for a new application.

     B.     All amendments to development agreements must be in writing, and approved by both the city and the applicant or successor in the interest thereto. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.47.120 Effect of new state or federal laws or regulations on development agreements.
     In the event that state or federal laws or regulations, enacted after a development agreement has been entered into, prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, such provisions of the agreement shall be modified or suspended as necessary to comply with such state or federal laws or regulations. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.48 ZONING MAP AND ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENTS
19.48.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the amendment of this title and the official zoning map. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.48.020 Initiation by planning commission or city council.
     The planning commission or city council may, at any time and in any form deemed appropriate by either body, initiate an amendment to any portion of this title. An amendment may be any of the following types:

     A.    An amendment to the text of this title not changing regulations or standards affecting the use of any property;

     B.     An amendment to the text of this title changing regulations or standards affecting the use of property;

     C.     Amendment to the official zoning map reclassifying property from one district to another, including applying an overlay district to, or removing an overlay district from property. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.48.030 Initiation by interested person(s).
     A property owner may initiate an amendment to the official zoning map to reclassify their property from one zoning district to another, or to establish an overlay district by filing an application with the community development department on forms prescribed by the city council, along with any plans, maps or additional information required by the community development director. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.48.040 Review and approval procedures.
     A.    Approval Authority. An application for a zoning map or ordinance text amendment shall be reviewed, and approved or denied by the city council in accordance with Chapter 19.40, Review and Approval Procedures.

     B.     Planning Commission Review. An application for a zoning map or ordinance text amendment shall be referred to the planning commission for review and recommendations in accordance with Chapter 19.40.

     C.     Required Findings. The city council may approve an application for a zoning map or ordinance text amendment only if it finds all of the following:

     1.     The amendment is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan.

     2.     The amendment is consistent with the purposes of this title, as set forth in Chapter 19.01, Authority, Purposes and Effects of the Zoning Ordinance. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.49 NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
19.49.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate buildings and uses which do not conform to one or more provisions of this title, but were lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time this title and any amendment thereto was adopted.

     B.     This chapter is intended to prevent the expansion of nonconforming buildings and uses and establish the circumstances under which they may be altered, repaired or changed.

     C.     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or implied so as to allow for the continuation of illegal nonconforming buildings and uses. Such uses shall be removed immediately upon notification by the community development director. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

     “Appraised valuation” means either the appraised valuation for property tax purposes, updated as necessary by the increase in the consumer price index since the date of the last valuation, or the valuation determined by a professionally-recognized property appraiser.

     “Cost” of renovation or repair or replacement means the fair market value of the materials and services necessary to accomplish such renovation, repair, or replacement. Renovation, repair, or replacement costs shall be determined by the building official, whose decision may be appealed to the city council. The “cost” of such renovation of repair or replacement shall mean the total cost of all such intended work, and no person may seek to avoid the intent of this chapter by doing such work incrementally.

     “Nonconforming lots” means a lot, the area dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the effective date of this title, or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.

     “Nonconforming structure” means any structure that was lawfully established and in compliance with the applicable ordinances and laws at the time the ordinance codified in this title or any amendment thereto became effective, but which, due to the application of this title or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of development in the zoning district in which it is located.

     “Nonconforming use” means any use of land or property that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the ordinance codified in this title, or any amendment thereto, became effective, but which, due to the application of this title or any amendment thereto is a use not listed as permitted, accessory, or subject to permit in the zoning district in which it is located. “Nonconforming use” shall also include uses reclassified from permitted to subject to permit in the same district, and uses made nonconforming by the addition of a development standard previously not required for such use in the same zoning classification, where such added standard is specified to be a “condition of use.” (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.030 Limitations to nonconforming structures.
     The following limitations shall apply to nonconforming structures:

     A.    A nonconforming structure shall not be moved, altered, enlarged, or reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the development standards specified for the zoning district in which the structure is located, except that where a dwelling unit has a nonconforming side yard or rear yard setback, the nonconformity may be extended along the length of the nonconforming façade.

     B.     A nonconforming structure which is damaged to the extent that the cost of repair or replacement would exceed fifty percent of the appraised value of the damaged structure may be restored only if made to conform to all provisions of this title.

     C.     Repairs and changes to interior partitions or other nonstructural improvements may be made to a nonconforming structure; however, the cost of such repairs and changes shall not exceed fifty percent of the appraised value of the structure to be renovated.

     D.    Subject to the valuation limit in subsection (C) of this section, structural elements may be modified where the building official determines such modification is immediately necessary to protect the health and safety of the public or occupants of the nonconforming building or adjacent property.

     E.     If the use of a nonconforming structure is discontinued for a period of twelve months or more, the structure shall lose its nonconforming status and shall thereafter be removed or altered to conform to the provisions of this title. For purposes of determining whether a right to continue a nonconforming situation is lost pursuant to this subsection, all of the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally to be considered as a whole. For example, the failure to rent one apartment in a nonconforming apartment building for twelve months shall not result in a loss of the right to rent that apartment or space thereafter so long as the apartment building as a whole is continually maintained. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.040 Limitations to nonconforming uses.
     The following limitations shall apply to nonconforming uses:

     A.    A nonconforming use may be continued, provided that a nonconforming use which ceases for a continuous period of one hundred eighty days, or a nonconforming seasonal use which ceases operation for one season, shall lose its nonconforming status, and the premises on which the nonconforming use was located shall from then on be used for conforming uses only.

     B.     Change of ownership, tenancy, or management of nonconforming use shall not affect its legal nonconforming status.

     C.     A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or extended to occupy any part of a structure or site which it did not occupy on the effective date of this title or of any amendment thereto that caused it to become a nonconforming use, or in such a way as to displace any conforming use occupying a structure or site.

     D.    A nonconforming use shall not be intensified. For example, it may not be modified so as to directly increase the number of employees or patrons, or to extend hours of operation.

     E.     A lot or portion thereof occupied by a nonconforming use may be further developed by the addition of conforming uses and structures.

     F.     No structure, the use of which is nonconforming, shall be moved or altered unless required by law, or unless the moving or alteration will result in the elimination of the nonconformity.

     G.    A conditional use permit shall be required for the reconstruction of a structure housing a nonconforming conditional use established prior to enactment of this title if the structure is destroyed to an extent greater than fifty percent.

     H.    No use of land or structure existing at the time of adoption of this title shall be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of a failure to meet the requirements of Chapter 19.21, Parking and Loading. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.050 Use of nonconforming lots.
     Any lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to the requirements of the applicable zoning district, shall be considered buildable for the purposes of this title. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.060 Certificates of nonconformity.
     Certificates of occupancy for nonconforming uses existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title may be issued by the community development director. The certificate shall state that the use is in nonconforming use and does not conform with the provisions of this title, but is operating legally, consistent with nonconforming provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.070 Nonconforming signs.
     Refer to Chapter 19.23, Sign Regulations, for provisions regarding nonconforming signs. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

19.49.080 Public utility exceptions.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or implied so as to require the removal of public utility buildings, structures, equipment, or facilities provided that there is no change of use and no enlargement of the land area devoted to such use. (Ord. 2001-02 § 1, 2001)

 

Chapter 19.50 SPECIAL STUDY ZONE DISTRICT
19.50.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the special study zone district is to:

     A.    Allow properties to be zoned or prezoned until the city has completed appropriate planning studies to determine the types and intensities of land uses through an amendment of the city’s general plan.

     B.     Allow agricultural, grazing, open space and public uses within the district as interim uses. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.50.020 Applicability.
     Properties designated as “special study zone” by the general plan shall be within the special study zone district. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.50.030 Permitted uses.
     Permitted uses shall be: agriculture, grazing, open space and public uses, except as provided in Section 19.12.040. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

19.50.040 Conditionally permitted uses.
     Any structure greater than ten thousand square feet shall be a conditionally permitted use. (Res. 2008-105 § 4, 2008)

 

Chapter 19.52 REQUEST FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
19.52.010 Intent and purpose.
     It is the policy of the city of American Canyon, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter “fair housing laws”), to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. This chapter establishes a procedure for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the city to comply fully with the intent and purpose of fair housing laws. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009)

 

19.52.020 Applicability.
     A.    Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use and zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures, or even waiving certain requirements, when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to housing opportunities.

     B.     An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of such person’s major life activities, as furthered defined and amended in the Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA) of California Government Code Sections 12926(i)(1), (2), and 12926(k)(1), (2).

     C.     A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, his or her representative, or an entity, developer or provider of housing for individuals with disabilities, when the application of a land use or zoning regulation, policy, practice or procedure acts as a barrier to housing opportunities. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009)

 

19.52.030 Application.
     Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in a manner prescribed within this section.

     A.    Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted by completing the city of American Canyon Request for Reasonable Accommodation Form and submitting it to the community development department and specifying the following information:

     1.     Name and address of the individual(s) requesting reasonable accommodation;

     2.     Name, address and telephone number of the property owner(s);

     3.     Address of the property for which accommodation is requested;

     4.     The current actual use of the property;

     5.     Description of the requested accommodation and the zoning code provision, regulation(s), policy or procedure for which accommodation is requested;

     6.     The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the acts; and

     7.     Reason that the requested accommodation is necessary for the individual(s) with the disability to use and enjoy the dwelling.

     B.     If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including, but not limited to, a conditional use permit, design review, general plan amendment, zoning change, annexation, etc.), then the applicant shall file the information required by this section together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval.

     C.     No application fee shall apply to a request for reasonable accommodation (unless the request is being made concurrently with an application for some other discretionary approval, in which case the applicant shall pay only the required application fee for the discretionary approval).

     D.    Any information related to a disability status and identified by an applicant as confidential shall be retained in a manner so as to respect the privacy rights of the applicant and shall not be made available for public inspection.

     E.     A request for reasonable accommodation in regulations, policies, practices and procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. A reasonable accommodation does not affect an individual’s obligations to comply with other applicable regulations not at issue in the requested accommodation.

     F.     If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city will provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009)

 

19.52.040 Reviewing authority.
     A.    Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the community development director, if no discretionary approval is sought other than the request for reasonable accommodation.

     B.     A request for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009)

 

19.52.050 Findings.
     A.    In approving or denying the request, the following criteria shall apply:

     1.     The accommodation is reasonable, considering the nature of the applicant’s disability, the surrounding land uses, and the rule, standard, policy or practice from which relief is sought;

     2.     The accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant equal opportunity to enjoy and use a dwelling;

     3.     The accommodation will have only incidental economic or monetary benefits to the applicant, and the primary purpose of the accommodation is not to assist with real estate speculation or excess profit-taking;

     4.     The accommodation does not create a substantial adverse impact on surrounding land uses, or a public nuisance, that cannot be reasonably mitigated;

     5.     The accommodation is reasonably feasible, considering the physical attributes of the property and structures;

     6.     There are no alternative accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant, while minimizing adverse impacts on surrounding land uses and lessening the financial and/or administrative burden on the city;

     7.     In the case of a determination involving a one-family dwelling, whether the household would be considered a single housekeeping unit if it were not using special services that are required because of the disabilities of the residents;

     8.     The requested accommodation does not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city; and

     9.     The requested accommodation does not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a program.

     B.     In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, any conditions of approval may be imposed to ensure that any removable structures or physical design features that are constructed or installed in association with the reasonable accommodation be removed once those structures or physical design features are unnecessary to provide access to the dwelling unit for the current occupants. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009)

 

19.52.060 Appeals.
     A.    Any decision of the community development director made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the planning commission by the applicant or any other person aggrieved by the commission’s decision. Such appeal may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director prior to the time the decision becomes final, on forms furnished by the director. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council.

     B.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in this chapter not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision.

     C.     The planning commission may affirm wholly or partly, reverse, modify, or attach additional conditions to the decision which was appealed. The council’s decision shall be final on adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given.

     D.    Any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the city council by the applicant or any other person aggrieved by the commission’s decision. Such appeal may be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the community development director prior to the time the decision becomes final, on forms furnished by the director. The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee established by the city council.

     E.     Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be given in the manner and time provided in this chapter not less than ten days before such hearing to each person entitled to notice of the preceding decision.

     F.     The city council may affirm wholly or partly, reverse, modify, or attach additional conditions to the decision which was appealed. The council’s decision shall be final on adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no notice thereof need be given.

     G.    Permit Issuance. No permit shall be issued prior to the expiration of any appeal period for an entitlement. (Ord. 2009-16 § 3, 2009)

 

Chapter 19.53 SMALL-CELL ANTENNA FACILITIES
19.53.010 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish ministerial zoning requirements for small-cell antenna facilities (SAFs) that improve high-speed wireless telecommunication services compatible with federal and state rules and regulations, provide cost recovery for impacts to the city infrastructure, and avoid potential adverse environmental impacts in the community such as noise, aesthetics, and public infrastructure maintenance. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter apply to small-cell antenna facilities (SAFs) in the city of American Canyon. Small-cell wireless telecommunication facilities that do not comply with the SAF standards require a design permit approved by the planning commission in accordance with Chapter 19.41. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.030 Definitions.
     “Accessory equipment” means any equipment installed, mounted, operated or maintained in close proximity to a personal wireless telecommunication facility to provide power to the personal wireless telecommunication facility or to receive, transmit or store signals or information received by or sent from a personal wireless telecommunication device.

     “Antenna enclosure” means any casing or hardware used to enclose or camouflage wireless telecommunication antennas or related equipment.

     “Antenna structure” means any antenna, any structure designed specifically to support an antenna or any appurtenance mounted on such a structure or antenna.

     “Applicable law” means all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders, as the same may be amended from time to time.

     “Applicant” includes any person or entity submitting an application to install a commercial wireless telecommunication facility under this chapter.

     “Base station” means the equipment and non-tower supporting structure at a fixed location that enables Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications between user equipment and a communications network.

     “CEQA” means the California Environmental Quality Act.

     “City” means the city of American Canyon.

     “City property” means any property owned by the city of American Canyon that is outside of the public right-of-way, which includes, but is not limited to, parks, city building sites, the wastewater reclamation facility, City Hall, etc.

     “Collar mount” means any band or pieces of a band that fits around the neck of a pole to support an antenna. See Figure 19.53.030-a.

     “Collocation” means the mounting or installation of additional wireless transmission equipment at an existing wireless facility.

     “Council” means the city council of the city of American Canyon.

     “Department” means the community development department of the city of American Canyon.

     “Director” means the community development director of the city of American Canyon or designee.

     “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor to that agency.

     “Least intrusive means” means that the location or design of a commercial wireless telecommunication facility addresses a significant gap in an applicant’s personal communication service while doing the least disservice to the policy objectives of this chapter. Analysis of whether a proposal constitutes the least intrusive means shall include consideration of means to close an asserted significant gap by collocating a new personal wireless telecommunication facility on the site, pole, tower, or other structure of an existing personal wireless telecommunication facility.

     “Local preference” means preference given to an applicant when two or more applicants propose wireless facilities on the same utility pole or structure at the same time.

     “Macro sites” means any high-powered wireless telecommunication facility used to serve major coverage areas of several miles with multiple antennas.

     “Major street trenching” means any proposed trenching of a public right-of-way of more than ten feet in length.

     “MLA” means master lease agreement.

     “Micro wireless facility,” shall be defined as a small cell that is no larger than twenty-four inches long, fifteen inches in width, twelve inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than eleven inches.

     “Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire, pole, or tower used to support antennas or related equipment. A monopole also includes a monopine, monopalm, and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble faux objects attached on a monopole.

     “MPE” means maximum permissible exposure.

     “Non-tower supporting structure” means any structure, whether built for wireless communications purposes or not, that supports wireless transmission equipment under a valid permit at the time an applicant submits an application for a permit under this code and which is not a wireless tower.

     “OET” or “FCC OET” means the Office of Engineering & Technology of the Federal Communications Commission.

     “Open space” includes: (1) land which is zoned OS, OS-CRW, or REC as defined in Chapter 19.05.070 and 19.05.080; (2) land in residential zones upon which structures may not be developed by virtue of a restriction on title; (3) all common areas, public and private parks, slope easements, recreational areas and open portions of recreational facilities; and (4) any other area owned by a homeowners association or similar entity.

     “Personal communication service” means commercial mobile services provided under a license issued by the FCC.

     “Personal wireless telecommunication facility,” “wireless telecommunication facility,” or “wireless facility” means a structure, antenna, pole, tower, equipment, accessory equipment and related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information, including, but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service and paging service.

     “RF” means radio frequency.

     “Section 6409” means Title 47, United States Code, Section 1455.

     “Side-arm assembly” means an articulated mounting assembly that connects an antenna to the pole, see Figure 19.53.030-b.

     “SAF” means small-cell antenna facility consisting of antennas, antenna supports, equipment, cabinets, equipment housing and enclosure; and related accessory equipment. SAF also means a micro wireless facility. See Figure 19.53.030-c.

     “State” means the state of California.

     “Stealth facility” or “camouflaged facility” means a SAF or any wireless telecommunication facility, including its antennas, antenna supports, poles, equipment, cabinets, equipment housing and enclosure; and related aboveground accessory equipment, which: (1) are integrated as an architectural feature of an existing structure such as a cupola; or (2) are integrated in an outdoor structure such as a flagpole or streetlight; or (3) use a design which mimics and is consistent with nearby natural or architectural features, or is incorporated into or replaces existing permitted facilities (including, but not limited to, utility poles or stop signs or other traffic signs or freestanding light standards) so that the presence of the wireless telecommunication facility is not readily apparent. See Figure 19.53.030-d.

     “Transmission equipment” or “wireless transmission equipment” means any equipment that facilitates transmission for any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber optic cable, and regular and backup power supplies.

     “Wireless telecommunication facility” means any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications service.

     “Wireless tower” or “telecommunications tower” means any structure, including a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, freestanding tower or other structure, designed and constructed for the primary purpose of supporting any Federal Communications Commission licensed or authorized wireless telecommunications facility antennas and their associated facilities. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

Figure 19.53.030-a: Collar Mounts

 



Collar mounts for antennas are not permitted for small-cell antenna facilities.

 

Figure 19.53.030-b: Side-Arm Mounts



Side-arm mounted antennas are not permitted.

Figure 19.53.030-c SAF Components



Small-cell antenna facilities consist of the antenna, equipment enclosures, and the light pole. All cables need to be concealed within the pole or shrouded. All ground equipment is prohibited in the public right-of-way.

 

Figure 19.53.030-d Stealth SAF Components



 

Camouflaged antenna equipment and antenna.

Figure 19.53.030-e Stealth SAF Components on Wider Transit Poles



Example of a transit light pole with a small-cell antenna placed on top, and the accessory equipment painted to match the color and material of the pole.

(Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.040 Review and approval.
     A.    All SAFs require a SAF permit and building permit.

     B.     All SAFs on city property require master licensing agreements.

     C.     All SAFs on public right-of-way require an encroachment permit with the city.

 

Table 19.53.040—SAF Types and Requirements

SAF Location Type

Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

SAF Requirements

Private Property

City-Owned Property

Public ROW

SAF Permit

Y

Y

Y

Building Permit

Y

Y

Y

Master Lease Agreement

 

Y

 

Encroachment Permit

 

 

Y

(Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.050 Development standards—All SAFs.
     All small-cell antenna facilities shall comply with all the following development standards:

     A.    A maximum of one SAF is permitted on a single support structure.

     B.     All SAFs shall be designed as a stealth facility as defined in Section 19.53.030.

     C.     The combined volume of SAF accessory equipment, including an electric meter, on a single pole shall not exceed six cubic feet, whether an array or separate.

     D.    The antenna enclosure and accessory equipment is permitted a maximum of ten and one-half inches wide when placed on slim light poles (less than ten inches width) and a maximum of fifteen inches on wide poles (greater than ten inches width).

     E.     Equipment normally placed at ground level must be placed in an underground vault.

     F.     All conduit and facility wiring must be concealed within the support structure.

     G.    Unless otherwise required by city, county, state or federal rules or regulations, SAFs shall have all manufacturer labels removed. No logos or advertising is permitted.

     H.    SAFs shall be painted a non-reflective neutral color finish consistent with the predominant color of the support structure.

     I.      Unless otherwise required by applicable county, state, or federal rules, the SAF may not have any artificial lighting.

     J.      All SAFs shall be designed with passive cooling.

     K.    All facilities shall be designed so as to be graffiti resistant.

     L.     To protect residential views, a SAF proposed within nine feet of a residential window is prohibited, and any SAF shall not negatively impact or impede views of the ridgelines to the east of the city or the Napa River watershed to the west.

     M.    A SAF on city property outside of the public right-of-way is required to obtain its own electrical service and meter.

     N.    Outside the public right-of-way, the overall height of the SAF may not exceed the maximum building height permitted in site zoning district..

     O.    The Director retains the discretion to determine the applicability of CEQA for SAFs and requires the preparation of an initial study (CEQA Guidelines Section 15365) for any permit application to properly determine the potential impacts of any application on the physical environment. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.060 Development standards—SAFs in public right-of-way.
     In addition to the development standards identified in Section 19.53.050, the following standards apply to SAFs in the public right-of-way:

     A.    No major street trenching is permitted.

     B.     A SAF antenna shall be positioned on top of the support structure. A SAF antenna may not be placed on a support structure with a collar mount, or side-arm assembly. SAF accessory equipment may be placed on collar mounts when they comply with the development standards of Section 19.53.050.

     C.     A SAF may not include any ground-mounted equipment.

     D.    Where feasible, support structure-mounted accessory equipment shall be installed behind existing traffic signs.

     E.     The overall height of the SAF may not exceed six feet above any adjacent streetlight or utility pole, whichever is less. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.070 Conditions of approval.
     The following standard conditions of approval shall apply to all SAF projects:

     A.    To help screen each proposed SAF in the public right-of-way, the encroachment permit shall identify an appropriate street tree and location in the public right-of-way as close to each proposed SAF as feasible. The tree shall meet the following standards:

     1.     The minimum tree size shall be fifteen-gallon size.

     2.     The tree shall match the species of trees along the same street. If no street trees exist, the tree shall be a variety native to the region and drought-tolerate, subject to approval of the public works director.

     3.     If installing a street tree is infeasible on the basis of inadequate sidewalk width, utility interference, or public health, safety, or welfare reasons, at the approval of the public works director, the applicant shall provide an “in-lieu” payment into the city’s “street tree” fund. In-lieu street tree payment shall be paid prior to the building permit issuance.

     4.     Care and Maintenance of Street Trees. The city shall assume the duty of a “property owner.” The applicant shall fund ten years care and maintenance of any street tree required to be installed in the public right-of-way under this section.

     5.     The applicant shall provide a security bond that is reviewed and found satisfactory by the city attorney to guarantee funding for ten years of tree maintenance.

     B.     The applicant shall verify that the SAF when operational complies with the noise standard in Section 19.53.090(b).

     C.     The applicant shall provide written agreement to relocate the SAF facility at the applicant’s expense when public projects, services or improvements conflict with its installation with reasonable notice. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.080 Application and submittal requirements.
     A.    Each SAF requires a SAF permit.

     B.     Each SAF requires a building permit.

     C.     Each SAF in the public right-of-way requires an encroachment permit.

     D.    Each SAF requires a security bond that is reviewed and found satisfactory to ensure the proper removal of older, obsolete, or abandoned SAF equipment.

     E.     In conjunction with the building permit application, each SAF application shall include the following information:

     1.     Site Plan. Provide a site plan of each project area drawn to scale depicting the existing conditions and proposed project.

     2.     Elevations. Provide elevation plans for each location, drawn to scale depicting the existing support structure and the proposed project.

     3.     Provide a sheet with specifications of all proposed equipment.

     4.     Provide scale drawings of each SAF component.

     5.     Identify location of power source.

     6.     EMF Report. Provide documentation demonstrating that the facility will comply with applicable radio frequency (RF) emission standards. Such documentation may be satisfied by a written demonstration of compliance with FCC Bulletin OET-65, as amended. Provide a written agreement, which indicates that no SAF facility or facilities proposed for this application, shall produce power densities that exceed the Federal Communication Commission’s (FCC) Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE); and written agreement to comply with FCC Office of Engineering Technology (OET) Bulletin 65, as amended.

     7.     Interference Report. Provide a written description of the proposed method(s) of correcting any potential interference with consumer electric products that may result from the operation of the facility.

     8.     Noise Study. Include manufacturer information on the amount of noise generated by the facility, including, but not limited to, retractable monopole motors, antenna rotators, power generation and related equipment. Such information shall include the estimated times, frequency, duration and decibel levels of the noise.

     9.     Coverage Maps. Each application shall include the following:

     a.     Map showing all current and planned facility sites within and adjacent to the city that are owned and/or operated by the service operator.

     b.     Name(s), address(es), telephone number(s), and e-mail(s) that own the facility and that will be responsible for its operation and maintenance.

     c.     Any proposed access roads or parking areas.

     d.     Documentation verifying that the operator has obtained licenses and/or approvals that are required by federal and/or state agencies.

     10.   Visual impact analysis showing a silhouette or other visualization(s) or photo simulations of the proposed facility within the context of its surroundings, such as the ridgelines to the east of the city or the Napa River watershed to the west; and/or

     11.   Written authorization for the city to hire an independent, qualified consultant to evaluate technical and other aspects of the proposal, including, but not limited to, compliance with applicable emission standards, potential for interference with consumer electronic products and/or public safety communications and the appropriateness of granting any requested exceptions. Such authorization shall include a written agreement by the applicant to advance or promptly reimburse the city for all reasonable costs associated with the consultation.

     12.   Payment of the applicable SAF plan review fee.

     13.   Security bond to ensure the proper removal of older, obsolete, or abandoned SAF equipment

     14.   Master lease agreement (Type 2).

     15.   Applicants that propose SAF projects adjacent to a public school, property owned by a public agency, or public park are required to submit verification that they have consulted with the applicable public agency representative.

     16.   Applicants that propose a SAF project in a residential zoning district shall mail a notice to property owners located within three hundred feet of the proposed site. The public notice shall inform property owners of the proposed SAF project and invite their feedback.

     17.   Design standards self-assessment checklist.

     18.   Electronic copies of all submitted items. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.090 Operation standards.
     A.    Health and Safety Regulations, EMF Report. No SAF by itself or in combination with other such facilities shall be sited or operated in such a manner that it poses a potential threat to the public health or safety. To that end, no facility or facilities shall produce power densities that exceed the Federal Communication Commission’s (FCC) Maximum Permissible Exposure (MPE). Compliance with FCC Office of Engineering Technology (OET) Bulletin 65, as amended, is mandatory. The SAF applicant, operator, or owner shall copy the city on any filings and reports with the California Board of Equalization and the California Public Utilities Commission concerning the SAF. Applicant shall provide notice of the SAF permit to the California Board of Equalization and California Public Utilities Commission to facilitate appropriate reimbursement to the city for the SAF authorization.

     B.     Noise Compliance. Each SAF shall be operated in such a manner so as to minimize any noise impacts. A SAF shall generate no more than forty-five decibels of noise at three feet from the nearest building façade or sensitive receptor (e.g., school playground).

     C.     Each SAF installed on a streetlight in the public right-of-way shall obtain its electric power within the electric streetlight source.

     D.    Maintenance. A SAF Applicant or property-owner shall, at its sole cost, be responsible to repair to city standard specifications or replace in-kind any city facilities or improvements disturbed or damaged during the installation, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of the SAF and any support infrastructure.

     E.     Interference. To the extent allowed under applicable federal rules and regulations, the operator of a SAF shall correct interference problems experienced or caused by the facility to any person or entity with respect to equipment such as television, radio, computer, and telephone reception or transmission. The operator is under an affirmative duty to promptly provide the community development director a copy of any notice of such violation issued by any local, state, or federal agency.

     F.     Applicant shall warrant and ensure that its services will be made available to businesses and residents of the city. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.100 Density of small-cell antenna facilities.
     A.    No wireless service provider may locate a SAF within one hundred feet of another SAF that the service provider owns or controls.

     B.     A SAF proposed on two or more support structures may not be placed on adjacent support structures.

     C.     All SAFs on city property require a master lease agreement (“MLA”) prior obtaining an encroachment permit or building permit. The MLA shall be recorded with the Napa County recorder by the applicant at its sole expense.

     D.    Local Preference. For projects where two applicants propose a SAF on the same support structure(s), local preference will grant a permit to the applicant with a wireless telecommunication retail store in the city. The sale of wireless devices must be the primary business of the retail store. In the event both applicants have a retail store in the city, local preference will be granted to the applicant that has the retail store in the city for the longest continuous period of time. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.110 Permit duration and renewal.
     The following guidelines explain the city’s requirements for SAF permit renewals and modifications:

     A.    A Type 2 SAF permit shall be renewed on the ten-year anniversary of its original final date or subsequent renewal date.

     1.     Renewal Permitted. At the end of the term set forth above, the department may renew a SAF permit for an additional ten-year term.

     2.     SAF Renewal Application Required. An applicant seeking to renew a SAF permit shall file a renewal application with the department no later than six months prior to the anniversary date of the existing permit. The renewal application shall include a written report from a certified engineer confirming the following:

     a.     That the permitted wireless facility complies with the Public Health Compliance Standards.

     b.     The SAF continues to remain in operation.

     c.     That the SAF meets or exceeds current stealthing technology.

     d.     The SAF renewal application fee is paid.

     e.     For Type 2 permits, the revised MLA shall be recorded with the Napa County recorder by the applicant at its sole expense.

     3.     SAF permit renewal on city property requires a renewed master lease agreement after the ten-year period.

     B.     Modifications to existing SAF projects will require a new SAF permit and submittal requirements for any changed elements as outlined in Section 19.53.080.

     C.     A SAF facility shall be relocated at the applicant’s expense, upon receipt of reasonable notice, when public projects, services, or improvements conflict with its installation. (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

 

19.53.120 Discontinuation of use.
     Antenna, support structures and related equipment shall be removed within thirty calendar days after discontinuation of a wireless facility and the site shall be restored to its previous condition. The service provider shall provide the community development department with a notice of intent to vacate the site a minimum of thirty calendar days prior to vacation. For Type 2 SAFs located on city property, this requirement shall be included in the terms of the lease. For Type 1 SAFs, the property owner shall be responsible to remove all antennas, structures and related equipment within thirty calendar days following discontinuation of the use. Upon submittal of proof to the city that the site has been restored to its previous condition, the city shall cause the release of the security bond set forth in Section 19.53.080(E)(13). (Ord. 2018-05 § 8, 2018)

