AVENAL, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
AVENAL, CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE
____________
A Codification of the General Ordinances of
the City of Avenal, California
____________
Adopted: May 27, 1982
____________
Date of Publication: 2012
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Avenal,
California.
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering
system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing
provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section.
Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are
numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to
accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal
expansion.
AVENAL, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the
provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table,
following the text of the Code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in
the codification; and beginning with the republication, legislation can be tracked using the "Code
Comparative Table and Disposition List."
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific Code provisions by
individual section numbers.
This republication brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 2011-06, passed June 9,
2011.
Municipal Code Corporation
1700 Capital Circle SW
Tallahassee, FL 32310
800-262-2633
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE
This Code is organized to make the laws of the City as accessible as possible to City officials, City
employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important
elements of this Code.
Numbering System.
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses
a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It
is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is
represented in the Code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04
of Title 2.
Title.
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This Code
contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain
ordinances about the general penalty, Code adoption and definitions. The titles in this Code are
separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use.
Chapter.
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the
chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters
which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without
renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04,
City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney.
Section.
Each section of the Code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by
"tens" to allow for expansion of the Code without renumbering.
Tables of Contents.
There are many tables of contents in this Code to assist in locating specific information. At the
beginning of the Code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter
has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively.
Ordinance History Note.
AVENAL, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
At the end of each Code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying
ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year.
(Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).)
Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These
history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the
back of the volume preceding the index.
Statutory References.
The statutory references direct the Code user to those portions of the state statutes that are
applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated.
Cross-Reference Table.
When a Code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older
or "prior" Code references in the new Code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the
Code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior Code section in the column labeled
"Prior Code Section" and the new Code section in the column labeled "Herein."
As of the republication, this table will no longer be updated.
Ordinance List and Disposition Table.
To find a specific ordinance in the Code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List
and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion
in the Code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the
disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated.
(Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally
codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the
ordinance is for some reason omitted from the Code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the
disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending),"
"(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)."
Beginning with the republication, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and
Disposition List."
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List.
Beginning with the republication, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for
use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of
each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies
the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the Code of
each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any
section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.
Index.
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this Code, start with the index. This is
an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and crossreferences
where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate
subheadings:
BUSINESS LICENSE
See also BUSINESS TAX
Fee 5.04.030
Required when 5.04.010
The index will be updated as necessary when the Code text is amended.
Looseleaf Supplements
AVENAL, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of
the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory
legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new
pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication.
As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the
amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher
that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition,
that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Kelly Heaton, Editor, and Eric Grant, Vice
President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other
members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.
The publisher is most grateful to Pamela J. Bonilla, City Clerk, and the other members of the citystaff
for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that
their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Municipal Code which will make the active law of
the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration
of the city's affairs.
Instruction Sheet.
Each supplement to the new Code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction
Sheet will tell the Code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in
that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the Code and the new pages that must
be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the Code is kept accurate and current.
Removed pages should be kept for future reference.
Page Numbers.
When originally published, the pages of this Code were consecutively numbered. When new pages
are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1,
32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in Codes that are printed double-sided) will be
left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use.
Electronic Submission.
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if
at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have
a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a
diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your Code more quickly but also
ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com.
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to:
Municipal Code Corporation
P.O. Box 2235
Tallahassee, FL 32316
Customer Service.
If you have any questions about this Code or our services, please contact Municipal Code
Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or:
Municipal Code Corporation
1700 Capital Circle SW
Tallahassee, FL 32310
AVENAL, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
Ordinance No. 82-04
An Ordinance of the City of Avenal Adopting the Avenal Municipal Code, Together with the Following
Secondary Codes Therein Adopted by Reference, To Wit: That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Fire Code,
1979 Edition", Published by the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western Fire Chiefs
Association, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the
Provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code; That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Building Code", 1979
Edition, Volume I, Published by the International Conference of Building Officials, Together with Its
Appendices, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the
Provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code; That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Electrical Code", 1978
Edition, Published by the Pacific Coast Electrical Bureau, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are
Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code; That Certain Code
Entitled "National Electrical Code", 1978 Edition, Published by the National Board of Fire Underwriters,
Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of the
Avenal Municipal Code; That Certain Code Entitled "Uniform Plumbing Code", 1979 Edition, Published by
the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, Together with Its Appendices, Save
and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified, or Amended by the Provisions of the Avenal
Municipal Code; and That Certain Code Entitled "Mechanical Code", 1976 Edition, Published by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and International Conference of Building
Officials, Together with Its Appendices, Save and Except Such Portions Thereof as Are Deleted, Modified,
or Amended by the Provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code; and Prescribing Certain Penalties for the
Violation of the Provisions Thereof
The City Council of the City of Avenal does ordain as follows:
Sec. 1. Adoption of the Avenal Municipal Code.
That certain document, entitled "Avenal Municipal Code", including the Appendix thereto, three (3)
copies of which have been filed and are on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection, together
with the secondary Codes therein adopted by reference, is hereby adopted by reference as a
comprehensive Ordinance Code for the City of Avenal pursuant to the provisions of Article 2 of Chapter 1
of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the State of California, and each and all of the
provisions, terms, and penalties of said Code on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to,
adopted, incorporated herein, and made a part of this Ordinance as if fully set forth in this Ordinance.
Sec. 2. Savings provisions.
The repealing provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code shall not affect or impair any act done or right
vested or approved, or any proceeding, suit, or prosecution had or commenced in any cause before such
repeal shall take effect; but every such act done, or right vested or accrued, or proceeding, suit, or
prosecution had or commenced shall remain in full force and effect to all intents and purposes as if the
applicable provisions of the ordinance, or part thereof, so repealed had remained in full force and effect.
No offense committed and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the
time when any such ordinance, or part thereof, shall be repealed or altered by said Code, shall be
discharged or affected by such repeal or alteration; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses,liabilities,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be instituted and proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance, or
part thereof, had not been repealed or altered.
Sec. 3. Violations of Code provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of the Avenal Municipal Code or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by said
Municipal Code. Any person violating any of such provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of the Avenal Municipal Code shall be guilty of an infraction as designated by,
and provided for, in Sections 16, 17, 19c, and 19d of the Penal Code of the State of California and as
expressly specified in Section 40000 of the Vehicle Code of the State of California. Each such person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of
AVENAL, CALIFORNIA MUNICIPAL CODE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
any provision of the Avenal Municipal Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by said
Municipal Code, is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable
accordingly.
Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code shall be
punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than Fifty and no/lOOths ($50.00) Dollars, for a
second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than One Hundred and no/lOOths
($100.00) Dollars, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not
more than Two Hundred and no/lOOths ($200.00) Dollars.
In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition permitted or caused to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by
reference by said Municipal Code, or any subdivision, building, wiring, plumbing, or other similar activity in
violation of the provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
summarily abated by the City in a civil action, and each day such condition continues shall be a new and
separate offense.
Sec. 4. Effective date: Publication.
This ordinance shall become effective and be in full force and operation thirty (30) days from the date
of its final passage and approval and shall be posted as provided by law.
The foregoing ordinance was introduced by Councilman Norman Messer at a regular meeting of the
City Council held on the 13th day of May, 1982.
The foregoing ordinance was passed, adopted, and ordered to print at a regular meeting of the City
Council held on the 27th day of May, 1982.
Ayes: Castleman, Casida, Glover, Messer and Etchison
Noes:
Absent:
/s/ JIM CASTLEMAN
Mayor of the City of Avenal
ATTEST:
/s/ CAROLYN PARKS
City Clerk of the City of Avenal
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - ADOPTION OF CODE
Chapter 2 - PENALTY PROVISIONS
Chapter 3 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 4 - APPEALS
Chapter 5 - CITY SEAL
Chapter 1 ADOPTION OF CODE
Sections:
1-1.01 Title—References to Code.
1-1.02 Authority.
1-1.03 Effective date.
1-1.04 Construction and interpretation of Code.
1-1.05 Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.
1-1.06 References to specific ordinances.
1-1.07 Validity of Code.
1-1.08 Repeal of ordinances.
1-1.09 Maintenance of Code.
1-1.01 Title—References to Code.
This Code shall be known as the "Avenal Municipal Code".
It shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the Avenal Municipal Code in any prosecution for the
violation of any provision hereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to,
amending, or repealing the provisions of this Code as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the
Avenal Municipal Code, or a portion thereof.
1-1.02 Authority.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, this Code consists of all the regulatory, penal, and
administrative laws of general application of the City of Avenal, codified pursuant to the authority set forth
in Article 2 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code of the State.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
1-1.03 Effective date.
The provisions of this Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting this
Code by reference.
1-1.04 Construction and interpretation of Code.
All provisions of this Code and all City ordinances shall be interpreted to refer to the appropriate or
designated officer or office of the City, and whenever an ordinance, uniform code, statute, or other matter
which is adopted by reference refers to any department, officer, employee, inspection, police, or other
function, unless the context requires otherwise, all such references shall be to the appropriate or
designated office, officer, department, agency, employee, or function of the City.
1-1.05 Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal of any ordinance of the City by this Code shall in any
manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the
effective date of this Code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty on such effective date
due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to
any violation of such ordinances, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required to be
posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations pertaining to
such ordinances shall continue in full force and effect.
1-1.06 References to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which
refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are specifically designated by number or
otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such references shall apply to the corresponding
provisions set forth in this Code.
1-1.07 Validity of Code.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The
Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause, and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional.
1-1.08 Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of the City in force upon the effective date of this Code are hereby repealed except as
follows:
(a) Ordinances relating to matters of a special or temporary nature, which ordinances are listed in
Table 2 of the Appendix of this Code;
(b) Ordinances which have been suspended, which ordinances are listed in Table 3 of the
Appendix of this Code; and
(c) Ordinances of a general nature which have not been codified but which are to remain in effect
pending their revision or repeal, which ordinances are listed in Table 4 of the Appendix of this
Code.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
1-1.09 Maintenance of Code.
At least three (3) copies of this Code, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on file in
his office as the official copies of the Code. Additional copies of the Code shall be distributed to the
departments of the City as shall be prescribed by the City Manager.
Duly certified copies of each ordinance making a change in the Code shall be filed in the office of the
City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference.
At least semiannually the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of this Code in which changes
have been made to be reproduced, including a notation as to the ordinance number and the datepursuant
to which such change is adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the Code, prepared
for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the City and the general public, may be
brought up-to-date.
Chapter 2 PENALTY PROVISIONS
Sections:
1-2.01 Violations.
1-2.02 Prohibited acts.
1-2.03 [Duty of court.]
1-2.04 Determination of punishment.
1-2.05 Fees, charges, licenses, and taxes made a civil debt.
1-2.06 Violation of administrative provisions.
1-2.01 Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Code or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this Code. Unless
otherwise specified, any person violating any of such provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this Code shall be guilty of an infraction as designated by, and provided for, in
Sections 16, 17, 19c and 19d of the Penal Code and Section 40000.1 of the Vehicle Code of the State.
Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which
any violation of any provision of this Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this
Code, is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
Unless otherwise specified, any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code
shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00), and for a second
conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a
third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00).
In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this Code, or the provisions of any Code adopted by reference by this
Code, or any subdivision, building, wiring, plumbing, or other similar activity in violation of the provisionsof
this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City in a civil action,
and each day such condition continues shall be a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 89-10 § 1, 1989)
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
1-2.02 Prohibited acts.
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting,
aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission.
1-2.03 [Duty of court.]
The provisions of this Code which declare certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned
devolve a duty upon the court authorized to pass sentence and impose the punishment described.
1-2.04 Determination of punishment.
Whenever in this Code the punishment for a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the
punishment to be inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to pass
sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this Code.
1-2.05 Fees, charges, licenses, and taxes made a civil debt.
The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of any nature whatsoever
imposed by any provision of this Code shall be deemed a civil debt owing to the City. An action may be
commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount
of any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax, together with any
penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this Code. The remedy prescribed by this section shall be
cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the use
of any other remedy provided by this Code or by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof.
1-2.06 Violation of administrative provisions.
The violation of any administrative provisions of this Code by any officer or employee of the City may
be deemed a failure to perform the duties or to observe the rules or regulations of the department, office,
or board within the meaning of the rules and regulations of the City or of the civil service regulations of the
City.
Chapter 3 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Sections:
1-3.01 Scope.
1-3.02 Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
1-3.03 Tenure of officers preserved.
1-3.04 Effect of headings.
1-3.05 Meaning of section and subsection.
1-3.06 References to acts or omissions within the City.
1-3.07 Acts by deputies.
1-3.08 Writing.
1-3.09 References to ordinances—Application to amendments.
1-3.10 Notices required—Service.
1-3.11 Notices required—Service—Proof.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
1-3.12 Statute of limitations.
1-3.13 Definitions.
1-3.01 Scope.
Unless the provisions of this Code otherwise specifically provide, or the context of this Code
indicates to the contrary, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in this
chapter shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under
it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice.
1-3.02 Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances
relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new
enactments.
1-3.03 Tenure of officers preserved.
All persons who, at the time this Code takes effect, hold office under any of the ordinances repealed
by this Code, which offices are continued by this Code, shall continue to hold such offices in accordance
with the tenure originally granted such persons.
1-3.04 Effect of headings.
Title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern,
limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter,
article, or section of this Code.
1-3.05 Meaning of section and subsection.
"Section" shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned.
"Subsection" shall mean a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section
is expressly mentioned.
1-3.06 References to acts or omissions within the City.
The provisions of this Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial
limits of the City and to that territory outside the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by
virtue of the Constitution of the State or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property.
1-3.07 Acts by deputies.
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer or employee, the power
may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person
otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
1-3.08 Writing.
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means.
Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is required or authorized by this Code, such notice,
report, statement, or record shall be made in writing in the English language unless this Code expressly
provides otherwise.
1-3.09 References to ordinances—Application to amendments.
Whenever any reference in this Code is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to such
ordinance of the City unless this Code expressly provides otherwise. Whenever any reference is made to
any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of the City, the reference shall apply to all amendments and
additions made to this Code.
1-3.10 Notices required—Service.
Whenever a notice is required to be given pursuant to the provisions of this Code, unless different
provisions are otherwise specifically set forth in the text of the Code, such notice may be given either by
personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed
envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or
residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the
matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the
time the notice is deposited in the post office.
1-3.11 Notices required—Service—Proof.
Proof of giving any notice required to be given pursuant to the provisions of this Code may be made
by the certificate of any officer or employee of the City or by the affidavit of any person over the age of
eighteen (18) years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with the provisions of this Code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
1-3.12 Statute of limitations.
When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right
or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the
time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.
1-3.13 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Code, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases
used in this Code are defined as follows:
(a) "Calendar year" shall mean from January 1 through December 31 of any given year.
(b) "City" shall mean the City of Avenal.
(c) "Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Avenal.
(d) "County" shall mean the County of Kings.
(e) "Fiscal year" shall mean from July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year.
(f) "Gender". The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
(g) "Goods" shall mean and include wares and merchandise.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
(h) "May" shall be permissive.
(i) "Month" shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
(j) "Number". The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural number shall include the
singular.
(k) "Oath" shall include affirmation.
(l) "Office". The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or ordinance shall mean such
officer, employee, office, or ordinance of the City, unless otherwise specified.
(m) "Official time standard". Wherever certain hours are names in this Code, they shall mean
standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the City.
(n) "Operate" shall mean and include carrying on, keeping, conducting, or maintaining.
(o) "Owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant
in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.
(p) "Person" shall include any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, public
corporation, political subdivision, city (except the City of Avenal), the County of Kings, any
district in the County of Kings, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any
department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.
(q) "Personal property" shall include money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences of
debt.
(r) "Property" shall include real and personal property.
(s) "Quarterly", where used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first three (3) calendar
months of any given year or any succeeding period of three (3) calendar months.
(t) "Real property" shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
(u) "Sale" shall include any sale, exchange, barter, or offer for sale.
(v) "Shall" shall be mandatory.
(w) "State" shall mean the State of California.
(x) "Street" shall include all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares,
or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to
public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of the State.
(y) "Tenant or occupant", applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
(z) "Tenses". The present tense shall include the past and future tenses, and the future tense shall
include the present tense.
Chapter 4 APPEALS
Sections:
1-4.01 Right to appeal.
1-4.02 Time limit for filing.
1-4.03 Hearings—Notices.
1-4.04 Hearings.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
1-4.01 Right to appeal.
Except where an appeals procedure is otherwise specifically set forth in this Code, any person
excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him pursuant to any of
the provisions of this Code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the City, if the denial,
suspension, or revocation of such permit or the determination of such administrative decision involves the
exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the provisions of
this Code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal,
setting forth the specific grounds thereof.
No appeal may be taken to any such administrative decision made by an official of the City pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter unless such decision to appeal has been first taken up with the
department head concerned.
No right of appeal to the Council from any administrative decision made by an official of the City
pursuant to any of the provisions of this Code shall exist when such decision is ministerial and thus does
not involve the exercise of administrative discretion or personal judgment exercised pursuant to any of the
provisions of this Code, whether the administrative decision involves the denial, suspension, or revocation
of a permit or any other administrative decision.
1-4.02 Time limit for filing.
The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the
receipt of the notice of the administrative decision concerned.
1-4.03 Hearings—Notices.
Upon the filing of the notice of appeal in proper form, the City Clerk shall place the matter on the
Council agenda for the next regular meeting of the Council which will be held at least five (5) days after
the date of the filing of the notice of appeal. Except in cases of emergency when the Council may
determine the matter immediately, the Council shall set the matter for hearing at a subsequent meeting,
but in no event later than thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the notice of appeal with the City
Clerk. The City Clerk shall cause a written notice of the hearing to be given to the appellant not less than
five (5) days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the appellant.
1-4.04 Hearings.
At the hearing required by the provisions of Section 1-4.03 of this chapter, the appellant shall show
cause on the grounds set forth in the notice of appeal why the action appealed from should not be
approved. The Council may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be
final and conclusive in the matter.
Chapter 5 CITY SEAL
Sections:
1-5.01 Adoption—Custody.
1-5.02 Definitions.
1-5.03 Unauthorized use or reproduction prohibited.
1-5.04 Replica—Use on vehicles.
1-5.05 Violation—Penalty.
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
1-5.01 Adoption—Custody.
(a) Pursuant to the provisions of Section 34501 of the Government Code of the State, the City Council of
the City does hereby approve and adopt as and for the Corporate Seal of said City, a seal, with
lettering, form, arrangement and designs all as set forth and shown in the embossed or stamped
impression thereof.
(b) The City Clerk shall have official custody of the official seal of said City.
(c) The only form of corporate seal authorized for use by or for said City, after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be the form of seal in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. 83-04 §§ 1, 3, 4, 1983)
1-5.02 Definitions.
The word "person" as used in this chapter, shall include person, firm, association and corporation,
and whether acting as principal, agent, employee or otherwise.
(Ord. 83-04 § 7, 1983)
1-5.03 Unauthorized use or reproduction prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use the seal of the City, or any cut, or facsimile, or
reproduction of said seal, or make or use any seal or any design which is an imitation of said seal, or of
the design thereof, or which may be mistaken for the seal of said City for any purpose other than for City
purposes, or for the purpose of any board, officer or department thereof without the express and written
approval of the governing body of the City.
(Ord. 83-04 § 2, 1983)
1-5.04 Replica—Use on vehicles.
(a) Until the further order of the City Council, the Director of Public Works of the City shall designate the
particular motor vehicles or other vehicles or items or property belonging to the City, on or in
connection with which replicas or near representations of the official seal of the City shall be used;
and when so designated the officers or employees having immediate charge or control of such
vehicles or equipment so designated, shall obtain such replicas from the City Clerk and affix the
same thereto and maintain the same thereon, until further order of the Director of Public Works or by
order of the City Council.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to display or place, either temporarily or permanently, the official
seal of the City, or any facsimile, or any representation or near representation thereof on any
privately owned vehicle, unless by express written permit first had and obtained from the City Council
of the City so to do. In the event any such permit is granted by the Council, it shall be unlawful for
any person to place or display such seal in any manner, or at any time contrary to or in violation of
the provisions of the permit.
(Ord. 83-04 §§ 5, 6, 1983)
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
1-5.05 Violation—Penalty.
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.
(b) Every person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which, or
during any portion of which, any of the provisions of this chapter is violated.
(Ord. 83-04 § 8, 1983)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2 - CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
Chapter 3 - COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 4 - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Chapter 5 - ELECTIONS
Chapter 6 - CITY CLERK
Chapter 1 CITY COUNCIL
Sections:
Article 1. - Meetings
Article 2. - Compensation and Benefits
Article 1. Meetings
2-1.101 Place.
2-1.102 Time.
2-1.103 Special and adjourned.
2-1.101 Place.
All meetings of the Council shall be held at 233 East Kings Street in the City, commonly known as
the Avenal Theater.
(Ord. 2002-01, 2002; Ord. 81-05)
2-1.102 Time.
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the second and fourth Thursdays of each month at
6:00 p.m.
(Ord. 79-2; Res. No. 2004-04, § 2, 1-8-2004)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
2-1.103 Special and adjourned.
(a) Special. Special meetings of the Council may be called at any time by the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem, or
by a majority of the members of the Council by delivering personally or by mailing a written notice to
each member of the Council, the City Attorney, and to each local newspaper of general circulation
and radio or television station requesting notice in writing. Such notice shall be delivered personally
or by mail at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as set forth in the notice.
The call and notice shall set forth the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be
transacted. No other business shall be considered at such meeting. Such written notice may be
dispensed with as to any member who, at or prior to the time the meeting convenes, files with the
City Clerk a written waiver of the notice. Such waiver may be given by telephone or by telegram.
Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any member who is actually present at the
meeting at the time it convenes.
(b) Adjourned. Any regular, adjourned regular, special, or adjourned special meeting of the Council may
be adjourned to a time and place specified in the order of adjournment. Less than a quorum may so
adjourn from time to time. If all members of the Council are absent from a regular or adjourned
regular meeting, the City Clerk may declare the meeting adjourned to a stated time and place and
shall cause a written notice of the adjournment to be delivered personally or by mail to each member
of the Council, the City Attorney, and to each local newspaper of general circulation and radio or
television station requesting notice in writing. Such notice shall be delivered personally or by mail at
least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as set forth in the notice. A copy of the
order or notice of adjournment shall be conspicuously posted on or near the door of the place where
the regular, adjourned regular, special, or adjourned special meeting was held within twenty-four (24)
hours after the time of the adjournment. When a 2-1.103 regular or adjourned regular meeting is
adjourned as provided in this section, the resulting adjourned regular meeting shall be a regular
meeting for all purposes. When an order of adjournment of any meeting fails to state the hour at
which the adjourned meeting is to be held, it shall be held at the hour specified for regular meetings
by ordinance, resolution, law, or other rules.
Article 2. Compensation and Benefits
2-1.201 Compensation.
2-1.202 Benefits.
2-1.201 Compensation.
Council members shall be entitled to receive compensation as set by resolution provided such
resolution does not exceed an amount equivalent to the maximum salary computed pursuant to California
Government Code Section 36516, as it now exists or hereafter may be amended or superseded.
(Ord. 99-06, 1999)
2-1.202 Benefits.
In lieu of compensation pursuant to Section 2-1.201, a Council Member may elect to receivebenefits,
including retirement, health and welfare and/or federal social security benefits, which are available and
paid by the City to its employees, in an amount equal to the compensation available to that Council
Member pursuant to Section 2-1.201.
(Ord. 99-06, 1999)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
Chapter 2 CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
Sections:
2-2.01 Presenting and filing.
2-2.02 Council consideration.
2-2.03 Payment—Audit by Council.
2-2.04 Payment—Signatures.
2-2.01 Presenting and filing.
Any person having a claim against the City, except for a salary fixed by ordinance or resolution, shall
present a detailed statement of such claim to the City Clerk, which statement shall be filed with the City
Clerk at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting of the Council at which such claim is to be heard.
The Council hereby reserves the right to require, by resolution, that, as a prerequisite to the payment
of such claim, any particular claim or type of claim shall be verified by oath before the City Clerk or other
officer authorized to administer oaths.
2-2.02 Council consideration.
Claims against the City shall be considered and allowed by the Council only at the first regular
meeting in every month.
2-2.03 Payment—Audit by Council.
No demand or claim against the City shall be paid until after such demand or claim has been
presented to, and audited by, the Council; provided, however, the payment of salaries and wages shall
not be subject to this restriction and shall be paid as established by resolution of the Council.
2-2.04 Payment—Signatures.
All demands, when audited and allowed, and all salaries shall be paid by the Mayor of the City and
countersigned by the City Clerk, or by their designated subordinates.
Chapter 3 COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Sections:
Article 1. - Planning Commission
Article 2. - Redevelopment Agency
Article 3. - Economic Development Agency
Article 1. Planning Commission
2-3.101 Established.
2-3.102 Members—Appointment.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
2-3.103 Term of office.
2-3.104 Power and duties.
2-3.105 Attendance at meetings.
2-3.101 Established.
There is hereby established a Planning Commission for the City of Avenal.
(Ord. 94-01 (part), 1994; Ord. 80-6 (part))
2-3.102 Members—Appointment.
The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be appointed to the Planning
Commission and who shall serve as follows:
(a) Appointments shall be made by each member of the City Council from a list of candidates or
from the community at large, subject approval by the Council.
(b) Appointments shall be made on a rotating basis according to the following schedule: (1) Thefirst
appointment shall be made by the Mayor; (2) The second appointment shall be made by the
Mayor Pro Tem; and (3) The third, fourth and fifth appointment shall be made by the remaining
council members in order of elected seniority. In the event council members have the same
elected seniority, the Mayor shall determine the rotation order. The City Clerk is charged with
maintaining a record of the rotation schedule.
(c) Each member of the Planning Commission shall be accountable to the member of the City
Council who appointed that Planning Commission member, and shall report and answer to said
City Council member.
(d) In addition to the members appointed to the Planning Commission as described above, the City
Engineer and the Mayor shall be ex officio members of the Commission.
(Ord. 94-01 (part), 1994; Ord. 80-6 (part))
2-3.103 Term of office.
Each member of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years.
(Ord. 94-01 (part), 1994; Ord. 80-6 (part))
2-3.104 Power and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have the power and duties prescribed by law.
(Ord. 94-01 (part), 1994; Ord. 80-6 (part))
2-3.105 Attendance at meetings.
In the event a member of the Planning Commission misses three (3) meetings in any twelve (12)
month period, the City Council member who appointed that Planning Commissioner shall have the right,
at his or her discretion, to remove the Commissioner.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
(Ord. 94-01 (part))
Article 2. Redevelopment Agency
2-3.201 Statutory authority.
2-3.202 Designated.
2-3.203 Organization—Compensation.
2-3.201 Statutory authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the California Health and Safety Code, the City
Council of the City does hereby make the finding that the formation of a Redevelopment Agency will
serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner.
(Ord. 84-15 § 1, 1984)
2-3.202 Designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the California Health and Safety Code, the City
Council of the City, the legislative body of said City, does hereby declare itself to be the Redevelopment
Agency of the City and vests in itself all rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested therein.
(Ord. 84-15 § 2, 1984)
2-3.203 Organization—Compensation.
The Mayor of the City shall be the Chairman of said Redevelopment Agency, the Mayor Pro Tem
shall be the Chairman Pro Tem of said Agency, and the City Manager shall be the Executive Director of
said Agency. Each of the five said officers shall serve with compensation prescribed at twenty-five dollars
($25.00) per member per meeting attended with a maximum limit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
month per member.
(Ord. 84-15 § 3, 1984)
Article 3. Economic Development Agency
2-3.301 Established.
2-3.302 Members—Appointment.
2-3.303 Term of office.
2-3.304 Purpose.
2-3.305 Duties.
2-3.306 Meetings.
2-3.307 Quorum.
2-3.308 Rules of procedure.
2-3.309 Agency records.
2-3.310 Clerical assistance—Consultants.
2-3.311 Compensation—Reimbursement for expenses.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
2-3.312 Removal from office.
2-3.301 Established.
An Economic Development Agency is established for the City of Avenal, such Agency to be known
as the Avenal Economic Development Agency.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.302 Members—Appointment.
The Economic Development Agency shall consist of five (5) members, who shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Council. The City Manager and the City Council member who is responsible for
overseeing the Economic Development Agency shall interview potential candidates for the Economic
Development Agency. Following said interview, the City Manager and the City Council member shall
make recommendations to the City Council. The members of the Economic Development Agency shall be
appointed by rotation schedule, with each member of the City Council appointing one member of the initial
Economic Development Agency. Thereafter, the City Council members shall appoint successor Agency
members by rotation as the members' terms expire. Members of the Economic Development Agency shall
be required to file a California Government Code Section 87302 Conflict of Interest form with the City
Clerk.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.303 Term of office.
The term of office of the members of the Economic Development Agency shall be four (4) years. The
initial members of the Agency shall, by lot, select two (2) members to serve terms of two (2) years each;
two (2) members to serve terms of three (3) years each; and one member to serve a term of four (4)
years. Thereafter, all terms shall be four (4) years. Agency members shall serve for their term, which shall
expire on December 31st of the final year of each term, provided, however, that Agency members shall
continue to serve until the appointment of their successors in office. Excepting for the first Agency, which
shall assume office immediately upon appointment, the terms of office of the Agency members shall
commence on January 1st of the year following their appointment.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.304 Purpose.
Members of the Economic Development Agency shall serve in a review and advisory capacity to the
City Council of the City of Avenal. The purpose of this Agency is to facilitate, act upon and develop
strategies and tactics to retain business and to express a commitment to growth within the area of the
City of Avenal.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.305 Duties.
The Agency shall:
(a) Review the economic condition of the City of Avenal and the surrounding areas;
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
(b) Consult with local business and trade organizations, labor organizations and any other local,
state or national commission, organization, trade association or agency, whether voluntary or
created by law, which the committee deems may be of assistance in formulating a program for
industrial and economic development;
(c) Advise and make recommendations to the City Council with respect to the industrial and
economic development of the City of Avenal and formulate a program in furtherance of this
purpose at the earliest practicable time;
(d) Develop and manage programs for the improvement of the local economy;
(e) Develop and recommend methods for financing economic development in the City;
(f) Conduct or sponsor seminars relating to economic development;
(g) Coordinate its studies and programs with other economic development organizations in
California's Central Valley; and
(h) Report monthly to the City Council on the Agency's progress and performance and provide
timely responses to all proposals and inquiries made by the City Council.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.306 Meetings.
The Economic Development Agency shall fix the time and place of its regular meetings, and may
hold special meetings in the manner prescribed by state law. The Agency shall meet once a month, or
more or less often as required to fulfill its duties and obligations. The Agency shall hold public hearings as
necessary, to assess program progress and performance and to provide for the submission of views and
proposals regarding the industrial and economic development of the City of Avenal. The Economic
Development Agency and its members shall be bound by the Brown Act.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.307 Quorum.
Three (3) voting members of the Agency constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A
majority vote of those present is required to take official action.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.308 Rules of procedure.
Rules of procedure to be followed by the Agency shall be adopted by it and submitted to the City
Council for approval by resolution. Any changes in the rules of procedure of the Agency shall likewise be
approved by the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.309 Agency records.
The Economic Development Agency shall make and keep a written, public record of its meetings,
resolutions, transactions, minute orders, findings and determinations, copies of which shall be kept on file
in the office of the City Clerk. The Agency shall record deliberations and decisions adequately to reveal
considerations significant to such decisions.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
2-3.310 Clerical assistance—Consultants.
The City Manager may provide clerical assistance to the Economic Development Agency. The
Agency may recommend to the City Council the employment of expert consultants to perform work or
give advice relating to the formulation of a program for industrial and economical development when the
Agency finds such work or advice necessary.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.311 Compensation—Reimbursement for expenses.
Members of the Avenal Economic Development Agency shall serve without compensation.
Necessary expenses incurred by them may be paid by the City of Avenal, provided that the approval of
such expenses shall be obtained from the City Council prior to the time that such expenses are actually
incurred.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-3.312 Removal from office.
Members of the Economic Development Agency may be removed from their position by the City
Council, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the City Council constituting a quorum.
(Ord. 96-02 § 1 (part), 1996)
Chapter 4 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Sections:
Article 1. - City Manager
Article 2. - Personnel System
Article 3. - Training Law Enforcement Officers
Article 4. - Retirement
Article 1. City Manager
2-4.101 Office established.
2-4.102 Appointment.
2-4.103 Term of office—Contract of employment.
2-4.104 Residence.
2-4.105 Absences or disability—Acting City Manager.
2-4.106 Compensation—Expenses.
2-4.107 Automobile allowance.
2-4.108 Powers and duties.
2-4.109 Relationship with the Council.
2-4.110 Attendance at commission, board, and committee meetings.
2-4.111 Vacation and sick leave.
2-4.112 Political activities.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
2-4.101 Office established.
The office of the City Manager of the City is hereby created and established.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.102 Appointment.
The City Manager shall be appointed by the Council on the basis of his administrative and executive
qualifications, ability, and technical training and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of theCouncil.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.103 Term of office—Contract of employment.
Unless the Council determines to enter into a contract of employment with the City Manager, as set
forth in this section, the Council shall appoint the City Manager for an indefinite term and may remove him
by a majority vote of the Council. The Council, in removing the City Manager, shall use its uncontrolled
and unqualified discretion, and its action shall be final.
The Council may, at its option, enter into a contract of employment with the City Manager upon such
terms as may be mutually agreed upon.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.104 Residence.
Residence in the City at the time of the appointment of the City Manager shall not be required as a
condition of the appointment. However, within ninety (90) days thereafter, the City Manager shall become
a resident of the City, or the Council shall declare the office of the City Manager to be vacant.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.105 Absences or disability—Acting City Manager.
In the case of the absence or disability of the City Manager for a period exceeding two (2) weeks, the
Council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the office during the period of
the absence or disability of the City Manager. A department head or other City employee may be
appointed Acting City Manager.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.106 Compensation—Expenses.
The City Manager shall receive such compensation as the Council shall from time to time determine.
Such compensation shall be fixed by resolution and shall be a proper charge against such funds of the
City as the Council shall designate.
In addition, the City Manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid by him in
the performance of his duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under the
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
direction of the Council. Reimbursement shall only be made when a claim, setting forth the sums
expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the Council for
approval and has been so approved.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.107 Automobile allowance.
The City Manager shall be paid an automobile allowance for City business or, in the discretion of the
Council, shall be furnished with the use of a City-owned automobile.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.108 Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and
control of the Council except as otherwise provided in this article. He shall be responsible for the efficient
administration of all the affairs of the City which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as
administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon; he shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) Law enforcement. To ascertain that the laws of the State pertaining to the City and all laws,
ordinances, and policies of the City are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits, and
privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed;
(b) Direction of officers and employees. To control, order, and give directions to all heads of
departments, subordinate officers, and employees of the City, except the City Clerk, City
Treasurer, and the City Attorney; to transfer employees from one department to another; to
consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments, or units under his direction; and to
exercise control over and supervise, in general, all departments and divisions of the City and all
appointive officers and employees thereof. Further, any actions taken by the City Manager shall
be consistent with the Personnel Rules of the City;
(c) Recommendation of appointment of officers and employees. To recommend to the Council the
appointment of all officers and employees over whom he has jurisdiction. Such
recommendations shall be made subject to the applicable Personnel Rules and shall be made
from eligibility lists when available. The City Manager may, subject to the applicable Personnel
Rules take action to remove, suspend, demote, and promote such officers and employees over
whom the City Manager has jurisdiction;
(d) Reorganization of offices, positions, and departments. To study and recommend to the Council
such reorganization of offices, positions, departments, or units under his direction as may be
indicated in the interest of the efficient, effective, and economical conduct of the City's business;
(e) Recommendation of adoption of laws. To recommend to the Council for adoption such
measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient;
(f) Attendance at Council meetings. To attend all meetings of the Council, unless excused
therefrom by the Council, except when his removal is under consideration;
(g) Preparation of financial reports. To keep the Council at all times fully advised as to the financial
conditions and needs of the City, including the current and anticipated expenses,appropriations,
cash on hand, and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts;
(h) Preparation of budgets and salary plans. To prepare and submit to the Council the annual
budget and to administer the budget after its adoption and to annually recommend to the
Council, a salary plan;
(i) Expenditure control and purchasing. To purchase or cause to be purchased all supplies for the
departments of the City. No expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the Council
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 11
except by the report or approval of the City Manager. However, no purchase shall be made or
obligation incurred by the City Manager except upon authorization by the Council. The Council
shall, by appropriate resolution, fix and determine the maximum amount which the City Manager
may spend or for which he may obligate the City to pay for designated services, supplies, or
equipment, within which limits the City Manager shall not need or require prior approval or
authorization. A report on all such expenditures shall be made to the Council;
(j) Investigations. To make investigations into the affairs of the City, and any department thereof,
and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the City;
(k) Supervision of public property. To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, parks,
streets, and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the Council,
including all utility systems and properties;
(l) Investigations and recommendations of government and overseeing franchises, permits, and
licenses. To investigate all complaints and recommendations in relation to matters concerning
the administration of the City government and concerning the service maintained by public
utilities in the City and to ascertain that all franchises, permits, and licenses granted by the City
are faithfully performed and observed;
(m) Devotion of time to his duties. To devote his entire time to the duties and interests of the City,
and he shall not engage in any other private occupation or employment for gain or profit;
(n) Preparation of reports and recommendations requested by Council. To make reports and
recommendations as may be desirable or as requested by the Council;
(o) Provide leadership. To provide leadership for civil movements designed to benefit the residents
of the City when so authorized by the Council; and
(p) Performance of additional duties. To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers
as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance, resolution, or other action of the
Council, including the duty of acting as City Engineer if he is so qualified; provided, however,
the Council shall not assign to the City Manager any duties the nature of which would operate to
give the City Manager any civil service status.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.109 Relationship with the Council.
The Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the
City Manager, except for the purposes of inquiry, and neither the Council nor any of its members shall
give orders directly to any subordinate of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take his orders and
instructions from the Council only upon official action taken in a duly held meeting of the Council, and no
individual Councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the City Manager, except as the Council
shall have officially instructed such Councilman to do so.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.110 Attendance at commission, board, and committee meetings.
The City Manager may attend any and all meetings of the Planning Commission, boards, or
committees, existing now or hereafter created by the Council, upon his own volition or upon the direction
of the Council, at which meetings he shall be heard by such commissions, boards, or committees as to all
matters upon which he may wish to address the members thereof, and he shall inform such members as
to the status of any matter being considered by the Council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent
with the members of all such commissions, boards, or committees appointed by the Council.
(Ord. 80-9)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 12
2-4.111 Vacation and sick leave.
The City Manager shall be entitled to those privileges with respect to vacations and sick leave as the
Council may from time to time determine.
(Ord. 80-9)
2-4.112 Political activities.
The rules and regulations prohibiting political activities by City employees, as set forth in Article 3 of
this chapter, shall apply with equal force and effect to the City Manager.
(Ord. 80-9)
Article 2. Personnel System
2-4.201 Adoption of personnel system.
2-4.202 Definitions.
2-4.203 Administration.
2-4.204 Competitive service.
2-4.205 Adoption and amendment of rules.
2-4.206 Appointments.
2-4.207 Probationary period.
2-4.208 Status of present employees.
2-4.209 Demotion—Dismissal—Reduction in pay—Suspension—Reprimand.
2-4.210 Right of appeal.
2-4.211 Lay-off and re-employment.
2-4.212 Political activity.
2-4.213 Contracts for special services.
2-4.201 Adoption of personnel system.
In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to
comply with applicable laws relating to the administration of the personnel process, the following
Personnel System is adopted.
(Ord. 89-02 § 1, 1989)
2-4.202 Definitions.
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules.
(Ord. 89-02 § 2, 1989)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 13
2-4.203 Administration.
The City Manager shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any of the powers
and duties to a Personnel Director or may delegate the appointing authority granted by the City Council to
any other officer of the City or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract
as provided in Section 2-4.213. The City Manager shall:
(a) Act as the appointing authority for the City.
(b) Administer all the provisions of this article and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to
the City Council.
(c) Prepare and recommend to the City Council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to
such rules.
(d) Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications,
and revisions of the plan.
(e) Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this article and the personnel
rules of the City.
(f) Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service;
the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification of a
list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service;
and performing any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system.
(Ord. 89-02 § 3, 1989)
2-4.204 Competitive service.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the
City, except:
(a) Elective officers.
(b) The City Manager and any assistant to the City Manager.
(c) The City Attorney and any assistant to the City Attorney.
(d) Members of appointive boards, commissions, and committees.
(e) All department heads.
(f) Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other service.
(g) Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen.
(h) All Council-appointed City officers.
(i) Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency
condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake which threatens life or property.
(j) Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in
permanent positions. "Regularly employed in permanent positions" means an employee hired
for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is either a full-time employee regularly
scheduled to work no less than two thousand eighty (2,080) regular hours per year or a
permanent part-time employee who is regularly scheduled to work no less than one thousand
forty (1,040) regular hours per year, and who has successfully completed the initial probationary
period and has been retained as provided in this article and the personnel rules.
(k) Except as otherwise provided herein, employees not included in the competitive service under
this section shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Those positions and
employments in the service of the City referred to in subsections (e), (g), (i) and (j) of this
section shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Manager or any appointment
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 14
power shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend any
such employee.
(Ord. 91-03 (part), 1991: Ord. 89-02 § 4, 1989)
2-4.205 Adoption and amendment of rules.
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. The rules may establish
regulations governing the personnel system, including:
(a) Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of position classification plan covering all
positions in the competitive service, including employment standards and qualifications for each
class.
(b) Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of application for
employment.
(c) Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists
concerning names of persons eligible for appointment.
(d) Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional
appointments.
(e) Establishment of probationary testing periods.
(f) Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter.
(g) Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the
competitive service.
(h) Separation of employees from the City service.
(i) The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures.
(Ord. 89-02 § 5, 1989)
2-4.206 Appointments.
Appointments to vacant position in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the
personnel rules. Appointments and promotion shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far
as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid the selection
of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of
candidates such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests,
physical ability test, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any combination of these or
other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process.
Physical, medical and psychological tests may be given as a part of any examination.
In any examination the City Manager or his/her designee may include, in addition to competitive
tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.
The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the City Manager. The City
Manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other officer of the City.
(Ord. 89-02 § 6, 1989)
2-4.207 Probationary period.
All original and promotional appointments shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period to
be determined by the Personnel Director for each class. All full-time positions shall be subject to a
probationary period of not less than one thousand forty (1,040) regular hours of work. All permanent partTitle
2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 15
time positions shall be subject to a probationary period of not less than five hundred twenty (520) regular
hours of work. The appointing authority may extend such probationary period by an additional one
thousand forty (1,040) regular hours for full-time appointments and an additional five hundred twenty
(520) regular hours for permanent part-time positions. The calculation of hours for purpose of this section
includes only regular hours as distinguished from overtime hours of work. During the probationary period,
the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal, hearing or any grievanceprocedure.
If the service of the probationary employee has been satisfactory to the appointing authority, then the
appointing authority shall file with the Personnel Director a written statement to such effect and state that
the retention of such employee in the service is desired. If such statement is not filed, the employee will
be deemed to be unsatisfactory and his employment terminated at the expiration of the probationary
period. Where a statement of satisfactory service has not been filed, notice of termination shall be served
on the terminated employee by the Personnel Director after the expiration of the selection period.
An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he has been promoted
shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he was promoted unless he is discharged from
the City service as provided in the personnel rules. If no vacancy exists in such position, he shall be
placed on a re-employment list as provided in the personnel rules.
(Ord. 89-02 § 7, 1989)
2-4.208 Status of present employees.
Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this article, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other
position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for
his class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date
without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this article and
personnel rules.
Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who
are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining
regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment.
(Ord. 89-02 § 8, 1989)
2-4.209 Demotion—Dismissal—Reduction in pay—Suspension—Reprimand.
The City Manager or any appointment power shall have the authority to demote, discharge,
reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend, any regular employee for cause in accordance with procedures
included in the personnel rules.
The City Manager or any appointment power shall have the authority to demote, discharge,
reprimand, reduce in pay, or suspend, any department head, volunteer personnel, emergency employee
or employee who is not regularly employed in a permanent position as provided in Section 2-4.204(k) of
this article.
(Ord. 91-03 (part), 1991: Ord. 89-02 § 9, 1989)
2-4.210 Right of appeal.
Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay,
suspension or discharge for disciplinary or medical reasons, except in those instances where the right of
appeal is specifically prohibited by this article or the rules adopted thereunder.
All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in
the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this article.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 16
(Ord. 89-02 § 10, 1989)
2-4.211 Lay-off and re-employment.
Lay-off and re-employment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules.
(Ord. 89-02 § 11, 1989)
2-4.212 Political activity.
The political activities of the City employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of State law and
any local provisions adopted pursuant to State law.
(Ord. 89-02 § 12, 1989)
2-4.213 Contracts for special services.
The City Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the
extent to which the City should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the
establishment or operation of the Personnel System. The City Council may contract with any qualified
person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and
duties imposed by this article.
(a) The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof.
(b) The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments
thereof.
(c) The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests.
(d) The conduct of employee training programs.
(e) Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to
personnel administration.
(Ord. 89-02 § 13, 1989)
Article 3. Training Law Enforcement Officers [1]
2-4.301 Declaration of qualification.
2-4.302 Declaration of adherence to standards.
2-4.301 Declaration of qualification.
The Council hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4 of Part 4 of the Penal Code of the State.
2-4.302 Declaration of adherence to standards.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4 of Part 4 of the Penal Code of the
State, the City, while receiving aid from the State pursuant to said Chapter 1, shall adhere to the
standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer
Standards and Training.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 17
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Cross reference— Police Department, § 4-11.01 et seq. (Back)
Article 4. Retirement
2-4.401 All employees.
2-4.401 All employees.
(a) Contract. A contract between the Council and The Board of Administration of the California Public
Employees' Retirement System is hereby authorized.
(b) Contract: Execution. The Mayor is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to execute such
contract for and on behalf of the City.
Chapter 5 ELECTIONS
Sections:
2-5.01 When held.
2-5.01 When held.
In accordance with California Government Code Section 36503.5, the municipal election for Avenal
shall be held on the same date as the statewide general election.
(Ord. 83-10 § 1, 1984)
Chapter 6 CITY CLERK [1]
Sections:
2-6.101 Election of City Clerk.
2-6.102 Elections official.
2-6.103 Term of office.
2-6.104 Qualifications of City Clerk.
2-6.105 Absences or disability—Acting City Clerk.
2-6.106 Compensation—Expenses.
2-6.107 Powers and duties.
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 18
2-6.108 Prohibited acts.
2-6.109 Vacation and sick leave.
2-6.110 Political activities.
2-6.101 Election of City Clerk.
The elective office of City Clerk shall be filled by the city electorate at a general municipal election
governed by California Elections Code, applicable provisions of the California Government Code, and
other relevant statutes and common law. In accordance with California Government Code, Section
36503.5, the municipal election shall be held on the same date as the statewide general election.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.102 Elections official.
The City Clerk is the elections official. The City Council, by resolution, may request the County Clerk
to render specific elections services to the City.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.103 Term of office.
The City Clerk shall hold office for a period of four (4) years, and shall hold office for the prescribed
term from the Tuesday succeeding the election and until the successors are elected and qualified.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.104 Qualifications of City Clerk.
In order to hold the office of City Clerk, the candidate must be an elector of the City at the time of
assuming office, and a registered voter at the time nomination papers were issued. If the candidate
moves his/her residence to a place outside the city limits or ceases to be an elector, the office held by that
person immediately becomes vacant.
An "elector" is any person who is a United States citizen at least eighteen (18) years of age, and a
resident of an election precinct at least twenty-nine (29) days prior to an election. A "voter" is an elector
who is registered as such.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.105 Absences or disability—Acting City Clerk.
In the case of the absence or disability of the City Clerk for a period exceeding two (2) weeks, the
Council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the office during the period of
the absence or disability of the City Clerk. A department head or other City employee may be appointed
Acting City Clerk.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 19
2-6.106 Compensation—Expenses.
The City Clerk shall receive such compensation as the Council shall, from time to time, determine.
Such compensation shall be fixed by resolution and shall be a proper charge against such funds of the
City as the Council shall designate.
In addition, the City Clerk shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred or paid in the
performance of City Clerk duties or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the City under the
direction of the Council. Reimbursement shall only be made when a claim, setting forth the sums
expended for such business for which reimbursement is requested, has been presented to the Council for
approval and has been so approved.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.107 Powers and duties.
The City Clerk, being a special administrative officer, shall be, and is, under the supervision,
direction, and guidance of the City Council which delegates this supervision, direction, and guidance to
the City Manager. In addition to the general powers, the City Clerk shall have, without limitation, the
following powers and duties:
(a) The City Clerk shall act as the elections official for general and special municipal elections;
(b) Administer and generally supervise the application for, issuance of, renewal of, and payment for
business licenses in accordance with Title 3 (Finance), Chapter 1 (Business Licenses) of the
Municipal Code for the City of Avenal;
(c) Administer and generally supervise the Fair Political Practices Commission Guidelines and the
filing of the Economic Interest Statements;
(d) Prepare and distribute all public hearing notices;
(e) Preparation of all agendas for meetings of the Council, Redevelopment Agency, and Public
Finance Authority, including, but not limited to, review of documents submitted for agenda;
(f) Each Thursday and Friday of the week prior to a meeting of the Council, between 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., prepare and organize Council packets for use during Council meetings;
(g) Preparation for Council meetings, including, but limited to, setting up table, chairs, and
equipment in the meeting facility; the City Clerk shall report to City Hall at 2:00 p.m. the day of
the City Council meeting and continue until conclusion of Council/RDA/PFA meeting(s). The
City Clerk shall also report to City Hall the Friday following the Council/RDA/PFA meeting(s)
from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.;
(h) To attend all meetings of the Council, Redevelopment Agency (RDA), Public Finance Authority
(PFA), and City Staff, as scheduled, unless excused therefrom by the City Manager or by the
Council;
(i) Preparation of minutes of all meetings of the Council, Redevelopment Agency, and the Public
Finance Authority;
(j) Provide secretarial services to the City Council, the City Mayor, the Redevelopment Agency,
and the Public Finance Authority, including filing, typing, and other duties as requested;
(k) During City election/nomination period, the City Clerk shall be available to work during the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. each week day. This is usually a four (4) week period every two (2)
years unless there is a special election;
(l) Handle general information inquiries to the City by the public;
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 20
(m) Performance of additional duties. To perform such other duties which may be delegated from
time to time to the City Clerk by the City Manager, ordinance, resolution, or other action of the
Council;
(n) The City Clerk's schedule shall include, in addition to the foregoing and without limitation, the
following, except as otherwise directed by the City Council:
(1) Every Tuesday from 10:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.;
(2) Every first and third week of the month: Thursday and Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;
(3) Every second and fourth week of the month: Thursday from 2:00 p.m. until conclusion of
City Council/RDA/PFA meeting. Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon;
(4) Election/nomination period. Every two (2) years unless Special Elections, the Clerk shall be
at City Hall from Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (approximately four (4)
weeks).
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.108 Prohibited acts.
Without prior consent of the City Manager, or unless otherwise authorized in this Chapter, the City
Clerk is prohibited from the following acts and responsibilities:
(a) From participating in any involvement in or with issues involving personnel, officers, or other
individuals employed by or on behalf of the City;
(b) From seeking, examining, or otherwise having access to confidential files.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.109 Vacation and sick leave.
The City Clerk shall be entitled to those privileges with respect to vacations and sick leave, if any, as
the City Council may, from time to time, determine.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
2-6.110 Political activities.
(a) The rules and regulations prohibiting political activities by City employees, as set forth in Section 2-
4.212, shall apply with equal force and effect to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 96-06 § 1 (part), 1996)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— At the direction of the city, pursuant to the general election held November 5, 1996, the
position of city clerk shall now be appointed as opposed to elected since it serves no beneficial purpose
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 21
for the taxpayers of Avenal to absorb the related costs of the election process, payroll, benefits and the
cost related to training these elected positions which are currently being performed by staff. (Back)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 3 FINANCE
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - BUSINESS LICENSING
Chapter 2 - FUNDS
Chapter 3 - PROPERTY TAXES
Chapter 4 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES
Chapter 5 - SALES AND USE TAXES
Chapter 6 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
Chapter 7 - UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
Chapter 8 - PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 9 - CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Chapter 10 - FRANCHISE FEES
Chapter 11 - DEVELOPMENT FEES
Chapter 1 BUSINESS LICENSING
Sections:
Article 1. - General Provisions
Article 2. - Tow Service Providers
Article 1. General Provisions
3-1.01 Definitions.
3-1.02 Revenue measure.
3-1.03 Effect on other ordinances.
3-1.04 License and tax payment required.
3-1.05 Branch establishments.
3-1.06 Evidence of doing business.
3-1.07 Constitutional apportionment.
3-1.08 Exemptions.
3-1.09 Contents of license.
3-1.10 Application first license.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
3-1.11 Renewal license.
3-1.12 Information confidential.
3-1.13 Failure to file.
3-1.14 Appeal.
3-1.15 Additional power of Collector.
3-1.16 License nontransferable—Changed location and ownership.
3-1.17 Duplicate license.
3-1.18 Posting and keeping licenses.
3-1.19 License tax and how and when payable.
3-1.20 Delinquent taxes—Penalties—Installment payment.
3-1.21 Refund of overpayments.
3-1.22 License taxes—License tax—Fixed place of business.
3-1.23 Validity.
3-1.01 Definitions.
(a) Persons. As used in this chapter, "person" includes all domestic and foreign corporations,
association, syndicates, joint stock, corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business, or
common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the City,
other than as an employee.
(b) City. As used in this chapter, "City" shall mean the City of Avenal, a municipal corporation of the
State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated,
enlarged or re-incorporated form.
(c) Business. As used in this chapter, "business" includes profession, trades, and occupations and all
and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.
(d) Sale. As used in this chapter, "sale" shall include the transfer in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a
consideration of any property or service; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is
transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall be likewise be
deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or
which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.
(e) Sworn Statement. As used in this chapter, "sworn statement" shall mean an affidavit sworn to before
a person authorized to take oaths, or in California a declaration or certification made under penalty of
perjury.
(f) Collector. As used in this chapter, "Collector" shall mean the City Tax Collector, Finance Director, or
other City officer charged with the administration of this chapter.
(g) Gross Receipts. As used in this chapter, "gross receipts" shall mean the total receipts of a business
for the prior year. If the business is reporting on its first year receipts there shall be an estimate of
such gross receipts, which amounts shall be adjusted as reflected in the actual receipts in the next
succeeding year.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 2, 3-25-2010)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
3-1.02 Revenue measure.
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for
regulation.
3-1.03 Effect on other ordinances.
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter
shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required
under any other ordinance of the City, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other
ordinances.
3-1.04 License and tax payment required.
There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations
specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the City without
first having procured a license from said City so to do and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without
complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.
This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business
within the City if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the State of
California. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the City nevertheless
shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter.
3-1.05 Branch establishments.
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business
transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license
shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or
in the manner designated in such license; provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in
connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishment.
3-1.06 Evidence of doing business.
When any person shall by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone book, or newspapers, advertises,
holds out, or represents that he is in business in the City, or when any person holds an active license or
permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the City, and such person
fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the Collector that he is not conducting a business in the City,
after being requested to do so by the Collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence
that he is conducting a business in the City.
3-1.07 Constitutional apportionment.
None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue
burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the
Constitutions of the United States and of the State of California.
In any case where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue
burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the
Collector for an adjustment of the tax. Such application may be made, before, at, or within six months
after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business
and such other information as the Collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any,
of such undue burden or violation. The Collector shall then conduct an investigation, and, after having first
obtained the written approval of the City Attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount
that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has already been paid, shall order a refund
of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the
Collector shall have the power to base the license tax upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other
measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on
businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed
by this chapter.
Should the Collector determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he
may require the applicant to submit, either at the time of termination of applicant's business in the City, or
at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of
license tax thereof, provided that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required
after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter.
3-1.08 Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying
on any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the
State of California nor shall it be construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or
carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted,
managed or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived,
either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation.
Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section, shall file a sworn statement with the
Collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, providing the Collector with the Federal and
State identification number for exempt organization, and in the absence of such statements substantiating
the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this chapter.
The Collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such
person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the City of the license tax required by
this chapter.
The Collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke
any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon the information that the licensee is not
entitled to the exemptions as provided herein.
3-1.09 Contents of license.
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application
as hereinafter prescribed for the same to the Collector of the City, and upon the payment of the
prescribed license tax the Collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following
information: (1) The name of the person to whom the license is issued; (2) The business licensed; (3) The
place where such business is to be transacted and carried on; (4) The date of the expiration of such
license; and (5) Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter is measured by the number of
vehicles, devises, machines, or other pieces of equipment used by the licensee, the Collector shall issue
only one license; provided that he may issue for each tax period for which the license tax has been paid
one identification sticker, tag, plate, or symbol for each item included in the measure of the tax.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
3-1.10 Application first license.
Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly
established business, such person shall furnish to the Collector a sworn statement, upon a form provided
by the Collector, setting forth the following information: (1) The exact nature or kind of business for which
a license is requested; (2) The place where such business is to be carried on and if the same is not to be
carried on at any permanent place of business, the places of residences of the owners of same; (3) In the
event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious
name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of those owning said business;
(4) In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership,
the application shall set forth the names and places of residences of the officers or partners thereof; (5)
Any further information which the Collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license applied
for.
The Collector shall not issue to any person another license for the same or any other business, until
such person shall have furnished to him the sworn statement and paid the license tax as herein required.
3-1.11 Renewal license.
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the Collector for his guidance in
ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a sworn statement, upon a form to
be provided by the Collector, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business during the
preceding year as may be required by the Collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license
tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth herein nor shall the filing of the same
preclude the City from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable
hereunder.
3-1.12 Information confidential.
It shall be unlawful for the Collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions
of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information
furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Provided that nothing in this section shall
be construed to prevent: (1) The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another
City official, employee, or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing
any provisions of this chapter, or collecting taxes imposed hereunder; (2) The disclosure of information to,
or the examination of records by, Federal or State officials; (3) The disclosure of information to a court of
law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the
particular taxpayers to the City; (4) The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the
taxpayer himself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and
guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid
tax or amount of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the
City Attorney approves each such disclosure and that the Collector may refuse to make any disclosure
referred to in this paragraph when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby; (5) The
disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued and the general
type or nature of their business; (6) The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such
information as may be necessary to the City Council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts
when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to
a claim asserted against him by the City for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter; (7) The
disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the City.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
3-1.13 Failure to file.
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand
therefor made by the Collector he fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax
imposed by this chapter fails to apply for a license, the Collector may determine the amount of license tax
due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain.
If the Collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he
may determine the amount of any license tax due by means of any information he may be able to obtain.
If such a determination is made the Collector shall give the notice of the amount so assessed by
serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Avenal, California, postage
prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within fifteen
(15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the Collector for a
hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the Collector shall cause the matter
to be set for hearing within fifteen (15) days before the City Council. The Collector shall give at least ten
(10) days' notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for
serving notices of assessment. The Council shall consider all evidence produced, and shall make finding
thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner
prescribed above for serving notices of assessment.
3-1.14 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to
issue such license may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Council.
The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The Clerk of the Council shall
give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in
the United States Post Office at Avenal, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last
known address. The Council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No
such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter.
3-1.15 Additional power of Collector.
In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the Collector shall have the power, for good cause
shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding
thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, except that
simple ten (10) percent interest shall be added to any tax determined to be payable.
3-1.16 License nontransferable—Changed location and ownership.
No license issued pursuant to the chapter shall be transferable; provided, that where a license is
issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may
upon application therefor and paying a fee of two dollars ($2.00), have the license amended to authorize
the transacting and carrying on of such business under said license at some other location to which the
business is or is to be moved. Provided further that transfer, whether by sale or otherwise, to another
person under such circumstances that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially
similar to the ownership existing before the transfer shall not be prohibited by this section. For the
purpose of this section stockholders, bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a
corporation or other entity herein defined to be a person are regarded as having the real or ultimate
ownership of such corporation or other entity.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
3-1.17 Duplicate license.
A duplicate license may be issued by the Collector to replace any license previously issued
hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing statement of such fact, and at the
time of filing such statement paying to the Collector a duplicate license fee of two dollars ($2.00).
3-1.18 Posting and keeping licenses.
(a) Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the City shall keep
the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on;
(b) Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in
the City shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the
business for which it is issued;
(c) Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device,
machine, or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom
such stickers, tags, plates, or symbols have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle,
device, machine, or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol which has been
issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the Collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or
symbol shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment kept in use,
during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate, or symbol is issued;
(d) No person shall fail to affix as required herein any identifying sticker, tag, plate, or symbol to the
vehicle, device, machine, or piece of equipment, for which it has been issued at the location
designated by the Collector, or to give away, sell, or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate, or
symbol to another person, or to permit its use by another person.
3-1.19 License tax and how and when payable.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the provisions of this chapter,
shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of July of each year; provided the license taxes
covering new operations, commenced after the first day of July, may be prorated for the balance of the
license period.
Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be
due and payable as follows: (a) Semi-annual license taxes, on the first day of January and the first day of
July of each year; (b) Monthly license taxes, on the first day of each and every month; (c) Weekly license
taxes on Monday of each week in advance; (d) Daily flat rate license taxes each day in advance; (e)
Other flat rate license taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business and thereafter on the first
day of any applicable period.
3-1.20 Delinquent taxes—Penalties—Installment payment.
For failure to pay a license tax when due the Collector shall add a penalty of fifteen (15) percent.
No license or sticker, tag, plate, or symbol shall be issued nor one which has been suspended or
revoked shall be reinstated or reissued, to any person, who at the time of applying therefor, is indebted to
the City for any delinquent license taxes, unless such person, with the consent of the Collector, enters
into a written agreement with the City, through the Collector, to pay such delinquent taxes, plus 8%
simple interest upon the unpaid balance, in monthly installments, or oftener, extending over a period of
not to exceed one (1) year.
In any agreement so entered into, such person shall acknowledge the obligation owed to the City
and agree that, in the event of failure to make timely payment of any installment, the whole amount
unpaid shall become immediately due and payable and that his current license shall be revocable by the
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
Collector upon thirty (30) days' notice. In the event legal action is brought by the City to enforce collection
of any amount included in the agreement, such person shall pay all costs of suit incurred by the City or its
assignee; including a reasonable attorney's fee. The execution of such an agreement shall not prevent
the prior accrual of penalties on unpaid balances at the rate provided hereinabove, but no penalties shall
accrue on account of taxes included in the agreement, after the execution of the agreement, and the
payment of the first installment and during such time as such person shall not be in breach of the
agreement.
3-1.21 Refund of overpayments.
No refund of an overpayment of taxes imposed by this chapter shall be allowed in whole or in part
unless a claim for refund is filed with the Collector within a period of three (3) years from the last day of
the calendar month following the period for which the overpayment was made, and all such claims for
refund of the amount of overpayment must be filed with the Collector on forms furnished by him and in the
manner prescribed by him. Upon the filing of such claim and when he determines that an overpayment
has been made, the Collector may refund the amount overpaid.
3-1.22 License taxes—License tax—Fixed place of business.
Every person engaged at a fixed place of business in the City of Avenal in any trade, calling,
occupation, vocation, profession or other means of livelihood, as an independent contractor and not as an
employee of another, and not specifically licensed by other provisions of this chapter, shall pay an annual
license tax based upon the annual gross receipts of the year proceeding the tax year. Such tax shall be
established by resolution by the City Council.
Licensed tax: No fixed place of business. Every person engaged at other than a fixed place of
business in the City of Avenal in any trade, calling, occupation, vocation, profession or other means of
livelihood, as an independent contractor and not as an employee of another, and not specifically licensed
by other provisions of this chapter, shall pay an annual license tax. Said tax shall be established by
resolution by the City Council.
License tax: Flat amount. Every person commencing, transacting and carrying on any business
herein enumerated shall pay a license tax. Said tax shall be established by resolution by the City Council.
Coin machine: Outside owner. Every person commencing, transacting and carrying on at other than
a fixed place of business in the City of Avenal the business of lending, renting, leasing, or otherwise
distributing any coin operated machine while retaining title thereto, shall pay semi-annual license tax for
each machine. Said tax shall be established by resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 85-10, 1985; Ord. 87-03, 1987; Ord. 91-06 § 1, 1991)
3-1.23 Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The City Council hereby declares each section,
clause and phrase thereof valid and continuing irrespective of the fact that any one or more other
sections, subsections, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
Article 2. Tow Service Providers
3-1.200 Title.
3-1.205 Purpose.
3-1.210 Definitions.
3-1.215 Scope of chapter.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
3-1.220 License requirement.
3-1.225 Period of license.
3-1.230 Storage and release of impounded vehicles.
3-1.235 Violation.
3-1.200 Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Tow Service Provider Licensing Ordinance"
of the City of Avenal.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
3-1.205 Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure the safety and welfare of the motor vehicles impounded within
the boundaries of the City of Avenal, and to ensure that such vehicles will be closely accessible, and to
preserve and enhance the viability of business operations within the City of Avenal.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
3-1.210 Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:
(a) "Tow service" and "tow services" mean the moving by a person of a motor vehicle from one
place to another under power from other than such motor vehicle.
(b) "Tow service provider" means any person who provides any tow service.
(c) "This Code" and "this Code" refers to the Municipal Code of the City of Avenal.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
3-1.215 Scope of chapter.
To the extent that the provisions of this article do not conflict with other applicable provisions outside
of this article, but within this chapter, both shall be controlling. If any matter covered within this article
conflicts with any provision(s) outside this article, but within this chapter, the provision(s) this article shall
be controlling.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
3-1.220 License requirement.
(a) All persons who operate a business that provides any towing service whatsoever within the
boundaries of the City of Avenal must possess a valid business license issued pursuant to Chapter 1
of Title 3 of the Municipal Code of the City of Avenal, unless otherwise exempt.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision in this Chapter, no tow service business license shall be issued
to any person who has not demonstrated that such person has a motor vehicle storage yard within
the City of Avenal, unless such person signs a tow service business license that expressly indicates:
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
"The undersigned licensee acknowledges that he/she is not licensed or authorized to tow impounded
motor vehicles."
(c) All persons with a valid tow service business license must carry such license in their possession atall
times when providing tow services within the City of Avenal.
(d) This section shall not apply to a person in any calendar month in which such person provides tow
service within the City of Avenal no more than once.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
3-1.225 Period of license.
All business licenses issued to persons regulated under this article shall be effective for at least one
year and shall expire the year after they were issued, on the last day of the same calendar month.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
3-1.230 Storage and release of impounded vehicles.
(a) All persons who, within the boundaries of the City of Avenal, provide tow service in connection with
the impoundment of a motor vehicle by a peace officer must satisfy all of the following:
(1) Have a permanently fixed business structure (i.e. place of business) and a motor vehicle
storage yard within the boundaries of the City of Avenal;
(2) Present to the impounding peace officer, proof of such person's current tow service business
license issued by the City of Avenal;
(3) Present to the impounding peace officer, proof of such person's towing certification by California
Highway Patrol (CHP); and
(4) Have on file in the office of the license collector proof of such person's current towing
certification by California Highway Patrol;
(b) All persons who, within the boundaries of the City of Avenal and at the request of a peace officer,
provide tow service in connection with the impoundment of a motor vehicle must store such motor
vehicle within the boundaries of the City of Avenal, except when such vehicle(s) must be immediately
taken to a laboratory, or similar facility, for forensic testing and analysis by a law enforcement agency
or such agency's contractor.
(c) Any tow services provider who has stored an impounded motor vehicle must release such
impounded motor vehicle only when presented with a signed CHP-180 Vehicle Report form (or any
superseding form), as amended from time to time, and proper identification of a person authorized to
retrieve the impounded motor vehicle.
(d) When a motor vehicle has been impounded under California Vehicle Code section 22651(p), the tow
services provider must not release such motor vehicle unless all applicable vehicle release fees have
been paid to the City of Avenal. The tow services provider must, prior to release of the motor vehicle,
require that the registered or licensed owner of the motor vehicle has presented to the tow service
provider a written receipt from the City of Avenal evidencing full payment of all relevant vehicle
release fees.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 11
3-1.235 Violation.
Except where otherwise indicated, any person who willfully violates or causes, permits or assists in
the violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each and every
day such violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 3-25-2010)
Chapter 2 FUNDS
Sections:
Article 1. - Depositories and Signatories
Article 2. - Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
Article 1. Depositories and Signatories
3-2.101 Designated.
3-2.101 Designated.
All moneys belonging to, or collected or received for the use of the City by any officer or employee
shall immediately be deposited with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall deposit such moneys in and with
the Bank of America, Avenal Branch, Avenal, California, which bank is hereby designated as depository of
the City for the benefit of the funds to which such moneys respectively belong. Such moneys shall be
subject to withdrawal by the combined signatures of the City Treasurer, the City Clerk, and the Mayor or
Mayor Pro Tempore, or designated signatories.
Article 2. Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
3-2.201 Created.
3-2.202 Deposits.
3-2.203 Expenditures.
3-2.201 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code (as amended by
Chapter 1621, Statutes of 1967), there is hereby created in the City treasury a special fund to be known
as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund."
3-2.202 Deposits.
All moneys received by the City from the State pursuant to the provisions of the Streets and
Highways Code of the State, for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or
the construction, maintenance, or improvement of streets or highways, other than State highways, shall
be paid into the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 12
3-2.203 Expenditures.
All moneys in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended exclusively for the
purposes authorized by, and subject to, all the provisions of Sections 2106—2116 of the Streets and
Highways Code
(As amended by Chapter 1621, Statutes of 1967).
Chapter 3 PROPERTY TAXES
Sections:
3-3.01 Transfer of assessment and collection to County.
3-3.02 Transfer of other duties to the City Clerk.
3-3.01 Transfer of assessment and collection to County.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 51500 through 51521 of the Government Code of the State,
the assessment and tax collection duties and the collection of assessments levied for municipal
improvements are hereby transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County; provided,
however, the duties of the City Treasurer shall be reserved to the City and shall not be performed by the
County Treasurer.
3-3.02 Transfer of other duties to the City Clerk.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 51507 of the Government Code of the State, the duties of the
City Assessor, other than the assessing of City property, and the duties of the City Tax Collector, other
than the collection of ad valorem taxes, are hereby transferred to the City Clerk or to such officer of the
County as may by contract with the City be designated and authorized to perform such duties.
Chapter 4 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAXES
Sections:
3-4.01 Title.
3-4.02 Imposed—Rate.
3-4.03 Payment.
3-4.04 Exemptions—Debt security instruments.
3-4.05 Exemptions—Governmental agencies.
3-4.06 Exemptions—Bankruptcies and receiverships.
3-4.07 Exemptions—Securities and Exchange Commission orders.
3-4.08 Exemptions—Partnerships.
3-4.09 Administration.
3-4.10 Claims for refunds.
3-4.11 Operative date.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 13
3-4.01 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the City of
Avenal". It is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division
2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State.
3-4.02 Imposed—Rate.
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or
other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or
vested in the purchaser, or any other person, by his direction, when the consideration or value of the
interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at
the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half
(27½) cents for each five hundred dollars ($500.00), or fractional part thereof.
3-4.03 Payment.
The tax imposed by the provisions of Section 3-4.02 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who
makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax or for whose use or benefit the
same is made, signed, or issued.
3-4.04 Exemptions—Debt security instruments.
The tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to
secure a debt.
3-4.05 Exemptions—Governmental agencies.
The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political
subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed by the provisions of
this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which such governmental agency is aparty,
but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.
3-4.06 Exemptions—Bankruptcies and receiverships.
The tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of
conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:
(a) Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
(b) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as
defined in subsection (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;
(c) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in
subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or
(d) Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 14
The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or filing of instruments of
transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or
change.
3-4.07 Exemptions—Securities and Exchange Commission orders.
The tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of
conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in
subsection (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:
(a) The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance
is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of
Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company
Act of 1953;
(b) Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
(c) Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
3-4.08 Exemptions—Partnerships.
(a) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if:
(1) Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the
meaning of the provisions of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and
(2) Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
(b) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of the provisions of Section 708 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this chapter such partnership shall be treated as
having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereof), all realty held by such partnership at the time of
such termination.
(c) Not more than one tax shall be imposed by the provisions of this chapter by reason of a termination
described in subsection (b) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the
realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
3-4.09 Administration.
The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions
of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State and the provisions of any County
ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
3-4.10 Claims for refunds.
Claims for the refund of the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the
provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the State.
3-4.11 Operative date.
The provisions of this chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance
adopted by the County pursuant to the provision of Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division
2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, or on passage whichever is the later.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 15
Chapter 5 SALES AND USE TAXES
Sections:
3-5.01 Title.
3-5.02 Rate.
3-5.03 Operative date.
3-5.04 Purpose.
3-5.05 Contract with State Board of Equalization.
3-5.06 Sales taxes imposed.
3-5.07 Sales taxes—Place of sale defined.
3-5.08 Use taxes imposed.
3-5.09 Adoption of State law provisions.
3-5.10 Adoption of State law provisions—Limitations.
3-5.11 Sellers' permits.
3-5.12 Exclusions and exemptions.
3-5.13 Exclusions and exemptions.
3-5.14 Exclusions and exemptions—Operative dates.
3-5.15 State law provisions—Amendments.
3-5.16 Collection—Enjoining.
3-5.01 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of the City of Avenal".
3-5.02 Rate.
The rate of the sales tax and use tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be ninety-eight
hundredths (.98%) of one percent.
3-5.03 Operative date.
The provisions of this chapter shall be operative on November 1, 1979.
3-5.04 Purpose.
The Council hereby declares that the provisions of this chapter are adopted to achieve the following,
among other, purposes and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to
accomplish those purposes:
(a) To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements and limitations set forth
in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State;
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 16
(b) To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales
and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations set forth in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State;
(c) To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor which
can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adopts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the sales and use taxes of the State; and
(d) To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree
possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time
minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of
this chapter.
3-5.05 Contract with State Board of Equalization.
Prior to the operative date of this chapter, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization
to perform all the functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax law. If the
City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to such operative date, the City
shall nevertheless so contract, and, in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the execution of such contract rather than the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the adoption of this chapter.
3-5.06 Sales taxes imposed.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all
retailers in the City at the rate set forth in Section 3-5.02 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer
from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of
this chapter.
3-5.07 Sales taxes—Place of sale defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the
retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-
State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use
tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales
are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the
State Board of Equalization.
3-5.08 Use taxes imposed.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the City of tangible
personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for the
storage, use, or other consumption in the City at the rate set forth in Section 3-5.02 of this chapter of the
sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject
to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 17
3-5.09 Adoption of State law provisions.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set
forth in this chapter.
3-5.10 Adoption of State law provisions—Limitations.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State,
wherever the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted
therefor. Such substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title
of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization,
the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State. Such substitution shall not be made when the result of
that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof, rather than
by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of the provisions of this chapter. Such substitution shall not be made in those sections,
including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where
the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales,
storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt
from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to tax by the State
under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax
by the State under the said provisions of said Code. Such substitution shall not be made in Sections6701,
6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code of the State. Such substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer
engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 of said Code or in the definition of that phrase in said
Section 6203.
3-5.11 Sellers' permits.
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by the
provisions of this chapter.
3-5.12 Exclusions and exemptions.
(a) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer
or consumer.
(b) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the
sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance
with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any City and County, County, or
City, in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
(c) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the
sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any
foreign government.
(d) In addition to the exemptions provided in Section 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators
of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 18
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any
foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
(Ord. 83-09 § 1, 1983)
3-5.13 Exclusions and exemptions.
(a) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer
or consumer.
(b) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the
sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance
with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city
in this State shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
(c) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the
sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed
principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of
persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.
(d) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of
waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage
of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.
(e) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the
sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any
foreign government.
(f) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and Sections 6366.1 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or
property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the
use tax.
(Ord. 83-09 § 2, 1983)
3-5.14 Exclusions and exemptions—Operative dates.
(a) The provisions of Section 3-15.13 of this chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year
following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for Stateassessed
property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by the
provisions of Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, at which time the
provisions of Section 3-5.12 of this chapter shall become inoperative.
(b) In the event the provisions of Section 3-5.13 of this chapter become operative, and the State Board
of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ration for State-assessed property, which ratio
is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the provisions of Section 3-5.12 of this chapter shall become
operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted,
at which time the provisions of said Section 3-5.13 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month
following the month in which said Board again adopts an assessment ration for State-assessed
property, which ratio is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by the provisions of said
Section 401, at which time the provisions of said Section 3-5.13 shall again become operative and
the provisions of said Section 3-5.12 shall become inoperative.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 19
3-5.15 State law provisions—Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, which amendments
relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2
of said Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter.
3-5.16 Collection—Enjoining.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or
proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to
prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this chapter
or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State.
Chapter 6 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAXES
Sections:
3-6.01 Title.
3-6.02 Definitions.
3-6.03 Imposed—Rate.
3-6.04 Enforcement.
3-6.05 Exemptions.
3-6.06 Duties of operators.
3-6.07 Registration.
3-6.08 Penalties and interest.
3-6.09 Due dates—Returns—Payments.
3-6.10 Deficiency determinations.
3-6.11 Redeterminations.
3-6.12 Collection security.
3-6.13 Refunds.
3-6.14 Administration.
3-6.15 Appeals.
3-6.16 Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee—Created—Powers and duties.
3-6.17 Violations.
3-6.01 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law of the
City of Avenal."
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 20
3-6.02 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and
phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Hotel" shall mean any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or intended
or designed for occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and shall
include any hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private
club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure, or portion
thereof.
(b) "Occupancy" shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.
(c) "Operator" shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of
owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the
operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than
an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this
chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
(d) "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club,
fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver,
trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
(e) "Rent" shall mean the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of
space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise,
including all receipts, cash, credits, property, and services of any kind or nature, without any
deduction therefrom whatsoever.
(f) "Tax Administrator" shall mean the City Clerk.
(g) "Transient" shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy in a
hotel by reason of a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a
period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full
days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the
period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a
person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the
effective date of the provisions of this chapter may be considered.
(h) "Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee" shall mean the Council.
3-6.03 Imposed—Rate.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax in
the amount of six (6) percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed
by the transient to the City, which debt shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel
or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid
in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall
be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid
to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the
Tax Administrator.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 21
3-6.04 Enforcement.
The Tax Administrator shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to adopt
rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or
desirable to aid in such enforcement. He shall provide schedules for the payment of the tax, and such
schedules shall eliminate fractions of one cent ($0.01).
3-6.05 Exemptions.
No tax shall be imposed upon:
(a) Any person as to whom or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the City to
impose the tax provided for in this chapter;
(b) Any officer or employee of a foreign government, which officer or employee is exempt by reason
of express provisions of Federal laws or international treaties;
(c) Any occupant for more than thirty (30) successive calendar days;
(d) Any occupant whose rent is of a value less than two dollars ($2.00) per day;
(e) Any person who rents a private home, vacation cabin, or like facility from an owner who is not
regularly engaged in the business of renting such facilities but does so only occasionally and
incidentally to his own use thereof; and
(f) Any occupant whose rent is paid for a hospital room or to a medical clinic, convalescent home,
or home for aged people.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) of this section,
except upon a claim therefor made at the time the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a
form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
3-6.06 Duties of operators.
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter to the same extent and
at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately
stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from
the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly,
that the tax, or any part thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added
to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter.
Every operator maintaining a place of business or renting rooms in the City, the occupancy of which
is not exempted under the provisions of this chapter, shall collect the tax from the occupant. The tax
required to be collected by the operator shall constitute a debt owed by the operator to the City. In all
cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the operator may be
deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent
such credits are paid or deferred payments are made in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the
amount thereof.
3-6.07 Registration.
(a) Required. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the
City shall register with the Tax Administrator on a form provided by the Tax Administrator. Persons
engaged in such business shall so register not later than fifteen (15) days after commencing
business, but such registration after commencing business shall not relieve any person from the
obligation of the payment or the collection of the tax on and after the date of commencing business.
(b) Form. Such registration shall set forth the following information:
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 22
(1) The name under which such person transacts or intends to transact business.
(2) The location of his place or places of business; and
(3) Such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the Tax Administrator mayrequire.
The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or
partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or
some other person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration.
(c) Certificates. The Tax Administrator shall, within ten (10) days after such registration, issue, without
charge, a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with
a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of such registrant. Such certificate shall,
among other things, set forth the following information:
(1) The name of the operator;
(2) The address of the hotel;
(3) The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
(4) A statement as follows: "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the
person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient
Occupancy Tax Law of the City by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of
collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the Tax
Administrator. This certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business
or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly
complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit
from any board, commission, department, or office of this City. This certificate shall not
constitute a permit."
Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately
to the Tax Administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer.
Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which such certificate is applicable and
shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants
and persons seeking occupancy.
3-6.08 Penalties and interest.
(a) Original delinquencies. Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this
chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax in addition to the
amount of the tax.
(b) Continued delinquencies. Any operator who shall fail to remit any delinquent remittance on or before
a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall
pay a second delinquency penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax in addition to the
amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed.
(c) Fraud. If the Tax Administrator determines that the non payment of any remittance due pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter is due to fraud or intent to evade the provisions of this chapter, a
penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the
penalties set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
(d) Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed any operator who shall fail to remit any tax imposed by
the provisions of this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction
thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent until paid.
(e) Penalties and interest merged with tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues,
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by the
provisions of this chapter.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 23
3-6.09 Due dates—Returns—Payments.
(a) Due dates. The tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall become due and payable from the
occupant at the time of occupancy. All amounts of such taxes collectible or collected by any operator
shall be due and payable to the Tax Administrator quarterly on the first day of the months of April,
July, October, and January next succeeding each respective quarterly period and shall be delinquent
after the last day of such months.
(b) Returns: Filing. On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period of three (3)
months, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the Tax Administrator. The
return shall be filed, in such form as the Tax Administrator may prescribe, by every operator and
every person liable to the payment of the tax during such quarterly period who has not paid such tax
and who has not made a return in regard to the related occupancy which is the subject of tax.
(c) Returns: Form. The returns shall show the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related
period and such other information as is required by the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator
may require the returns to show the total rentals upon which the tax was collected or otherwise due,
the gross receipts of a registered returnee for such period, and an explanation in detail of any
discrepancy between such amounts.
(d) Returns: Delivery. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the
remittance of the amount of the tax due, to the Tax Administrator at his office.
(e) Extensions of time. For good cause the Tax Administrator may extend for not to exceed one month
the time for making any return of payment of the tax. No further extension shall be granted, except
by the Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee. Any person to whom an extension is granted,
who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of such extension, shall pay, in addition to the
tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the
unpaid balance for the period of such extension to the time of the return and payment, which interest
shall become a part of the tax.
(f) Other than quarterly periods. The Tax Administrator, if he deems it necessary in order to insure
payment or facilitate collection by the City of the amount of taxes in any individual case, may require
the returns and the payment of the amount of the taxes for other than quarterly periods.
3-6.10 Deficiency determinations.
(a) If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to
be paid to the City by any person, the Tax Administrator may compute and determine the amount
required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the returns or upon the basis of any
information within the possession of the Tax Administrator or that may come into his possession.
One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more than one
period.
(b) In making a determination the Tax Administrator may off set overpayments, if any, which may have
been previously made for a period or periods, together with interest on the overpayments, against
any underpayment for a subsequent period or periods, or against penalties and interest on the
underpayments. The interest on underpayments and overpayments shall be computed in the manner
set forth in Section 3-6.08 of this chapter.
(c) The Tax Administrator shall give to the operator or occupant written notice of his determination. The
notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, the notice shall be enclosed in a sealed
envelope, postage prepaid, and be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the
records of the Tax Administrator. In cases of service by mail or any notice required by the provisions
of this chapter, the service shall be complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office.
(d) Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade the provisions of this chapter or authorized rules and
regulations, or failure to make a timely return, every deficiency determination shall be made and
notice thereof mailed within three (3) years after the last day of the month following the close of the
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 24
quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after
the return is filed, whichever period expires the later.
(e) If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax or to make, within the time provided in this
chapter, any report and remittance of such tax, or any portion thereof, required by the provisions of
this chapter, or makes a fraudulent return or otherwise wilfully attempts to evade the provisions of
this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the
facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Administrator
shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment
of any such tax imposed by the provisions of this chapter and payable by any operator who has
failed or refused to collect the tax and to make such report and remittance, the Tax Administrator
shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties
provided for by this chapter. In the event such determination is made, the Tax Administrator shall
give notice of the amount so assessed. Such determination and notice shall be made and mailed
within three (3) years after discovery by the Tax Administrator of any fraud, intent to evade, or failure
to file a return. Any determination shall become final within thirty (30) days after giving notice thereof
as provided in this subsection.
(f) If the Tax Administrator believes that the collection of any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected and paid to the City will be jeopardized by delay, or if any determination will be jeopardized
by delay, he shall thereupon make a determination of the tax or amount of the tax required to be
collected, noting that fact upon the determination. The amount determined shall be immediately due
and payable. If the amount specified in the determination is not paid within ten (10) days after the
service of the notice thereof upon the person against who the determination is made, the amount
shall become final at the expiration of such ten (10) days, and the delinquency penalty and the
interest provided for in Section 3-6.08 of this chapter shall attach to the amount of the tax or the
amount of the tax required to be collected.
3-6.11 Redeterminations.
(a) Any person against who a determination is made pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-6.10 of this
chapter, or any person directly interested, may petition for a redetermination within fifteen (15) days
after the service upon the person of the notice thereof. If a petition for redetermination is not filed
within the thirty (30) day period, the determination shall become final at the expiration of the period;
provided, however, a petition for redetermination pursuant to the provisions of subsection (f) of
Section 3-6.10 of this chapter shall be filed within ten (10) days after notice.
(b) If a petition for redetermination is filed within the allowable time, the Tax Administrator shall
reconsider the determination and, if the person has so requested in his petition, shall grant the
person an oral hearing and shall give him ten (10) days notice of the time and place of the hearing.
The Tax Administrator may continue the hearing from time to time as may be necessary.
(c) The Tax Administrator may decrease or increase the amount of the determination before it becomes
final, but the amount may be increased only if a claim for the increase is asserted by the Tax
Administrator at or before the hearing.
(d) The order or decision of the Tax Administrator upon a petition for redetermination shall become final
fifteen (15) days after the service upon the petitioner of the notice thereof, unless an appeal of such
order or decision is filed with the Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee within fifteen (15)
days after the service of such notice.
(e) No petition for redetermination or an appeal therefrom shall be effective for any purpose unless at or
before the filing thereof the amount due in the original determination is paid or a bond or other
security satisfactory to the Tax Administrator is filed with him guaranteeing the payment of any
amount finally determined to be due.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 25
3-6.12 Collection security.
(a) The Tax Administrator, whenever he deems it necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, may require any person subject to the provisions of this chapter to deposit with him
such security in the form of cash, a bond, or other security as the Tax Administrator may determine.
The amount of the security shall be fixed by the Tax Administrator but shall not be greater than twice
the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such
manner as the Tax Administrator deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever
amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased or decreased by the Tax
Administrator, subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter.
(b) If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or in the event a
determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the Tax Administrator may, not
later than three (3) years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail
to all persons in the County having in their possession or under their control any credits or other
personal property belonging to the delinquent or owning any debts to the delinquent. After receiving
such notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the
credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they
receive the notice until the Tax Administrator consents to a transfer or disposition or until twenty (20)
days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall, within five (5) days after the
receipt of the notice, advise the Tax Administrator of all such credits, other personal property, or
debts in their possession, under their control, or owing by them.
(c) At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected
becomes due and payable, or at any time within three (3) years after any determination becomes
final, the Tax Administrator may bring an action in the courts of the State, or any other state, or of the
United States, in the name of the City to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and
interest.
(d) If any operator liable for any amount pursuant to the provisions of this chapter sells his business or
quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover
such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that he
has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If the purchaser of a business fails to
withhold the tax from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for the
payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in
money. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate,
the Tax Administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail a notice to the purchaser at his address
as it appears on the records of the Tax Administrator of the amount that shall be paid as a condition
of issuing the certificate. Failure of the Tax Administrator to mail the notice will release the purchaser
from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as provided in this subsection.
The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the
operator sells his business or at the time the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever
event occurs the later.
3-6.13 Refunds.
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest has been overpaid, paid more than once, or
has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, such amount may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the
specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three (3) years
after the date of payment. The claim is approved by the Tax Administrator, the excess amount collected
or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from
whom such amount was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to such person, his
administrators, or executors.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 26
3-6.14 Administration.
(a) Deposit of moneys. The Tax Administrator shall deposit all moneys collected pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to the credit of the General fund.
(b) Records of operators: Form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the City shall keep such records,
receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the Tax Administrator may require. All
records shall be retained by the operator for a period of three (3) years and six (6) months after they
come into being.
(c) Examinations of records: Investigations. The Tax Administrator, or any person authorized in writing
by him, may examine the books, papers, records, and equipment of any person liable for the tax and
may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made or, if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required
to be paid.
(d) Authority to require reports: Contents. In the administration of the tax, the Tax Administrator may
require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or
custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall
be filed when the Tax Administrator requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each
occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the Tax Administrator
may require.
(e) Information confidential: Unlawful disclosure. It shall be unlawful for the Tax Administrator, or any
person having an administrative duty pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to make known in
any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information obtained by an investigation of
the records and equipment of any person required to obtain a Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate or pay a transient occupancy tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge
of official duties, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular
thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of
either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof, to be seen or examined by any
person; provided, however, nothing set forth in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the
following:
(1) The disclosure to, or the examination of, records and equipment by another City official,
employee, or agent for the collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing
any of the provisions of this chapter or collecting the taxes imposed by this chapter;
(2) The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, Federal or State officials or
the tax officials of another city, county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or
to a Grand Jury or court of law, upon subpoena;
(3) The disclosure of information and the results of examinations of records of particular taxpayers,
or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the
existence or amount of any business tax liability of the particular taxpayer to the City;
(4) The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer himself, or to his
successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly
interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid
tax, or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest, and penalties, provided, however, the
City Attorney shall approve each such disclosure, and the Tax Administrator may refuse to
make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in his opinion, the public interest would
suffer thereby;
(5) The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom Transient Occupancy
Registration Certificates have been issued, the names and addresses of the officers of
corporations and the members of partnerships to whom such certificates have been issued, and
the general type or nature of their business;
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 27
(6) The disclosure to the Council by way of public meeting or otherwise, of such information as may
be necessary in order to permit the Council to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer
files a claim for the refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a
claim asserted against him by the City for business taxes, or when acting upon any othermatter;
and
(7) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city.
Neither the Tax Administrator nor any person having an administrative duty pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or
information obtained by an investigation of the records and equipment of any operator, or any person
visited or examined in the discharge of official duties, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses,
expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy
thereof, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof, to be seen or examined by any person.
Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly
interested, and upon submitting written proof of their interest, may be given information as to the items
included in the measure and the amount of any unpaid tax or the amount of tax required to be collected,
interest, and penalties.
3-6.15 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator may appeal to the Transient
Occupancy Tax Review Committee by filing a notice of appeal with the Tax Administrator within fifteen
(15) days after the service or mailing of the notice of the decision. The Tax Administrator shall fix a time
and place for hearing such appeal as prescribed by the Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee in
its rules and regulations and shall give the appellant ten (10) days written notice of the time and place of
such hearing.
3-6.16 Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee—Created—Powers and duties.
A Transient Occupancy Tax Review Committee is hereby created, which shall consist of the
members of the Council. The committee shall have the following powers and duties:
(a) To hear and determine appeals of orders or decisions of the Tax Administrator made upon
petitions for redeterminations of taxes. The Committee may affirm, modify, or reverse such
orders or decisions or dismiss the appeals therefrom, as may be just, and shall prescribe such
forms, rules and regulations relating to appeals as the Committee may deem necessary. In the
review of the decision or order of the Tax Administrator, the Committee may take such evidence
and make such investigations as it may deem necessary. The Committee shall give notice of its
determinations in the manner set forth for the service of notices of decisions by the Tax
Administrator and shall file a copy of each such determination with the Tax Administrator with
certification thereon of the date of service thereof. Such determination shall become final ten
(10) days thereafter and shall thereupon become due and payable, subject to interest and
penalties, and enforceable by the Tax Administrator in like manner as an order or decision of
the Tax Administrator;
(b) To approve, modify, or disapprove all forms, rules, and regulations prescribed by the Tax
Administrator in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and such
forms, rules and regulations shall be subject to, and become effective only on, such approval;
(c) To hear and determine in such manner as shall be just any protest which may be made by any
person who may interested to any form, rule, or regulation approved or prescribed by the
Committee;
(d) To grant for good cause applications for extensions of time in excess of one month for making
any return or payment of tax and to prescribe rules therefor; and
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 28
(e) To make such investigations as the Committee deems advisable regarding the imposition and
administration of the transient occupancy taxes.
3-6.17 Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any operator or other person so required to fail or refuse to register as
required by the provisions of this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or to fail or refuse
to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Administrator, or to render a false or
fraudulent return. No person required to make, render, sign, or verify any report shall make any false or
fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due, required by the
provisions of this chapter to be made.
Chapter 7 UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
Sections:
3-7.01 Found property—Duties of finders.
3-7.02 Found property—Duties of Custodian.
3-7.03 Found property—Unclaimed—Title.
3-7.04 Sales at public auction—Notices.
3-7.05 Sales at public auction—Proceeds—Unsold property.
3-7.06 Exception for lost and unclaimed bicycles and toys.
3-7.01 Found property—Duties of finders.
Any person who finds and takes possession of any money or personal property within the City which
they have reason to believe may have been stolen, lost, or abandoned shall deliver such property to the
Avenal Police Department or to such other entity charged with code enforcement for the City, who shall
be considered the Custodian. A receipt shall be issued to the person delivering such property or money.
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
3-7.02 Found property—Duties of Custodian.
(a) If the identity of the owner of such property is reasonably ascertainable, the Custodian shall notify
the owner that it has the property and where it may be claimed. The Custodian may require payment
by the owner of a reasonable charge for costs of storage and care of the property.
(b) Such found personal property shall be stored in a safe place and such found money shall be
deposited with the City unless sooner claimed by the true owner. At the end of such time property
shall be subject to disposal as provided in this chapter.
(c) If the owner appears within three (3) months after receipt of such property, proves ownership of the
property and pays all reasonable charges, the Custodian shall restore the property to the owner. In
the case of found money, such money shall be paid to the true owner upon written order to the City
Director of Finance from the Custodian.
(d) Any found property delivered to the Custodian which the Custodian determines is dangerous or
perishable may be disposed of immediately, without notice, in such manner as shall be determined
by the Custodian.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 29
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990)
3-7.03 Found property—Unclaimed—Title.
(a) Unclaimed property, except unclaimed bicycles and toys, shall be held by the Custodian for a period
of at least three (3) months; thereafter, such property shall be transferred to the Chief Administrative
Officer for the City for sale to the public pursuant to this section shall not be redeemable by the
owner or other persons entitled to possession. If the Chief Administrative Officer determines that
such property transferred to it for sale is needed for public use, such property may be retained by the
City and need not be sold.
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990)
3-7.04 Sales at public auction—Notices.
(a) The City shall, once a year or at such period as the City Manager deems appropriate, sell all
unclaimed personal property at public auction. The auction shall be conducted by the City Manager
or his/her duly appointed representative.
(b) Notice of such sale shall be given by the City Manager at least five (5) days before the time fixed for
the sale by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation and by the conspicuous posting of
a notice in three (3) public places within the City outlining the conditions of sale, and the date, time
and place at which such property will be offered at public auction.
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990)
3-7.05 Sales at public auction—Proceeds—Unsold property.
(a) Property not claimed by its owner or the finder shall be sold at public auction by the City Manager or
his duly appointed representative to the highest bidder for cash on the day of sale. Such items of
property may be offered for bid singly or in combinations at the discretion of the City Manager. The
money received from the sale shall be placed in the General Fund of the City.
(b) The successful bidder at public auction shall also pay separately any reasonable charges for storage.
(c) Any property remaining unsold after being offered for sale at such public auction may be
appropriated for use by the City, donated to charity, destroyed, or otherwise disposed of by the City
Manager as he directs.
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990)
3-7.06 Exception for lost and unclaimed bicycles and toys.
Pursuant to Section 217 of the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State of California, when any
bicycles or toys, or both, in the possession of the Avenal Police Department or other entity charged with
code enforcement for the City have been unclaimed for a period of at least sixty (60) days, instead of
being sold at auction to the highest bidder, such bicycles or toys may be turned over to the probation
officer, to the Welfare Department of the County, or to any charitable or nonprofit organization which is
authorized under its articles of incorporation to participate in a program or activity designed to prevent
juvenile delinquency and which is exempt from income taxation under federal or state law, or both, for use
in any program or activity designed to prevent juvenile delinquency.
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
Chapter 8 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Sections:
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 30
3-8.01 Adoption of purchasing system.
3-8.02 Definitions.
3-8.03 Purchasing Officer.
3-8.04 Purchasing regulations.
3-8.05 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
3-8.06 Estimates of requirements.
3-8.07 Requisitions.
3-8.08 Emergency procedures.
3-8.09 Bidding.
3-8.10 Purchase orders.
3-8.11 Funding of purchases.
3-8.12 Public project bidding procedures.
3-8.13 Open market procedure.
3-8.14 Small purchases.
3-8.15 Local business enterprise credit.
3-8.16 Professional and other services excluded.
3-8.17 Public projects excluded.
3-8.18 Disposition of obsolete and surplus property.
3-8.19 Approval of modifications and change orders by City Manager.
3-8.20 Gratuities.
3-8.21 Contract splitting.
3-8.22 Purchasing manual.
3-8.01 Adoption of purchasing system.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for
the City supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to
exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority of the purchasing function
and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is hereby adopted.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.02 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates:
"Contract" means a written agreement between the City and a vendor, including a purchase order
issued to a vendor.
"Local business enterprise" means a business entity with fixed offices or distribution points located
within the boundaries of the City, listed in the business license tax files with a City of Avenal business
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 31
address, and designating, for sales tax purposes, the City of Avenal as the point of sale for retail
transactions.
"Purchasing Officer" means the City Manager, or his or her designated representative.
"Using agency" shall mean any office, department, bureau, commission, board or other agency of
the City using supplies or equipment.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.03 Purchasing Officer.
The Purchasing Officer shall be the City Manager or a person appointed by the City Manager as his
or her designated representative. The Purchasing Officer may delegate duties to other employees. The
duties of Purchasing Officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. The Purchasing
Officer shall have authority to:
(a) Purchase and contract for all supplies and equipment required by any using agency in
accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative
regulations as the Purchasing Officer shall adopt, and such other rules and regulations as shall
be prescribed by the City Manager;
(b) Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;
(c) Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies and equipment at least expense to the
City;
(d) Discourage collusive bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible
on all purchases;
(e) Prepare and recommend rules governing purchasing, maintaining an inventory, and
warehousing of supplies and equipment of the City;
(f) Keep informed of current developments in the fields of purchasing, prices, market conditions
and new products;
(g) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter
and other rules and regulations;
(h) Be responsible for the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to insure
conformance with specifications, and, where necessary, to require chemical and physical tests
of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries to determine their quality and
conformance with specifications;
(i) Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between City
departments as needed and the sale or other disposition of all supplies and equipment which
cannot be used by any using agency or which have become obsolete or otherwise unsuitable
for City use;
(j) Maintain a bidders' list, vendors catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the
purchasing division;
(k) Perform such other duties and functions as may be necessary.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.04 Purchasing regulations.
The Purchasing Officer shall be responsible for determining that the regulations and procedures set
forth in this chapter are carried out.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 32
3-8.05 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
The Purchasing Officer may authorize, in writing, any using agency to purchase and contract for
specified supplies and equipment independently of the purchasing division; but the Purchasing Officer
shall require that such purchases and contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by
this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the using agency on the purchases and
contracts made under such written authorization.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.06 Estimates of requirements.
All using agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies and equipment in
such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the Purchasing Officer shall prescribe.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.07 Requisitions.
Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing agent by
standard purchase requisition forms.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.08 Emergency procedures.
With regard to public works purchases, if there is a great public calamity, such as an extraordinary
fire, flood, storm, epidemic, or other disaster, or if it is necessary to do emergency work to prepare for
national or local defense, the City Council may pass a resolution by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of its members
declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate expenditure of public money to
safeguard life, health or property. Upon adoption of the resolution, it may expend any sum required in the
emergency without complying with the provisions of this chapter as they apply to such public works
purchases.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.09 Bidding.
Unless Section 3-8.12 is applicable, the purchase of supplies and equipment shall be by openmarket
procedures pursuant to Section 3-8.13. Formal bidding procedures required pursuant to Section 3-8.12
may be dispensed with only:
(a) When the City Manager finds that such supplies or equipment are unique because of their
quality, durability, availability, or fitness for a particular use and are available from only one
source; or
(b) When an emergency, as determined by the City Manager, requires that the purchase be
completed within a period of time which will not permit normal bidding or quotation procedures;
or
(c) When there is a breakdown in essential machinery or in an essential service, or when
unforeseen circumstances arise including delays by contractors, delays in transportation, and
unanticipated volume of work which requires the immediate attention of a professional or
immediate service/repair in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare; or
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 33
(d) When an essential operation affecting the preservation of life or property, public health, safety
or welfare would be greatly hampered if the prescribed procedure would cause an undue delay
in the procurement of the needed services or materials; or
(e) When the City has contracted with another governmental entity to purchase particular supplies
or equipment on a cooperative basis; or
(f) When the City Manager determines that due to the nature of the supplies or equipment, formal
bidding is not likely to result in the lowest price.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.10 Purchase orders.
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made by contract, which may include a purchase
order.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.11 Funding of purchases.
The Purchasing Officer shall not authorize or issue a written contract for supplies or equipment
unless there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the
purchase is to be charged.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.12 Public project bidding procedures.
(a) Intent.
(1) It is the intent of this chapter to direct and authorize the establishment and maintenance of
informal bidding procedures for the City of Avenal in accordance with Section 22034 of the
Public Contract Code to govern the selection of contractors to perform public projects under the
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act (the "Act").
(2) This chapter shall be in effect throughout the City of Avenal and shall apply to the performance
of all public projects undertaken by, or to be undertaken by, the City of Avenal, and it shall be
liberally construed for the accomplishment of its purposes.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms, phrases, and words used in this section shall
have the same meaning given them in the Public Contract Code of the State of California. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the
plural include the singular, and words used in the singular include the plural. The words "include,"
"including" or other similar words of inclusion shall mean without limitation or restriction.
(c) Force account negotiated contract purchase order. Any public project to be undertaken by the City of
Avenal, the estimated cost of which is less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00), may be
performed by the City of Avenal.
(d) Informal bidding requirements.
(1) Any public project to be undertaken by the City, the estimated cost of which is less than one
hundred twenty-five thousand dollars ($125,000.00) may be let to contract by the informal
procedures established in this section.
(2) A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of
Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and in accordance with criteria promulgated from
time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 34
(3) Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this section, a
notice inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid,
as shown on the list of contractors described in subsection (d)(2) of this section, or to all
construction trade journals as specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting
Commission in accordance with Section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional
contractors or construction trade journals may be notified at the discretion of the City of Avenal,
provided, however:
(i) If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the City of Avenal for the particular
category of work to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the
construction trade journals specified by the California Uniform Construction Cost
Accounting Commission.
(ii) If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a
certain contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to
such contractor or contractors.
(e) Administrative authority. The Public Works Director, with the written concurrence of the City
Manager, is hereby authorized to award contracts pursuant to the informal procedures established in
this chapter, subject to the requirement that the current adopted City of Avenal budget provides for
the work.
(f) Limitations. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit, or construed to prohibit, the City Council of the City
of Avenal, the Public Works Director, or the City Manager from utilizing the alternative procedures set
forth in (1) Article 25 (commencing with Section 20390) of Chapter 1 of Part 3 of Division 2 of the
Public Contract Code, or (2) in Article 7 (commencing with Section 25500) of Chapter 5 of Part 2 of
Division 2 of Title 3 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 95-12 § 1, 1995: Ord. 95-11 § 1, 1995: Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992; Res. No. 2009-14, 6-3-2009)
3-8.13 Open market procedure.
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in an amount less than twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00) but greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may, upon receipt and approval of
a purchase requisition executed by a department manager, be made by the Purchasing Officer in the
open market without observing the formal bidding procedures prescribed by Section 3-8.12.
(a) Minimum number of quotations. Open market purchases shall, wherever practicable, be based
on at least three (3) quotations and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible vendor, except
as otherwise provided herein.
(b) Inviting quotations. The Purchasing Officer may solicit quotations by written requests to
prospective vendors, by telephone or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the
Avenal City Hall, or by any other means deemed effective.
(c) Quotations. Sealed, written quotations shall be submitted to the Purchasing Officer, who shall
keep a record of all open market quotations and contracts for a period of two (2) years after
submission of quotations or the execution of contracts. This record, while kept, shall be open to
public inspection, except that vendor proprietary data shall not be open to public inspection.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.14 Small purchases.
All ordinary purchases of day-to-day supplies or capital acquisitions with a value of less than five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be made at the discretion and direction of the Purchasing Officer. No
bidding procedures, formal or otherwise, or any other formal procedures or requirements, shall be
necessary.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 35
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.15 Local business enterprise credit.
In determining the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to Section 3-8.12, or the lowest responsible
vendor pursuant to Section 3-8.13, the Purchasing Officer shall be authorized to give credit of up to one
percent of the bid price or quotation to a local business enterprise. If such credit is to be given, the dollar
or percentage amount thereof shall be set forth in the notice inviting bids or in the request for quotations.
The Purchasing Officer shall provide a form by which a local business enterprise shall document and
certify that it qualifies for such credit, where applicable.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.16 Professional and other services excluded.
Except as provided in Section 3-8.19, the procedures set forth in this chapter shall not apply to
purchase orders or contracts for professional or other services. The City Manager shall prepare an
administrative instruction setting forth the procedures to be followed by all city departments in contracting
for professional and other services, which procedures shall be approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.17 Public projects excluded.
Except for Section 3-8.19, the procedures set forth in this chapter shall not apply to a "public project,"
as said term is defined in Section 20161 of the Public Contract Code, when the expenditure required
therefor exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The procedures to be followed by the Purchasing
Officer and all city departments in contracting for a public project shall be in conformity with state law,
including without limitation the Public Contract Code and the Labor Code.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.18 Disposition of obsolete and surplus property.
Each using agency shall submit to the Purchasing Officer at least annually a report describing all
supplies, equipment, materials, fixtures, and other personal property of the City in the agency's custody
which is deemed to be surplus or which has become obsolete or unserviceable.
(a) Subject to subsection (e) of this section, the Purchasing Officer, with the approval of the City
Manager, is authorized from time to time to sell or exchange any and all supplies, equipment,
materials, fixtures, and other personal property of the City having a salvage value and which is
obsolete or unserviceable, or is deemed to be surplus, or for which replacements are to be
purchased. The Purchasing Officer may sell the same for the best price obtainable in the open
market, or, when it is deemed advisable, to the highest bidder at a public sale, or the
Purchasing Officer may exchange the same for other property or for credit on other property.
(b) If the Purchasing Officer determines that any such obsolete, unserviceable, or surplus property
has no salvage value, it may be disposed of, with the approval of the City Manager, in any
acceptable manner.
(c) All sales shall be paid for in cash or by certified check or money order payable to the City.
(d) The Purchasing Officer shall be authorized, with the approval of the City Manager, to sign bills
of sale and any other documents evidencing transfer of title to such property by and on behalf of
the City.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 36
(e) Prior to disposing of any obsolete, unserviceable or surplus property having an estimated
market value in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the Purchasing Officer shall inform
the City Council of the nature of the property proposed for disposition and the proposed sales
price. Such disposition shall be subject to the City Council's prior approval.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.19 Approval of modifications and change orders by City Manager.
The City Manager shall have the authority to approve modifications and change orders as follows:
(a) After the effective date of any contract executed on behalf of the City for the purchase of
equipment or supplies, the retention of professional or other services, or work on a public
project, the City Manager shall have authority to approve in writing any modification involving an
addition to, deletion from, or revision in any item in such contract, including, without limitation,
plans, specifications and extra work, and change orders relating to the nature or quantity of
services, equipment, supplies or work, subject to the following limitations:
(1) The dollar amount of all such modifications or change orders relating to any one contract
having an original contract price of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) or less shall not
exceed fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or twenty (20) percent of the original contract
price, whichever is less.
(2) The dollar amount of all such modifications or change orders relating to any one contract
having an original contract price of one million one dollars ($1,000,001.00) or more shall
not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).
(b) The authority herein conferred upon the City Manager may, in the sound discretion of the City
Manager, be delegated in whole or in part to a department manager or other designated
employee or agent of the City.
(c) In connection with any specific contract where the circumstances so warrant, the City Council
may, by resolution, authorize the City Manager to exceed the specific dollar amounts or
percentage limitations set forth in divisions (1) and (2) of subsection (a) of this section.
(d) If a proposed contract modification, change order or request for extra work exceeds the
limitations imposed upon the City Manager by this section or by resolution, and any extended
delay in obtaining City Council approval is reasonably determined to subject the City to liability
for damages incurred by a contractor, or to jeopardize the public health, welfare or safety, or to
otherwise result in potential detriment to the City, then the City Manager shall have authority to
exceed the dollar amounts or percentage limitations specified herein.
(e) The City Manager shall, not less frequently than every six (6) months, report to the City Council
on modifications and change orders which are approved pursuant to this Section 3-8.19.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.20 Gratuities.
Each officer and employee of the City is hereby prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, any
rebate, gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever from any person to whom any purchase order or
contract is or might be awarded.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 37
3-8.21 Contract splitting.
It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller portions, work orders, projects, purchases, contracts or
any public work project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, including the splitting of
work or services between or among departments or divisions or other organizational units of the City.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
3-8.22 Purchasing manual.
The Purchasing Officer shall prepare a purchasing manual which will clearly define and describe the
aims and purposes of this chapter. The purchasing manual shall describe and explain in detail the
procedures that the using agencies must follow in the procurement of supplies and services.
(Ord. 92-03 (part), 1992)
Chapter 9 CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Sections:
3-9.01 Statutory authority.
3-9.02 Purpose.
3-9.03 Definitions.
3-9.04 Procedures.
3-9.05 Delinquencies.
3-9.06 Alternatives.
3-9.07 Reimbursement.
3-9.08 Appeal.
3-9.01 Statutory authority.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with the provisions of Sections 29550 and 29550.1 of the
California Government Code and Article VIII, Section 22-120 of the Kings County Code.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
3-9.02 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the recovery of fees imposed against the City of Avenal
for the reimbursement of expenses incurred by the County of Kings in the booking or other processing of
persons arrested by employees or agents of the City of Avenal and brought to the Kings County Jail for
booking or detention.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 38
3-9.03 Definitions.
(a) Criminal justice administrative fee. As used in this chapter, "Criminal Justice Administrative Fee"
shall mean the fees provided for by California Government Code Section 29550 and Article VIII,
Section 22-120 of the Kings County Code.
(b) Criminal justice administrative fee recovery program. As used in this chapter, "Criminal Justice
Administrative Fee Recovery Program" (the "Program") shall mean the City of Avenal's program for
the recovery of criminal justice administrative fees in pursuant to the provisions of California
Government Code Section 29550.1 and in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
(c) Program Manager. As used in this chapter, "Program Manager" shall mean the City Manager of the
City of Avenal or any individual or individuals designated by the City Manager to perform the
functions of Program Manager.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
3-9.04 Procedures.
(a) A person arrested by an officer or agent of the City of Avenal will be billed for the amount of any
criminal justice administrative fee imposed against the City of Avenal if the arrested person is
convicted of any criminal offense related to the arrest.
(b) The City of Avenal will bill the arrested and convicted person for the criminal justice administrative
fees imposed by the County of Kings pursuant to Government Code Section 29550 and Kings
County Ordinance No. 495, Section 2 (Article VIII, Section 22-120 et seq. of the Kings County Code).
(c) The City of Avenal will treat the bill for criminal justice administrative fees as a civil debt of that
person which is collectible by the City in the same manner as a contract obligation.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
3-9.05 Delinquencies.
(a) If the bill for criminal justice administrative fees is not paid within thirty (30) days after the initial bill is
mailed by the City, or no arrangements are made for partial payment during the thirty (30) dayperiod,
then the bill will be considered delinquent.
(b) If a person refuses to pay a bill for criminal justice administrative fees, the City may pursue recovery
in Small Claims Court. Such an action will not be initiated until after the criminal charges have been
adjudicated.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
3-9.06 Alternatives.
(a) As an alternative to the procedure set forth in Section 3-8.04 of this chapter, the City may, in all
appropriate cases:
(1) Seek to have payment of the bill for criminal justice administrative fees imposed as a condition
of probation; or
(2) Seek to have an order for payment of the amount of the criminal justice administrative fees
included in the judgment of conviction.
(b) In all cases where an order for payment of the amount of the criminal justice administrative fee is
included in the judgment of conviction, execution may be issued on the order in the same manner as
a judgment in a civil action, but the order shall not be enforceable by contempt.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 39
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
3-9.07 Reimbursement.
If a person who has paid a bill for criminal justice administrative fees is not convicted of criminal
charges, the City will allow for reimbursement. A request for reimbursement must be made within thirty
(30) days after the defendant has been acquitted or the charges against the defendant have been
dismissed.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
3-9.08 Appeal.
Any person receiving a bill for criminal justice administrative fees has the right to appeal the bill to
the Program Manager within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill. The Program Manager will review the bill
for accuracy. If the bill is found to be in error, then the bill will be corrected or, if appropriate, rescinded.
(Ord. 94-03 § 1 (part), 1994)
Chapter 10 FRANCHISE FEES
Sections:
3-10.01 Regulation of franchise.
3-10.02 Franchise required.
3-10.03 Matters subject to franchise.
3-10.04 Franchises—Authority of the City Council.
3-10.05 Franchise terms.
3-10.06 Franchise consideration.
3-10.07 Franchise application.
3-10.08 Application fee.
3-10.09 Franchise—Call for bids discretionary.
3-10.10 Application—Referral.
3-10.11 Franchise—Notice of hearing.
3-10.12 Hearing.
3-10.13 Franchise bond.
3-10.14 Transportation franchise.
3-10.15 Acceptance of franchise.
3-10.16 Grant in lieu of all other franchises.
3-10.17 Franchise—Obligation of grantee.
3-10.18 Franchise payments.
3-10.19 Property subject to franchise.
3-10.20 City property.
3-10.21 Right to abandon property.
3-10.22 Purchase by City.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 40
3-10.23 Remedies of the City.
3-10.24 Penalty for exercising rights without franchise.
3-10.25 Franchise assignment.
3-10.26 Reservations of rights.
3-10.27 Relocation of facilities.
3-10.28 Failure to relocate.
3-10.29 Special permits.
3-10.30 Application for special permit.
3-10.31 Special permits—Granting.
3-10.32 Special permits—Bond.
3-10.01 Regulation of franchise.
Every franchise hereafter granted by the City of Avenal for the use of the City streets for any
purpose, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance granting such franchise, shall be granted upon
and be subject to the following rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions, which are hereby
deemed incorporated into each such ordinance, in addition to the rules, regulations, restrictions, terms
and conditions set forth in the ordinance granting each such franchise.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.02 Franchise required.
No person, firm or corporation shall exercise any franchise, permit or privilege mentioned herein,
except insofar as he, she or it may be entitled to do so by direct authority of the Constitution of the State
of California or the Constitution or laws of the United States, in, upon, over, under or along any public
place in the City of Avenal, or within the City limits of the City of Avenal, unless he, she or it shall have
obtained a grant therefor in accordance with the provisions hereof and any applicable provisions of the
Municipal Code of the City of Avenal. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to invalidate any lawful
franchise heretofore granted, nor to necessitate the obtaining of a new franchise for a use for which a
franchise holder shall have a valid, unexpired franchise.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.03 Matters subject to franchise.
Except insofar as he, she or it may be entitled to do so by direct authority of the Constitution of
California or the Constitution or laws of the United States, no person, firm or corporation shall exercise
any privilege enumerated in this section unless he, she or it shall have been granted an appropriate
franchise therefor by the City of Avenal, namely:
(a) Collect, transport or dispose of solid waste or recyclables along, upon, over, under, in, across or
along any public place in the City of Avenal, or within the City limits of the City of Avenal;
(b) Construct, maintain or operate a street, interurban, underground or elevated steam or
commercial railroad, or other system for transporting or conveying passengers or freight
(including any appurtenances which are a part of the system), over a fixed route, along, upon,
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 41
over, in, under or across any public place in the City of Avenal, or within the City limits of the
City of Avenal;
(c) Construct, maintain or operate pipes, tubes or conduits along, upon, over, in, under or across
any public place in the City of Avenal, or within the City limits of the City of Avenal, for the
purpose of transmitting or distributing water, gas, steam, oil, air or other substance or utility;
(d) Erect, construct, lay, maintain or operate poles, pipes, conduits, wires, cables or appurtenances
upon, over, under, in, across or along any public place in the City of Avenal, or within the City
limits of the City of Avenal, for the purpose of transmitting or distributing power, heat, electricity
or electric energy, or for a communication by telephone, telegraph or other system; or
(e) Construct, maintain or operate any other plants or system necessary or convenient for
furnishing the City and its inhabitants with solid waste disposal, recycling, transportation,
communication, water, light, power or other public utility services.
The term "public place" as used herein shall be deemed to include any street, lane, alley, court or
other public place in the City.
The term "City limits" as used herein means the incorporated area of the City of Avenal, as it now or
may hereafter exist.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to spur or side tracks, nor to require motor,
contract or other carriers of freight or passengers not operating over a fixed route to obtain franchises for
use of any public place in the City.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.04 Franchises—Authority of the City Council.
Pursuant to its constitutional and statutory authority, the City Council may grant franchises and
privileges for all of the purposes enumerated herein to persons, firms and corporations, whether operating
under any existing franchise or not, upon such terms and conditions as are in the applicable provisions of
the Avenal Municipal Code and any ordinances adopted pursuant thereto, and may in such franchises
impose such other and additional terms and conditions not in conflict with the Municipal Code, whether
governmental or contractual in character, as in the judgment of the City Council are in the public interest.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.05 Franchise terms.
Franchises may be granted for either a fixed or an indeterminate period. An indeterminate franchise
shall provide that it shall endure in full force and effect until the same, with the consent of the appropriate
state or federal agency, shall be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by its possessor, or until the State
of California, or some municipal or public corporation, duly authorized by law, shall purchase by voluntary
agreement or shall condemn and take, under the power of eminent domain, the property actually used
and useful in the exercise of such franchise and situate within the City limits of the City of Avenal or until
the franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the possessor thereof, or until it is
terminated in any other manner that may be specified in the franchise grant.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.06 Franchise consideration.
No franchise shall be granted without reserving to the City adequate consideration for the privilege
conferred. As part of the consideration for the granting of each franchise, the grantee shall agree to pay
the purchase price, if any, for such franchise as set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise, and to
make the franchise payment, if any such payment shall have been fixed by the City Council, and the
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 42
grantee shall also agree to perform all covenants and agreements set out in the ordinance granting the
franchise.
The City Council shall have the right, but shall not be obligated, to recognize that extensions of
services, betterment of services, surrendering of existing franchises or parts thereof, settling litigation
between the grantee and the City, or the performance by grantee of franchise obligations, may be
consideration (other than the franchise payment) of benefit to the City and its inhabitants.
In determining the amount of adequate consideration for the franchise or the amount of the franchise
payment, if any, to be paid by a grantee, the City Council shall have the right, but not the obligation, to
give weight to such factors as are enumerated in this section.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.07 Franchise application.
An applicant for any franchise above mentioned shall file with the City Council a verified application
which shall state:
(a) The name of the applicant;
(b) The purpose and term, whether definite or indeterminate, for which the franchise is desired;
(c) The amounts and/or percentages, if any, applicant, if granted the franchise, proposes to pay to
the City during the life of such franchise;
(d) Any limitations as to time, place or type of services proposed by applicant; and
(e) Any other terms or conditions that applicant may desire, including surrender of existing
franchises, or parts thereof, or claims to such franchises, or proposals to settle any litigation or
controversies between applicant and the City.
Unless the franchise is to cover all of the incorporated territory of the City, the application shall be
accompanied by six (6) copies of a map, drawn to scale, showing the location boundaries of the area to
be described in the franchise. Franchise applications shall set forth such other information as the City
Council may require.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.08 Application fee.
Every application for a franchise, permit or privilege shall be accompanied by a cash deposit of not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by a certified check for such amount, payable to the City, as a
fund out of which to pay all expenses connected with such application, including, but not limited to, all
advertising and publishing costs. The deposit of the applicant shall be retained until the acceptance of the
franchise and the filing of any bond or other security required, or until the City Council determines not to
grant the franchise. Thereupon, the remainder, if any, of the five hundred dollars ($500.00) after the
payment therefrom of all such expenses incurred by the City shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.09 Franchise—Call for bids discretionary.
The City Council may grant a franchise without calling for bids or may, in its discretion, advertise for
bids for the sale of a franchise after notice inviting bids therefor, upon a basis not in conflict with the
provisions of the Avenal Municipal Code, to be set out in advertisements for bids and notice of sale,
provided that no bidding shall be had or required upon any renewal of a franchise, surrender of existing
franchise or parts thereof, or in settlement of litigation between the grantee and the City.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 43
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.10 Application—Referral.
Every application made to the City Council for a franchise, privilege or permit mentioned herein shall,
before any action is taken thereon, be referred by the City Council to the City Manager and City Attorney
for their respective recommendations.
Before making his or her recommendation to the City Council, the City Manager shall obtain the
recommendations of the Director of Public Works, the Planning Director and the City Engineer.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.11 Franchise—Notice of hearing.
Upon receipt of the City Manager's recommendation, the City Council may pass a resolution
declaring its intention to consider the franchise application, stating the character of the same, setting forth
a notice of the day, hour and place when and where any and all persons having any objection to the
granting thereof may appear before the City Council and be heard thereon, and directing the City Clerk to
publish said notice at least once within fifteen (15) days after the passage of said resolution. The time
fixed for such hearing shall be not less than twenty (20) nor more than sixty (60) days after the date of the
passage of said resolution.
Such notice shall state: (a) the name of the applicant; (b) the character of the franchise; (c) its terms,
whether definite or indeterminate; (d) the amounts and/or percentages, if any, grantee shall pay to the
City during the life of such franchise; (e) any limitations as to time, place or type of services proposed; (f)
the amount and character of any bond or other security required; and (g) an outline of any other major
provisions of the proposed franchise.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.12 Hearing.
At any time not later than the hour set for the hearing of objections, any person interested may file a
written protest stating objections against the granting of such franchise. Such protest must be signed by
the protestant and be delivered to the City Clerk. At the time set for hearing objections, the City Council
shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests so made and its decision shall be final and conclusive.
The City Council may adjourn said hearing from time to time.
If no protest in writing shall have been delivered to the Clerk up to the hour set for hearing, or such
protests as shall have been filed shall have been heard and determined by the City Council to be
insufficient, or shall have been overruled or denied, the City Council may grant such franchise. Such
franchise shall be granted by ordinance adopted in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.13 Franchise bond.
The City Council may require the grantee of any franchise to provide such bond or other security as it
deems the public interest requires.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 44
3-10.14 Transportation franchise.
Every franchise granted a transportation company shall specify the area in which the grantee shall
operate, the public places or routes to be followed by the tracks or vehicles of the grantee; which area,
public places and routes shall be subject to the lawful orders of the Public Utilities Commission of the
State of California.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.15 Acceptance of franchise.
The grantee of any franchise granted hereunder shall within ten (10) days after the franchise is
granted, file with the City Clerk a written acceptance of the terms and conditions thereof and any bond or
other security required by the City Council. By its acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall covenant
and agree to perform and be bound by all of the terms and conditions imposed by the Avenal Municipal
Code, this chapter and the franchise.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.16 Grant in lieu of all other franchises.
Any franchise granted by the City with respect to a particular utility service shall be in lieu of all other
franchises, rights, or privileges then owned by the grantee for the furnishing of that particular utility or
service within the City limits, and by acceptance of any franchise hereunder the grantee shall be deemed
to have waived and abandoned all other franchises, rights and privileges then owned by the grantee for
the furnishing of that particular utility or service within the City limits. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to any franchise, right or privilege obtained by direct authority of the Constitution of the State of
California or of the United States.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.17 Franchise—Obligation of grantee.
The grantee of any franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall:
(a) Construct, install and maintain all tracks, pipes, tubes, conduits, poles, wires, instrumentalities
and appurtenances in accordance and in conformity with all of the lawful ordinances, rules and
regulations theretofore or thereafter adopted by the City of Avenal in the exercise of its police
powers and, as to state highways, subject to the provisions of general laws relating to the
location and maintenance of such facilities therein, and with as little hindrance as practicable to
the use of the streets for purpose of travel;
(b) Upon completion of the construction, installation or maintenance of such tracks, pipes, tubes,
conduits, poles, wires, instrumentalities and appurtenances, place all portions of the streets
which have been excavated or otherwise injured thereby in as good condition as before the
work of construction, installation or maintenance to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director;
(c) Pay to the City on demand the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any
operations of the grantee under such franchise;
(d) Indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents, employees and volunteers from
any and all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under such franchise;
(e) Make such reports as the City or the franchise may specify;
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 45
(f) At all reasonable times, permit any duly authorized representative of the City to examine and
transcribe any and all books, accounts, papers, maps and other records kept or maintained by
the grantee or under its control as the City deems material to the determination of the
performance of the franchise obligations and as the franchise may require; and
(g) At all reasonable times, permit any duly authorized representative of the City to examine any
and all property of the grantee erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained pursuant to
the franchise, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.18 Franchise payments.
Franchise payments shall be due and payable monthly within ten (10) days following the first day of
each month after the granting of the franchise. In the event a franchise payment is not made within ten
(10) days following the first day of each month, the grantee shall further pay interest on the amount due at
the rate of one percent per month.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.19 Property subject to franchise.
All facilities erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained by the grantee in highways, including
services connected with the grantee's facilities, whether installed by the grantee or not, in the area
described in and by virtue of the authority provided by the ordinance granting the franchise, prior to the
effective date of such ordinance, except those maintained under prior right other than franchise, shall
become subject to all the terms and conditions of such ordinance upon such effective date.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.20 City property.
A franchise does not give the grantee the right to attach any pipe, conduit or other facility to any
bridge or other City structure. Such attachments shall be made only in accordance with the provisions of
the ordinances and regulations of the City, as they now exist or are hereafter amended or superseded.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.21 Right to abandon property.
The Public Works Director, upon such terms and conditions as he or she may see fit to impose, may
give the grantee of the franchise permission to abandon, without removing, any facility laid, erected,
constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. The length of any such facility abandoned with
such permission shall not be considered in calculating payments due under the franchise except for the
time prior to the effective date of such permission. Nothing contained in the franchise shall be construed
to permit the grantee any right to omit from its annual reports, if such reports are required, and from the
calculation of franchise payments the length of any abandoned facility of grantee except in the manner
aforesaid. Unless such permission is granted, the grantee shall remove all abandoned facilities within
ninety (90) days after such abandonment and shall restore the street to its former state at the time such
facilities were removed, as near as may be, so as not to impair its usefulness.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 46
3-10.22 Purchase by City.
Every franchise shall reserve to the City the right to purchase the property of grantee either at an
agreed price or a price to be determined in a manner to be prescribed in the grant, to the extent that such
purchase may be authorized or permitted by law.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.23 Remedies of the City.
If any person, firm or corporation shall exercise a right or privilege for which he, she or it is required
by the Avenal Municipal Code to obtain a franchise without having first obtained such franchise from the
City, the City may establish by ordinance the reasonable amount or percentage that such person, firm or
corporation shall pay to the City for the exercise of such right or privilege within the City for which a
franchise is required, and if such person, firm or corporation shall thereafter fail to pay to the City on
demand such amount or percentage which has been so established by ordinance, the City shall have the
right to enforce the payment thereof from such person, firm or corporation. If the grantee of any franchise
shall fail or refuse to comply with any of the provisions or conditions set out in any franchise ordinance
enacted by the City Council, the City may declare a forfeiture, and/or may sue such person, firm or
corporation for damages for such noncompliance, and/or may exercise any other rights or remedies
provided by law.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.24 Penalty for exercising rights without franchise.
In addition to any other remedies that the City may have, any person, firm or corporation exercising
any right or privilege for which a franchise is required, without possessing a valid and existing franchise
therefor, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day during any portion of which said person, firm or corporation exercises any
privilege for which a franchise is required, without possessing a valid and existing franchise therefor, and
shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this ordinance.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.25 Franchise assignment.
No franchise, permit or privilege granted by the City of Avenal shall be, in whole or in part, leased,
assigned, transferred or otherwise disposed of without the express written consent of the City, provided
that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the grantee of such franchise, permit or privilege from
including it in a mortgage or trust deed without such express consent of the City.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.26 Reservations of rights.
(a) The City reserves the right to change the grade, to change the width or to alter or change the
location of any street over which the franchise is granted.
(b) The City reserves the right for itself and public entities which are now or may later be established to
lay, construct, repair, alter, relocate and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of
any type or description within the City streets over which the franchise is granted. If the City or other
public entity finds that the location or relocation of such facilities or improvements conflicts with the
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 47
facilities laid, constructed or maintained under the franchise, whether such facilities were laid before
or after the facilities of the City or such public entity were laid, the grantee of such franchise shall at
no expense to the City or public entity, on or before a date specified in a written request from the
Public Works Director, which date shall be not less than thirty (30) days after the receipt of such
notice and request to do so, commence work to change the location either permanently or
temporarily of all facilities so conflicting with such improvements to a permanent or temporary
location in said highways to be approved by the Public Works Director. Grantee shall thereafter
diligently prosecute such work to completion. If such street be subsequently constituted a state
highway, while it remains a state highway the rights of the State of California shall be as provided in
Streets and Highways Code Section 680 as it presently exists or may be amended or superseded.
(c) The City reserves the right for itself, for all cities and public entities which are now or may be later
established, to improve the surface of any City street over which the franchise is granted, upon
written notice that the grantor intends to improve any such City street within the territory covered by
the franchise, and requests that the grantee erect, install, lay or construct beneath the surface of the
City street the facilities which at that time are known or believed by the grantor to be necessary or
convenient to serve its needs and those of the public in the foreseeable future. The grantee shall
commence such work on or before the date specified in such written notice and request, which date
shall be not less than thirty (30) days from receipt of such written notice and request, and diligently
prosecute such work to completion. After the completion of said highway improvements by the
grantor, the right of the grantee to lay or construct facilities in, under or through the improved surface
of said City street or portion of the City street, under the franchise, shall be subject to such additional
terms and conditions as the Public Works Director may impose to minimize any damage to such
improved surface.
(d) The City expressly reserves the right and privilege, at no cost to the City, of installing and
maintaining four (4) communication circuits upon any poles or in any communication conduit erected
or placed by virtue of the franchise. The City may use the circuits for maintaining a communication,
control and fire alarm service in the dispatch of City business; and all such poles erected or conduits
laid under the authority of the franchise shall be erected and laid in such a manner as to leave
sufficient space for the proper accommodation of the four (4) circuits to be installed and maintained
by the City.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.27 Relocation of facilities.
If any of the facilities heretofore or hereafter erected, constructed, installed or maintained by the
grantee pursuant to the franchise on, along, upon, over, in, under or across any highway are located in a
manner which prevents or interferes with the change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance,
improvement, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, alteration or relocation of the highway, the
grantee shall relocate permanently or temporarily any such facility at no expense to the City or public
entity upon receipt of a written request from the Public Works Director to do so, and shall commence such
work on or before the date specified in such written request, which date shall be not less than thirty (30)
days from receipt of such written request, and thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion;
provided, however, if such City streets be subsequently constituted a state highway, thereafter and so
long as such highway remains a state highway, no such change of location shall be required for a
temporary purpose.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.28 Failure to relocate.
If the grantee after reasonable notice fails or refuses to relocate permanently or temporarily its
facilities located in, on, upon, along, under, over, across or above any highway or to pave, surface, grade,
repave, resurface or regrade as required pursuant to any provision of the franchise, the City or public
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 48
entity may cause the work to be done and shall keep an itemized account of the entire cost thereof, and
the grantee shall hold harmless the City, its officers and employees from any liability which may arise, or
be claimed to arise from the moving, cutting or alteration of any of grantee's facilities, or the turning on or
off of water, oil or other liquid, gas or electricity.
The grantee agrees to and shall reimburse the City or public entity for such cost within thirty (30)
days after presentation to the grantee of an itemized account of such cost.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.29 Special permits.
When the City Council shall find that an emergency exists and that public convenience and necessity
require it, a special permit may be granted to any applicant for a franchise to permit such applicant to
proceed with the relocation, extension, alteration or other change in existing facilities, except repairs or
maintenance changes, which relocation, extension, alteration or other change in existing facilities by
reason of such emergency should be made before the securing of a franchise is possible. Such special
permit shall only be granted to an applicant for a franchise and shall only be granted after the filing of the
application for a franchise as provided herein.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.30 Application for special permit.
An application for a special permit shall be filed in writing with the City Council setting forth such
information as will permit action thereon. Reference in the application may be made to the application for
a franchise for a description of the proposed extension, alteration or other change in existing facilities.
Applications for special permits shall be referred to the City Attorney and the City Manager in the manner
provided for applications for franchises.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.31 Special permits—Granting.
All such special permits shall be granted under the express condition that if a franchise under this
chapter is not granted and accepted, all work done under such special permit shall be removed
immediately at applicant's expense and the streets or alleys or other public places affected by such work
shall be placed in as good condition as before such work was done, all to the satisfaction of the Directorof
Public Works.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
3-10.32 Special permits—Bond.
The City Council may require, as a condition to the granting of such special permits, that a bond of a
kind and in an amount determined by the City Council shall be furnished by applicant conditioned upon
the faithful performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and further conditioned that applicant
shall prosecute diligently to completion all work thereunder, including removal work as hereinbefore
provided.
(Ord. 96-04 § 1 (part), 1996)
Chapter 11 DEVELOPMENT FEES
Sections:
3-11.01 Title.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 49
3-11.02 Findings.
3-11.03 Definitions.
3-11.04 Establishment of development fees.
3-11.05 Adoption of fees by resolution.
3-11.06 Imposition of development impact fee.
3-11.07 Annual adjustment.
3-11.08 Creation of special fund.
3-11.09 Computation of fees.
3-11.10 Payment of fees.
3-11.11 Fee adjustments.
3-11.12 Use of funds.
3-11.13 Refund of fees paid.
3-11.14 Exemptions.
3-11.15 Credits.
3-11.16 Developer construction of facilities.
3-11.17 Review.
3-11.18 Controlling state law.
3-11.19 Superseding provisions.
3-11.20 Severability.
3-11.01 Title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Development Impact Fee Ordinance of the
City of Avenal, California.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.02 Findings.
The City Council of the City of Avenal hereby finds and declares as follows:
(a) The State of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through
66009 has, among other things, determined the nexus that must be established in the
enactment of development impact fees.
(b) The imposition of development impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that
development bears a proportionate share of the cost of public facilities and service
improvements necessary to accommodate such development. This must be done in order to
promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(c) This chapter recognizes that all new development within the City will result in additional growth
and that such growth will place additional burdens on various City facilities, infrastructure and
services. This chapter further recognizes the types of land development that will generate
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 50
impacts necessitating the acquisition of land and construction of public facilities and expansion
of services and infrastructure in order to meet and accommodate them.
(d) All land uses within the City should bear a proportionate financial burden in the construction and
improvement of public facilities and services necessary to serve them.
(e) The cost of providing public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development
projects within the City of Avenal exceeds the revenue generated by fees exacted from the
development projects.
(f) The development impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the costs which are
generated through the need for new facilities and other capital acquisition costs required,
incremental, by new development within the City of Avenal.
(g) The fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing public
facilities occasioned by development projects within the City of Avenal.
(h) The fees established by this chapter relate rationally to the reasonable cost of providing public
facilities occasioned by development projects within the City of Avenal, which public facilities
are consistent with the General Plan and the various Elements of the General Plan of the City of
Avenal.
(i) The public facilities and anticipated future development herein referenced are based upon an
analysis of existing land use and zoning.
(j) The fees established by this chapter are consistent with the goals and objectives of the City's
General Plan and are designed to mitigate the impacts caused by new development throughout
the City. Development impact fees are necessary in order to finance the required public facilities
and service improvements and to pay for new development's fair share of their construction
costs.
(k) Imposition of fees to finance public facilities and service improvements is necessary in order to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.03 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
(a) "Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development.
"Development project" shall include a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction
or reconstruction, remodeling, or any work requiring any permit under the ordinances of the City
of Avenal, as the same presently exist or may be amended from time to time hereafter. The
term "development project" shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or
structures, and structures moved into the City.
(b) "Fee" means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by
the City to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of
defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project, but
does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the California Government Code, fees for
processing applications for governmental regulatory actions or approvals, or fees collected
under development agreements adopted pursuant to Article 2.5 (commencing with Section
65864) of chapter 4, division 1, title 7 of the California Government Code.
(c) "Public facilities" include public improvements, public services and community amenities.
(d) "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Avenal.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 51
(e) "Permits" and "building permits" shall mean permits for construction of new housing only and
shall not apply to permits issued in relation to rehabilitation of existing homes or where City has,
in its discretion, waived permit requirements for any existing reconstruction project.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.04 Establishment of development fees.
The following development impact fees are hereby established and imposed on the issuance of all
building permits for development within the City to finance the cost of the following categories of public
facilities and improvements required by new development. The development impact fees consist of the
following fees which are hereby established:
(a) Police Facilities and Equipment: A development impact fee is hereby established for police
facilities and training;
(b) Fire Facilities and Equipment: A development impact fee is hereby established for fire facilities
and equipment;
(c) General Facilities and Equipment Fee: A development impact fee is hereby established for
general facilities and equipment;
(d) Streets, Interchanges and Traffic Signals: A development impact fee is hereby established for
streets, interchanges and traffic signals;
(e) Bridges and Culverts: A development impact fee is hereby established for bridges and culverts;
(f) Street Medians and Landscaping: A development impact fee is hereby established for street
medians and landscaping;
(g) Water Supply Facilities: A development impact fee is hereby established for water supply
facilities;
(h) Water Distribution and Holding Facilities: A development impact fee is hereby established for
water distribution and holding facilities;
(i) Sewage Collection Facilities: A development impact fee is hereby established for sewage
collection facilities;
(j) Wastewater Treatment Facilities: A development impact fee is hereby established for
wastewater treatment facilities;
(k) Storm Drainage Facilities: A development impact fee is hereby established for storm drainage
facilities;
(l) Street Sweeping: A development impact fee is hereby established for street sweeping;
(m) Parks and Recreation Facilities: A development impact fee is hereby established for parks and
recreation facilities.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
3-11.05 Adoption of fees by resolution.
The City Council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees, describe the benefit
and impact area on which the fees are imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed and
describe the estimated cost of these facilities.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 52
3-11.06 Imposition of development impact fee.
(a) Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to develop
land within the City by applying for a building permit or applying for any discretionary land use permit,
is hereby required to pay the appropriate development impact fees established pursuant to this
chapter as the same may be applicable, in the manner, amount and for the purposes therein
referenced.
(b) No permits or extension of permits for the activities referenced in subsection (a) of this section shall
be granted unless and until the appropriate development impact fees hereby required have been
paid to the City.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.07 Annual adjustment.
Each fee imposed by this chapter shall be adjusted on July 1st of each fiscal year, beginning on July
1, 2007, by Resolution of the City Council. In the alternative, the Council may elect, by resolution, to
automatically adjust fees by a percentage equal to the Engineering Cost Index as published by
Engineering News Record for the preceding twelve (12) months or any other index which the Council
adopts by resolution. Any such automatic adjustments shall not apply to fees which are based on variable
factors which themselves result in an automatic adjustment or those which are specifically indicated
otherwise.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.08 Creation of special fund.
Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund created to hold the
revenue generated by each such fee. Monies within each such fund may be expended only by
appropriation by the City Council for specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the
money was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are hereby created and established for
the purposes indicated:
(a) A Police Facilities and Equipment Fund is hereby established. The Police Facilities and
Equipment Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated costs of police facilities and equipment, including any required acquisition of land.
(b) A Fire Facilities and Equipment Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for the deposit
of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated cost of fire facilities and
equipment, including any required acquisition of land.
(c) A General Facilities and Equipment Fund is hereby established. The General Facilities Fund is
a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of
constructing and improving the general municipal facilities within the City, including any required
acquisition of land.
(d) A Streets, Interchanges and Traffic Signals Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for
the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of the design,
upgrading or improvement of the traffic network, including any required acquisition of land.
(e) A Bridges and Culvert Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees
collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated cost of constructing and improving all
bridges and culverts within the City, including any required acquisition of land.
(f) A Street Medians and Landscaping Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for the
deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual estimated cost of constructing and
improving all street medians and landscaping facilities within the City, including any required
acquisition of land.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 53
(g) A Water Supply Facilities Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees
collected for, and the payment of, the actual estimated cost of constructing and improving the
water supply facilities within the City, including any required acquisition of land and/or the
purchase of any required water rights.
(h) A Water Distribution and Holding Facilities Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for
the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated cost of
constructing and improving the water distribution and holding facilities within the City, including
any required acquisition of land.
(i) A Sewage Collection Facilities Fund is hereby established. The Fund is a fund for the deposit of
fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated cost of constructing and
improving the sewage collection facilities and system within the City, including any required
acquisition of land.
(j) A Wastewater Treatment Facilities Fund is hereby established. The Wastewater Treatment
Facilities Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated costs of constructing and improving the sewage treatment facilities within the City,
including any required acquisition of land.
(k) A Storm Drainage Facilities Fund is hereby established. The Storm Drainage Facilities Fund is a
fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of
constructing and improving the storm drain facilities within the City, including any required
acquisition of land.
(l) A Street Sweeping Fund is hereby established. The Street Sweeping Fund is a fund for the
deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated cost of street sweeping
facilities and equipment.
(m) A Parks and Recreation Facilities Fund is hereby established. The Parks and Recreation
Facilities Fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or
estimated costs of constructing and improving the parks and recreation facilities within the City,
including any required acquisition of land, as well as grading, irrigation and turfing costs
associated therewith.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
3-11.09 Computation of fees.
If a parcel contains more than one (1) zone, then the applicable fees shall be prorated by acreage or
units, as appropriate, attributable to each zone. Public properties shall be classified into the category of
use as between residential, commercial or industrial, and shall pay fees pursuant to that classification, as
determined by the City Manager or her duly authorized designee. All fees due hereunder shall be
determined and calculated by the City Manager and/or her designated agent. The City Manager or her
designee shall have the further authority to determine the specific amount of development impact fees to
be assessed against a use which is not specifically or typically associated with the various land use zone
districts for which the development impact fees are established. In the determination and calculation, the
City shall establish a written record of the calculation and nexus to infrastructure impacts for the projects
identified above.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.10 Payment of fees.
The fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be paid for the property on which a development
project is proposed at the time of the issuance of any required building permit, except as otherwise
provided below:
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 54
(a) Fees imposed on residential development shall be collected in accordance with the provisionsof
California Government Code Section 66007, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be
amended from time to time. An applicant for a residential building permit may request that
payment be deferred until the date of final inspection. Said request shall be approved when the
property owner posts proper security in the form of cash deposit, letter of credit or other similar
instrument retrievable at the time request is made for final inspection. The form and manner of
the security shall be approved by the City Manager.
(b) Fees imposed on industrial and commercial development may be deferred by action of the City
Council. Such action shall consist of the adoption of a resolution consistent with the following
terms and conditions:
(1) A determination is made that such action will promote and stimulate economic
development within the City. The City Council shall make specific findings setting forth how
the subject project accomplishes this goal.
(2) Establish a specific timetable for payment in full of the deferred fees. The Council may also
require a percentage to be paid with the issuance of a building permit. In no event shall
deferral of payment in full be permitted for more than five (5) years.
(3) Interest on the unpaid portion of deferred impact fees shall accrue at a rate equal to the
Local Agency Investment Fund (LAIF) interest rate in effect at the time the resolution is
adopted and shall be articulated in said resolution. Interest shall be due and payable, infull,
with the final payment, although interest may be paid earlier at the election of the party
developing the project.
(4) A written guarantee of payment in full of said impact fees, in the form of a surety bond or
some other form of surety instrument as may be acceptable to the City Engineer and the
City Attorney, shall be executed and delivered to the City prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the project. Interest in real property may be deemed an appropriate form of
surety.
(5) A determination is made that such deferral of the fees shall not materially affect the
financial ability of the City to satisfy its then current five (5) year capital improvement
program.
(c) Development impact fees shall be paid at the time of application for a building permit.
(d) The fees created pursuant to this chapter shall be calculated on the basis of gross acreage, or
number of units, as set forth in the resolution referenced in Section 3-11.05 of this chapter. For
development projects containing a fraction of a net acre, the fee shall be calculated on the
fraction of the acre involved in the development project. All fees collected shall be promptly
deposited in the appropriate fund referenced in Section 3-11.08 of this chapter. All fees paid
pursuant to this chapter shall be the fees in effect at the time of collection; provided that fees
collected pursuant to subsection (b) hereinabove shall be those in effect at the time the Council
adopts the required resolution.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.11 Fee adjustments.
(a) A developer of any project subject to the fees described herein may apply to the City Council for a
reduction, adjustment, or waiver of any one or more of the fees, based upon the absence of any
reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of that development and either the amount of
the fee(s) charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and
filed with the City Clerk not later than: 1) ten (10) days prior to the public hearing on the development
permit application for the project; or 2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of
the request for a building permit.
(b) The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 55
(c) The City Council shall consider the application at the public hearing on the permit application or at a
separate public hearing held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application,
whichever is later. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same fashion and manner as
prescribed by the laws of the City for hearing on development permits. The decision of the City
Council shall be final.
(d) If a reduction, adjustment or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate
the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee if such change in use would render the same
inappropriate.
(e) The City Council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise, set forth, by Council resolution,
specific limitations which will apply to reductions, adjustments or waivers of development impact fees
which may be made pursuant to this section. In this regard, this chapter shall be considered enabling
and directory.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.12 Use of funds.
(a) Funds collected from development impact fees shall be used for the purpose of: 1) paying the actual
or estimated costs of constructing and/or improving the public facilities within the City to which the
specific fee or fees relate, including any required acquisition of land or rights-of-way therefore; 2)
reimbursing the City for the development's share of those public facilities already constructed by the
City or to reimburse the City for costs advanced, including, without limitation, administrative costs
incurred with respect to a specific public facilities project; or 3) to reimburse other developers who
have constructed public facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3-11.05 of
this chapter, where those facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impact of the developer's
project or projects.
(b) In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of public
facilities for which development impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt
service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the
type to which the fees involved relate.
(c) At least once each fiscal period, the City Manager of the City of Avenal (herein "City Manager"), or
his/her duly authorized designee, shall present to the City Council a proposed five (5) year capital
improvement program for the various public facilities referenced in the resolution adopted pursuant
to Section 3-11.05 of this chapter assigning monies (including any accrued interest) from the funds
referenced in Section 3-11.08 of this chapter to specific improvement projects and related expenses.
Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the
same fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of Section 3-11.13
of this chapter.
(d) Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in Section 3-11.08.
(e) The City shall be entitled to make loans of funds collected from one fund to another, provided that
the loans are properly recorded in the records of the Finance Department and repaid with interest
equal to the interest earned by the City on its funds invested with the Local Agency Investment Fund
(LAIF) through the State.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.13 Refund of fees paid.
(a) If a building permit expires without commencement of construction, then the fee payer shall be
entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that
the City shall retain one (1) percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund.
The fee payer must submit an application for such a refund to the City Manager within thirty (30)
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 56
calendar days of the expiration of the permit. Failure to timely submit the required application for
refund shall constitute a waiver of any right to the refund.
(b) In the event any fee collected pursuant to this chapter remains unexpended or uncommitted in any
fund established pursuant to Section 3-11.08 five (5) or more years after deposit of the fee, the City
shall make findings once each fiscal year to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to
demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged.
(c) The unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which
need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be refunded to the
then-current record owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects on a
prorated basis.
(d) The provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), (e) and (f) shall apply fully to any
refund of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted in any such City fund for five (5) or more years
after deposit, and the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be subordinate to the
section and shall be applied consistent therewith.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.14 Exemptions.
(a) Any claim of exemption with respect to any one (1) or more of the fees referenced in Section 3-11.04
of this chapter must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit. The following
shall be exempted from payment of the development impact fees of this chapter:
(1) Alterations or renovations of an existing building or structure where no additional dwelling units
are created and/or the use is not changed;
(2) The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed or damaged building or structure with a
new building or structure of the same size and use.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.15 Credits.
(a) New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate existing development is
entitled to a fee credit if the existing development is a lawful use under the Zoning Ordinance,
including a nonconforming use.
(b) New development that will replace development that was partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood,
earthquake, mudslide, or other casualty or Act of God, is entitled to a fee credit if the development
that was partially or totally destroyed was a lawful use under the Zoning Ordinance, including a
nonconforming use, at the time thereof.
(c) Credit for such eliminated development or development that was partially or totally destroyed (as
above specified) shall be calculated by the City Engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set
forth in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3-11.05 of this chapter and shall be applied to
new development on the same site.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.16 Developer construction of facilities.
(a) In-Lieu Fee Credits for Construction of Improvements:
(1) A developer that has been required by the City to construct any facilities or improvements (or a
portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3-11.05 of this chapter as a
condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit of the specific
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 57
development impact fee(s) involved for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of
fees shall be granted for facilities or improvements that mitigate all or a portion of the need therefor
that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given development.
(2) Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement or facility that mitigates the need therefor
attributable to and reasonably related to the given development shall be eligible for in-lieu credit, and
then only against the specific relevant fee(s) involved to which the facility or improvement relates.
(3) Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual construction costs of the facilities or
improvements that relate to the fees, as demonstrated by the applicant and reviewed and approved
by the City Engineer, all consistent with the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) above. Subject to
the applicable provisions of subsection (b) of this section, if the cost of the facilities or improvements
is greater than required relevant fees, this chapter does not create an obligation on the City to pay
the applicant the excess amount.
(4) An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee(s) required under this chapter may be
reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if
determined appropriate by the City Engineer. The City Engineer may set a time limit for reservation
of the credit.
(5) Credits shall be calculated by the City Engineer in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the
resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3-11.05 of this chapter.
(b) Developer Construction of Facilities Exceeding Needs Related to Development Project: Whenever
an applicant is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct any facility
or improvement (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3-
11.05, which facility or improvement is determined by the City to exceed the need therefor
attributable to and reasonably related to the given development project, a reimbursement agreement
with the applicant and a credit against the specific relevant fee which would otherwise be charged
pursuant to this Chapter on the development project, shall be offered. The credit shall be applied
with respect to that portion of the improvement or facility which is attributable to and reasonably
related to the need therefor caused by the development, and shall be determined, administered and
processed in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this section. The amount to be
reimbursed shall be that portion of the cost of the improvement or facility which exceeds the need
therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. The reimbursement
agreement shall contain terms and conditions mutually agreeable to the developer and the City, and
shall be approved by the City Council.
(c) Site-Related Improvements: Credit shall not be given for site-related improvements, including, butnot
limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way dedications, or providing paved access to the property, which
are specifically required by the project in order to serve it and do not constitute facilities or
improvements specified in the resolution referenced in Section 3-11.05 of this chapter.
(d) Determination of Credit: The developer seeking credit and/or reimbursement for construction of
improvements or facilities, or dedication of land or rights-of-way, shall submit such documentation,
including without limitation, engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates,
and utilize such methods as may be appropriate and acceptable to the City Engineer to support the
request for credit or reimbursement. The City Engineer shall determine credit for construction of
improvements or facilities based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering
criteria and construction cost estimates if he determines that such estimates submitted by the
developer are either unreliable or inaccurate. The City Engineer shall determine whether facilities or
improvements are eligible for credit or reimbursement.
(e) Time for Making Claim for Credit: Any claim for credit must be made no later than the application for
a building permit, or within sixty (60) days of completion of the construction dedication, whichever
occurs first. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
(f) Transferability of Credit; Council Approval: Credits shall not be transferable from one project or
development to another without the approval of the City Council.
Title 3 FINANCE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 58
(g) Appeal of Determinations of City Engineer: Determinations made by the City Engineer pursuant to
the provisions of this section may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written request with the
City Manager, together with a fee established by resolution of the City Council, within ten (10)
calendar days of the determination of the City Engineer.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.17 Review.
(a) Except for the first year the ordinance codified in this Chapter is in effect, no later than six (6) months
following the end of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall prepare a report for the City Council
identifying the balancing of fees in the various funds established pursuant to Section 3-11.08 of this
Chapter, the facilities constructed, and the facilities to be constructed. In preparing the report, the
City Manager shall adjust the estimated costs of the public improvements in accordance with the
approved cost adjustment criteria established pursuant to Section 3-11.07 of this chapter.
(b) At a noticed public hearing, the City Council shall review the report and the development impact fees
to determine whether the fee amounts continue to be reasonably related to the impact of
development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. The Council may revise the
development impact fees to include additional projects not previously foreseen as being needed.
(c) The report prepared by the City Manager and its review by the City Council, as well as any findings
thereon, shall be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), to the
extent applicable (which shall be controlling in the event of any conflict).
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.18 Controlling state law.
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall at all times be
subject and subordinate to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000), Division 1, of
Title 7 of the California Government Code, as the same presently exist or may hereafter be amended
from time to time, to the extent the same are applicable. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this chapter and the state law, the latter shall control.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.19 Superseding provisions.
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall supersede any
previous ordinance or resolution to the extent the same is in conflict herewith.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
3-11.20 Severability.
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision; and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. No. 2006-02, 7-13-2006)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - BICYCLES
Chapter 2 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Chapter 3 - FIRE CODE
Chapter 4 - TRAFFIC
Chapter 5 - PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS AND PRIVATE WATCHMEN
Chapter 6 - DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS
Chapter 7 - FIREWORKS
Chapter 8 - SKATEBOARD REGULATIONS
Chapter 9 - SKATEBOARD FACILITIES
Chapter 10 - SPORTS/RECREATIONAL FACILITIES LAW
Chapter 11 - POLICE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 1 BICYCLES
Sections:
4-1.01 Licenses—Required.
4-1.02 Licenses—Issuance—Terms.
4-1.03 Fees—Supplemental regulations.
4-1.04 License plates and registration cards.
4-1.05 Bicycle dealers—Reports.
4-1.06 Transfer of ownership.
4-1.07 Tampering unlawful.
4-1.08 Riding on sidewalks and footpaths.
4-1.09 Impounding.
4-1.10 Notification of change of address.
4-1.11 Disposition of revenues from license fees.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
4-1.01 Licenses—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly, or in part, by
muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys, or public highways of the City without first obtaining from
the Police Department a license therefor.
4-1.02 Licenses—Issuance—Terms.
Three (3) year license periods are hereby established. The Police Department is hereby authorized
and directed to issue, upon applications therefor, bicycle licenses which shall be effective for periods of
three (3) calendar years, or fraction thereof. Such licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensees to
operate such bicycles for which such licenses have been issued upon all the streets, alleys, and public
highways, exclusive of sidewalks, in the City.
4-1.03 Fees—Supplemental regulations.
The Council shall, by resolution, establish such fees and charges to be assessed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter and adopt such regulations as the Council deems appropriate.
4-1.04 License plates and registration cards.
The City shall provide license plates and registration cards as issued by the Department of Motor
Vehicles of the State. The license plates and registration cards and the bicycle frame shall have numbers
stamped thereon in numerical order. Such license plates shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames
of bicycles, and it shall be the duty of the Police Department to attach one such license plate to the frame
of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the
license fee provided for in Section 4-1.03 of this chapter. Such license plate shall remain attached during
the existence of such license. The Police Department shall also keep a record of the date of issuance of
each license, the license number and serial number of the bicycle, the make, type, and model of the
bicycle, and the name and address of the licensee. Such records shall be maintained by the Police
Department during the period of the validity of the license or until notification that the bicycle is no longer
to be operated.
4-1.05 Bicycle dealers—Reports.
(a) Each bicycle retailer shall supply to each purchaser a record of the following information: the name of
the retailer, the address of the retailer, the year and make of the bicycle, and the serial number of the
bicycle.
(b) All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make monthly
reports to the Police Department listing all sales made by such dealers, including the name and
address of each person to whom a bicycle was sold, the kind of bicycle sold, the description and
serial number, and the number of the license plate attached thereto, if any.
(c) All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles shall make monthly reports to
the Police Department giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle was
purchased, a description of each bicycle purchased, the serial number, and the number of the
license plate attached thereto, if any.
(d) No bicycle retailer shall sell any new bicycle unless such bicycle has permanently stamped or cast
on its frame a serial number placed there by the manufacturer.
(e) No retailer shall sell any bicycle unless it is properly equipped as required by State law.
(f) No person shall sell any bicycle unless it has a serial number or stamped identification number.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
4-1.06 Transfer of ownership.
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers the ownership of any bicycle to report such
sale or transfer by returning to the Police Department the registration card issued to such person as the
licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or
transferred. Such report shall be made within ten (10) days after the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be
the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of the license to his or her
name within ten (10) days after taking possession of such bicycle.
4-1.07 Tampering unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the
number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It shall also be unlawful
for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any license plate or registration card during the time
such license plate or registration card is operative.
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the Police Department from stamping numbers on the
frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found or on which such number is illegible or
insufficient for identification purposes.
4-1.08 Riding on sidewalks and footpaths.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle or tricycle on any sidewalk or footpath in the
City.
4-1.09 Impounding.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code. In addition, the
Avenal Police Department or other entity charged with the duty of code enforcement for the City, may
impound and retain the possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter until the violation is corrected to the satisfaction of such entity. Any bicycle so impounded and not
redeemed by correction of the violation for a period of more than three (3) months shall be deemed to be
unclaimed property subject to the provisions of Chapter 7 of Title 3 of this Code.
(Ord. 90-04 (part), 1990)
4-1.10 Notification of change of address.
Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter changes his or
her address, the Police Department shall be notified within ten (10) days thereafter of the old address and
the new address.
4-1.11 Disposition of revenues from license fees.
Revenues from bicycle license fees shall be retained by the City and shall be used for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or may be used to reimburse retailers for services rendered.
In addition, bicycle license fees collected shall be used to improve bicycle safety programs and establish
bicycle facilities, including bicycle paths and lanes within the City limits.
Chapter 2 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Sections:
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
4-2.01 Purposes.
4-2.02 Emergency defined.
4-2.03 Disaster Council—Membership.
4-2.04 Disaster Council—Powers and duties—Meetings.
4-2.05 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services—Powers and duties.
4-2.06 Emergency Organization.
4-2.07 Emergency Plan.
4-2.08 Expenditures.
4-2.09 Violations—Penalties.
4-2.01 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for
the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the
Emergency Organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the City with all other public
agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.
4-2.02 Emergency defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of
conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the City caused by
such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions, including
conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a
labor controversy, which conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel,
equipment, and facilities of the City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to
combat.
4-2.03 Disaster Council—Membership.
The Avenal Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:
(a) The Mayor, who shall be chairman;
(b) The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vice-chairman;
(c) The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;
(d) Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current Emergency Plan of the
City, adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
(e) Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran, professional, or other organizations
having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency
Services with the advice and consent of the City Council; and
(f) A representative from the Police Department.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
4-2.04 Disaster Council—Powers and duties—Meetings.
It shall be the duty of the Avenal Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered to develop and
recommend for adoption by the City Council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and
agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon the call of the chairman or, in his absence from the
City or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman.
4-2.05 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services—Powers and duties.
(a) Director of Emergency Services—Office created. There is hereby created the office of Director of
Emergency Services. The City Manager shall serve as the Director of Emergency Services.
(b) Assistant Director of Emergency Services—Office created. There is hereby created the office of
Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency
Services.
(c) Director of Emergency Services—Powers and duties. The Director of Emergency Services is hereby
empowered to:
(1) Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local
emergency," if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is
not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall
take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter, or the proclamation shall
have no further force or effect;
(2) Request the Governor of the State to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of
the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;
(3) Control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of the City for the accomplishment
of the purposes of this chapter;
(4) Direct cooperation between, and the coordination of, the services and staff of the Emergency
Organization of the City and resolve questions of authority and responsibility which may arise
between them;
(5) Represent the City in all dealings with the public or private agencies on matters pertaining to
emergencies; and
(6) In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency," as set forth in this section, the
proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the Governor or the Director of the Office of
Emergency Services of the State, or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the Director is
hereby empowered:
(i) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of
life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and
regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;
(ii) To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed
for the protection of life and property, to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and, if
required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
(iii) To require the emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the
proclamation of a "state of war emergency", to command the aid of as many citizens of the
community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be
entitled to the privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State laws for
registered disaster service workers;
(iv) To requisition necessary personnel or materials of any City department or agency; and
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
(v) To execute all of his ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred
upon him by the provisions of this chapter or by resolution or Emergency Plan adopted by
the City Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and all powers conferred upon
him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, or by any other lawful
authority.
(d) Order of succession. The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to
that office which succession shall take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend
meetings or otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be
approved by the City Council.
(e) Assistant Director of Emergency Services—Powers and duties. The Assistant Director of Emergency
Services shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service
chiefs, develop emergency plans, manage the emergency programs of the City, and have such other
powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
4-2.06 Emergency Organization.
All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them
during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of
law, including persons pressed into service pursuant to the provisions of subsection (iii) of subsection (6)
of subsection (c) of Section 4-2.05 of this chapter, be charged with duties incidental to the protection of
life and property in the City during such emergency, shall constitute the Emergency Organization of the
City.
4-2.07 Emergency Plan.
The Avenal Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the City of Avenal
Emergency Plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the City, both
public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, a state of emergency, or a state
of war emergency, and which plan shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and
staff of the Emergency Organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City
Council.
4-2.08 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall
be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the
City.
4-2.09 Violations—Penalties.
It shall be an infraction, punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code, for any person
during an emergency to:
(a) Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency Organization in the
enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or
in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter if such act is of such nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or
to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the
defense or protection thereof; or
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
(c) Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the
Emergency Agency of the State.
Chapter 3 FIRE CODE
Sections:
4-3.01 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code.
4-3.01 Adoption of Uniform Fire Code.
Those certain Codes designated as the "Uniform Fire Code, 1991 Edition," "Uniform Fire Code
Standards, 1991 Edition," published by the International Conference of Building Officials and the Western
Fire Chiefs Association, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public record and
inspection, is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter as though set forth in this
chapter in full, subject, however, to the amendments, additions and deletions set forth in this chapter, and
said Code shall be known as the Fire Code of the City; provided that the copy, after certification there of,
may be kept in the office of the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 87-04 § 1, 1987; Ord. 89-13 § 1, 1989; Ord. 93-01 § 1, 1993)
Chapter 4 TRAFFIC
Sections:
Article 1. - Title and Definitions
Article 2. - Traffic Administration
Article 3. - Enforcement
Article 4. - Traffic-Control Devices
Article 5. - Speed Limits
Article 6. - Turning Movements, Special Stops and One-Way Streets
Article 7. - Stopping, Standing and Parking
Article 8. - Trucks and Commercial Vehicles
Article 9. - Miscellaneous Driving Rules
Article 10. - Abandoned Vehicles
Article 11. - Pedestrians
Article 12. - Heavy Vehicles and Machinery
Article 13. - Violation—Penalty
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
Article 14. - Reserved
Article 15. - Public Preferential Parking on Public Streets
Article 16. - Towed Vehicle Recovery Program
Article 1. Title and Definitions
4-4.101 Title for citation.
4-4.102 Definitions generally.
4-4.103 Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used.
4-4.104 Bus.
4-4.105 City Manager.
4-4.106 Council.
4-4.107 Curb.
4-4.108 Divisional island.
4-4.109 Holidays.
4-4.110 Loading zone.
4-4.111 Official time standard.
4-4.112 Parkway.
4-4.113 Passenger loading zone.
4-4.114 Pedestrian.
4-4.115 Police officer.
4-4.116 Stop.
4-4.117 Vehicle Code.
4-4.101 Title for citation.
The provisions set forth in this title shall be known and may be cited as the "Avenal Traffic
Ordinance."
4-4.102 Definitions generally.
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall for the purpose of this title have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter.
4-4.103 Motor Vehicle Code definitions to be used.
Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle
Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
4-4.104 Bus.
"Bus" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common
carrier of passengers.
4-4.105 City Manager.
"City Manager" means and includes any such person or public entity as the City Council may, by
resolution designate; or as the City Manager, by written authorization, may designate to perform or
administer provisions of this title.
4-4.106 Council.
"Council" means the Council of the City of Avenal.
4-4.107 Curb.
"Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb is marked by curbing
construction or not so marked; the word "curb" as used in this title shall not include the line dividing the
roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, or from tracks or rights-of-way of public
utility companies.
4-4.108 Divisional island.
"Divisional island" means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or
conflicting streams of traffic.
4-4.109 Holidays.
Within the meaning of this title, "holidays" are the first day of January, the twelfth day of February,
the twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, the first Monday in
September, the ninth day of September, the twelfth day of October, the eleventh day of November,
Thanksgiving Day, and the twenty-fifth day of December. If the first day of January, twelfth day of
February, twenty-second day of February, the thirtieth day of May, the fourth day of July, the ninth day of
September, the twelfth day of October, the eleventh day of November, or the twenty-fifth day of
December falls upon a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday.
4-4.110 Loading zone.
"Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during
the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
4-4.111 Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings
time, as may be in current use in this City.
4-4.112 Parkway.
"Parkway" means that portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
4-4.113 Passenger loading zone.
"Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
4-4.114 Pedestrian.
"Pedestrian" means any person afoot.
4-4.115 Police officer.
"Police officer" means every officer of the Police Department of this City, or any officer authorized to
direct or regulate or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
4-4.116 Stop.
"Stop," when required, means complete cessation of movement.
4-4.117 Vehicle Code.
"Vehicle Code" means the Vehicle Code of the State of California.
Article 2. Traffic Administration
4-4.201 Traffic section—Established in Police Department.
4-4.202 Traffic section—Powers and duties.
4-4.203 City Manager—Powers and duties—Deputies authorized when.
4-4.204 City Manager—Traffic engineering duties.
4-4.205 Traffic section—Accident report filing duties.
4-4.206 Traffic section—Annual traffic safety report required.
4-4.207 Traffic accident studies.
4-4.208 Property damage—Report requirements.
4-4.209 Intersection visibility requirements.
4-4.201 Traffic section—Established in Police Department.
There is established in the Police Department a traffic section to be under the control of an officer of
police appointed by and administratively responsible to the Chief of Police.
4-4.202 Traffic section—Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the traffic section, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the
Police Department, to enforce the street traffic in this City, to make arrests for traffic violations, to
investigate traffic accidents, to cooperate with the City Manager and other officers of the City in the
administration of the traffic law and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 11
carry out those duties specially imposed upon said section by this title and related traffic ordinances of
this City.
4-4.203 City Manager—Powers and duties—Deputies authorized when.
It shall be the general duty of the City Manager to determine the installation and proper timing and
maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents
and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions
and to cooperate with other City officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this City.
Whenever by the provisions of this title a power is granted to the City Manager or a duty imposed upon
him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing
by him.
4-4.204 City Manager—Traffic engineering duties.
The City Manager shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this title and in related traffic
ordinances of this City. Whenever the City Manager is required or authorized to place or maintain official
traffic-control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained.
4-4.205 Traffic section—Accident report filing duties.
The traffic section shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall
be available for the use and information of the City Manager.
4-4.206 Traffic section—Annual traffic safety report required.
The traffic section shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Council.
Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters in this City as follows:
(a) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured,
and other pertinent traffic accident data;
(b) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of
the police;
(c) The plans and recommendations of the section for future traffic safety activities.
4-4.207 Traffic accident studies.
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic section shall
cooperate with the City Manager in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial
measures.
4-4.208 Property damage—Report requirements.
(a) The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in
damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any
fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in
damage to any tree, traffic-control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any
street shall, within twenty-four hours after such accident, make a written report of such accident to
the Police Department of this City.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 12
(b) Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name
and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal,
the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such
accident.
(c) The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or
penalties of this section if and during the time he is physically incapable of making a report, but in
such event he shall make a report as required in subdivision (a) of this section within twenty-four
hours after regaining ability to make such report.
4-4.209 Intersection visibility requirements.
Whenever the City Manager finds that any hedge, shrubbery, or tree growing in a parkway obstructs
the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the streets approaching such intersection, he shall cause
the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height.
Article 3. Enforcement
4-4.301 Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.
4-4.302 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
4-4.303 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
4-4.304 Obstruction of or interference with police or authorized officers.
4-4.305 Regulations applicable to persons riding bicycles or animals.
4-4.306 Public employees—Obedience to regulations required.
4-4.307 Certain official vehicles exempt from regulations—Conditions.
4-4.308 Removal of vehicles from streets authorized when.
4-4.301 Authority of Police and Fire Department officials.
Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police are
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible or other signal in conformance with traffic laws,
except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code.
4-4.302 Obedience to police or authorized officers.
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act forbidden by any lawful order,
signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized
by the Chief of Police or by law. Violation of this section is an infraction, as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2
of this Code.
4-4.303 Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic.
No person other than an officer of the Police Department or members of the Fire Department or a
person authorized by the Chief of Police or a person authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct
traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided, any
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 13
mechanical pushbutton signal erected by order of the City Manager. Violation of this section is an
infraction as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, of this Code.
4-4.304 Obstruction of or interference with police or authorized officers.
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of
this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this title. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any
chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City
in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title constitutes such interference or
obstruction. Violation of this section is an infraction as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, of this Code.
4-4.305 Regulations applicable to persons riding bicycles or animals.
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions
which by their very nature can have no application.
4-4.306 Public employees—Obedience to regulations required.
The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service
of the United States Government, this state, any county or City, and it is unlawful for any said operator to
violate any of the provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted in this title or by the Vehicle Code.
4-4.307 Certain official vehicles exempt from regulations—Conditions.
(a) The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply
to vehicles operated by the Police or Fire Department, any public ambulance or any public utility
vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as
an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the
manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.
(b) The provisions of this title shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation
to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety
of others.
(c) The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle
of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any
vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the
collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail.
4-4.308 Removal of vehicles from streets authorized when.
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of this City may remove or
cause to be removed:
(a) Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two (72)
or more hours;
(b) Any vehicle parked or left standing on a highway or alley when such parking or standing is
prohibited by signs posted giving notice of removal;
(c) Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such
street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the
street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or
highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic,
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 14
or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement
of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would
prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such
vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the
removal.
(Ord. 2004-02, 2004)
Article 4. Traffic-Control Devices
4-4.401 Installation—City Manager authority.
4-4.402 Signs required for enforcement purposes.
4-4.403 Driver obedience required—Exceptions.
4-4.404 Installation—Locations—Placement and maintenance.
4-4.405 Lane marking.
4-4.406 Distinctive roadway markings.
4-4.407 Hours of operation.
4-4.408 Removal, relocation or discontinuance authorized when.
4-4.409 Painting of curbs—Restrictions.
4-4.401 Installation—City Manager authority.
(a) The City Manager shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and
maintained official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of
this title.
(b) Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control
devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, the City Manager is
authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices, subject to any limitations or
restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
(c) The City Manager may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such
additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide
or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as
may be set forth in this title or as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
4-4.402 Signs required for enforcement purposes.
No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against
an alleged violator unless appropriate legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the
traffic laws.
4-4.403 Driver obedience required—Exceptions.
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device
placed in accordance with this title unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized
person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to emergency calls.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 15
4-4.404 Installation—Locations—Placement and maintenance.
(a) The City Manager is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those
intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be
alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life
or property from exceptional hazard.
(b) The City Manager shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by
field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his
determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety
standards and instructions set forth in the California Manual issued by the Division of Highways of
the State Department of Transportation.
(c) Whenever the City Manager installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he
shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic
approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are
maintained at any said intersection.
4-4.405 Lane marking.
The City Manager is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway
to indicate the courses to be traveled by vehicles, and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to
be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway.
4-4.406 Distinctive roadway markings.
The City Manager is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings, as described in
the Vehicle Code, on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other
curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and
markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by
the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.
4-4.407 Hours of operation.
The City Manager shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be
in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this
ordinance or by ordinance/resolution of the City Council.
4-4.408 Removal, relocation or discontinuance authorized when.
The City Manager is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic-control
device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this title whenever he shall determine, in any
particular case, that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or remain.
4-4.409 Painting of curbs—Restrictions.
No person, unless authorized by this City, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has
complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this City pertaining thereto.
Article 5. Speed Limits
4-4.501 State speed limit increased in certain zones.
4-4.502 State speed limits decreased in certain zones.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 16
4-4.503 Timing of traffic signals to regulate speed.
4-4.501 State speed limit increased in certain zones.
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by
state laws upon the following streets is less than is necessary for safe operation of vehicles thereon by
reason of the designation and sign posting of said streets as through highways and/or by reason of widely
spaced intersections, and it is declared that the prima facie speed limit shall be as hereinafter set forth in
this chapter on those streets or parts of streets designated in this article when signs are erected giving
notice thereof.
4-4.502 State speed limits decreased in certain zones.
It is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the speed permitted by
the state law outside of business and residence districts as applicable upon the following streets is
greater than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist upon such streets, and it is declared
that the prima facie speed limit shall be as set forth in this section on those streets or parts of streets
designated as follows when signs are erected giving notice thereof.
4-4.503 Timing of traffic signals to regulate speed.
The City Manager is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement
of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise
applicable within the district or at intersections, and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
Article 6. Turning Movements, Special Stops and One-Way Streets
4-4.601 Turning markers—Placement authorized when.
4-4.602 Restricted turn signs.
4-4.603 Signal-controlled intersections—Right turns at stop signals authorized when.
4-4.604 One-way streets and alleys.
4-4.605 Stop signs—Locations—Placement authorized when.
4-4.606 Stops—At through streets or stop signs.
4-4.607 Stops—Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
4-4.601 Turning markers—Placement authorized when.
The City Manager is authorized to place official traffic-control devices with or adjacent to
intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the
City Manager is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of
vehicles may make right to left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to
or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 17
4-4.602 Restricted turn signs.
The City Manager is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not
make a right, left or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns
may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the
same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
4-4.603 Signal-controlled intersections—Right turns at stop signals authorized when.
(a) No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is
sign-posted giving notice of such restriction as hereinafter provided in this section.
(b) The City Manager shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that
the making of right turns against traffic-signal stop indication would seriously interfere with the safe
and orderly flow of traffic.
4-4.604 One-way streets and alleys.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates any one-way street or alley, the City
Manager shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective
unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed
where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.
4-4.605 Stop signs—Locations—Placement authorized when.
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion
thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more
entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the City Manager
shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion
thereof so designated and at those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required and at any
railroad grade crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintainedat
any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every
such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided, in the Vehicle Code.
4-4.606 Stops—At through streets or stop signs.
(a) Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are declared to be through
streets for the purposes of this section.
(b) The provisions of this section shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such
entrances are established by resolution of the City Council.
(c) The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by
resolution of the City Council.
4-4.607 Stops—Emerging from alley, driveway or building.
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or
driveway.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 18
Article 7. Stopping, Standing and Parking
4-4.701 Time when provisions are applicable.
4-4.702 No-stopping zones—Designation—Driver obedience required.
4-4.703 No-stopping zones and no-parking areas—Maintenance —Driver obedience required.
4-4.704 Twenty-four minute parking—Green curb marking—Driver obedience required.
4-4.705 Forty-minute parking.
4-4.706 One-hour parking.
4-4.707 Two-hour parking.
4-4.708 Emergency parking.
4-4.709 Parking adjacent to schools.
4-4.710 Diagonal parking.
4-4.711 Parking parallel on one-way streets.
4.711.1 Parking parallel on residential streets.
4-4.712 Parking space markings.
4-4.713 Color of curb marking indicates stopping and parking restrictions.
4-4.714 No-parking areas—Designated.
4-4.715 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
4-4.716 Parking of peddling or vending vehicles—Limitations.
4-4.717 Parking vehicle for demonstration or sale.
4-4.718 Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets prohibited—Exception.
4-4.719 Washing or polishing vehicles—Restrictions.
4-4.720 Vehicles longer than twenty feet—Parking restrictions.
4-4.721 Alley restrictions.
4-4.722 Commercial vehicles—Parking restrictions.
4-4.723 Truck parking restrictions.
4-4.724 Loading zones—Yellow curb marking—Use limitations.
4-4.725 Loading and unloading—Procedures and time restrictions.
4-4.726 Loading and unloading—Zone use restrictions.
4-4.727 Bus zones—Red curb marking—Use limitations.
4-4.728 Closing of highways to vehicular traffic authorized when.
4-4.701 Time when provisions are applicable.
(a) The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all
times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 19
(b) The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person
from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances
of this City prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified
times.
4-4.702 No-stopping zones—Designation—Driver obedience required.
(a) The City Manager shall designate established no-stopping zones by placing and maintaining
appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days
when stopping is prohibited.
(b) During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it is unlawful for the operator of any
vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council as no-stopping zones.
4-4.703 No-stopping zones and no-parking areas—Maintenance —Driver obedience
required.
(a) The City Manager is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface,
all no-stopping zones, no-parking areas and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in
this title.
(b) When said curb markings or signs are in place no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park
such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of
this title.
4-4.704 Twenty-four minute parking—Green curb marking—Driver obedience required.
(a) Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four
(24) minutes at any time between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays.
(b) When authorized signs and curb markings have been determined by the City Manager to be
necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park
said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb markings or sign in violation thereof.
4-4.705 Forty-minute parking.
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Manager to be
necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said
vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a
period of time longer than forty (40) minutes.
4-4.706 One-hour parking.
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Manager to be
necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said
vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a
period of time longer than one hour.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 20
4-4.707 Two-hour parking.
When authorized signs or curb markings have been determined by the City Manager to be
necessary and are in place giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said
vehicle between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a
period of time longer than two (2) hours.
4-4.708 Emergency parking.
(a) Whenever the City Manager shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result
from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the
City Manager shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted
indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys
as the City Manager shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall
remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the City Manager shall cause such
signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
(b) When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person
shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
4-4.709 Parking adjacent to schools.
(a) The City Manager is authorized to erect signs restricting public/student parking upon any street
adjacent to, and/or the zoned area of, any school property when such parking would, in his opinion,
interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation to the general public and/or attending students.
(b) When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon a street adjacent to, and/or within the zoned
area of, any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
(c) Preferential parking permits may be issued in accordance with Article 14 of Title 4, Chapter 4, which
will act to exempt the holder from the limitations contained within this Section.
(Ord. 97-01, 1997)
4-4.710 Diagonal parking.
(a) On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal
parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:
(1) At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to park
vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space;
(2) With the front wheel nearest the curb within six (6?) inches of said curb.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of
loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions applicable in
Section 4-4.711 shall be complied with.
4-4.711 Parking parallel on one-way streets.
(a) Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen
(18?) inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street
unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 21
(b) In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one
direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of
such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
(c) The City Manager is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the
left-hand side of any one-way street, or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand
side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, and shall
erect signs giving notice thereof.
(d) The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any
commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in
which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend
beyond the centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby.
4.711.1 Parking parallel on residential streets.
Except as designated by sign, marking or resolution of the City Council all cars on residential or
collector streets in the City shall park parallel to the curb or to the property line.
(Ord. 86-09 § 1, 1986)
4-4.712 Parking space markings.
(a) The City Manager is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking
spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized parking is permitted.
(b) When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive
limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space
unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible.
4-4.713 Color of curb marking indicates stopping and parking restrictions.
(a) The City Manager is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and
when required herein shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing
regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section.
(1) Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle
Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
(2) Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading and
unloading of passengers or materials, provided, that the loading and unloading of passengers
shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more
than twenty (20) minutes.
(3) White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or
unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which
shall not exceed three (3) minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:
(i) When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at
all times;
(ii) When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when
such theater is closed.
(4) Blue curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for other than vehicles which display a
distinguishing license plate or a placard issued to disabled persons or veterans. Such parking
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 22
shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street adjacent to
the space.
(b) When the City Manager, as authorized under this chapter has caused curb markings and/or signs to
be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb markings
and/or signs in violation of any of the provisions of this section.
4-4.714 No-parking areas—Designated.
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
(a) Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or
markings;
(b) On either side of any street between the project property lines of any public walk, public steps,
street, or thoroughfare terminating at such street, when such area is indicated by appropriate
signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
(c) In any area where the City Manager determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by
appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
(d) In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no-parking area, when area is
indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface;
(e) Upon, along or across any railway track in such a manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the
movement of any car traveling upon such track;
(f) In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or
would endanger life or property;
(g) On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is
necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of
underground utilities, or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the
parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that
signs giving notice of such no-parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior
to the effective time of such no-parking;
(h) At any place within twenty (20') feet of crosswalk at an intersection when such place is indicated
by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop at a
designated bus stop;
(j) Within twenty-five (25') feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official
electric flashing device;
(k) On any public right-of-way between the rear of the public sidewalk (the edge furthest from the
curb) and the property line which is parallel to the public sidewalk. Illegal parking in this zone will
result in an infraction and imposition of a twenty dollar ($20.00) parking fine. The fine will be
imposed for each subsequent twenty-four (24) hour period during which the cited vehicle
remains in the prohibited area. Parking of vehicles on any public right-of-way may be permitted
by application to, and approval by, the City for an encroachment permit. Approval of such permit
shall remain in sole discretion of the City. Parking a vehicle in a position that is perpendicular to
the sidewalk and immediately behind a drive approach approved by the City is permitted,
provided no other violation exists.
(Ord. 91-12, 1991; Ord. 91-10, 1991)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 23
4-4.715 Parking prohibited on narrow streets.
(a) The City Manager is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street
when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty-five (25') feet, or upon one side of a street as
indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30') feet.
(b) When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized
herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking.
4-4.716 Parking of peddling or vending vehicles—Limitations.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or
pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed,
solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on
any portion of any street within the City, except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand
or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10)
minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering
such articles upon order of, or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of
business or distribution.
(b) No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle, or pushcart from
which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, ice cream or other articles of food are sold or offered for
sale, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Manager which shall designate the
specific location in which such cart shall stand.
(c) No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation
of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first
obtaining a written permit to do so from the City Manager which shall designate the specific location
where such vehicle may stand.
(d) Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park
or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any
location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is
convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such
permit shall be forthwith revoked by the City Manager upon the filing of the record of such conviction
with such officer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six (6) months have
elapsed from the date of such revocation.
4-4.717 Parking vehicle for demonstration or sale.
No commercial dealer shall park said vehicle upon any street in this City for the purpose of
advertising or displaying it for sale unless authorized by resolution of the City Council.
4-4.718 Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets prohibited—Exception.
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair, or cause to be repaired, grease or
cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public
street in this City. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street.
4-4.719 Washing or polishing vehicles—Restrictions.
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part
thereof upon any public street in this City, when a charge is made for such service.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 24
4-4.720 Vehicles longer than twenty feet—Parking restrictions.
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park any
vehicle in excess of twenty (20') feet in length on any street or portion thereof designated by ordinance or
resolution of the City Council.
4-4.721 Alley restrictions.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of
persons or materials in any alley.
4-4.722 Commercial vehicles—Parking restrictions.
(a) Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
Generally, whenever any words or phrases are used in this section, they are to be used as
defined in the California Vehicle Code.
"Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle, including, without limitation, a truck, bus or trailer,of
a type required to be registered under the California Vehicle Code, used or maintained for the
transportation of persons for hire, compensation, or profit, or designed, used, or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property, and having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight
rating greater than ten thousand (10,000) pounds.
"Gross vehicle weight rating" means the value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single vehicle, as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 390.
"Street" means that portion of any street, avenue, highway or other public way in the City
improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, and includes improved shoulders.
"Unattended vehicle" means a vehicle where the licensed driver responsible for the vehicle
is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving the vehicle.
"Unattended vehicle" means a vehicle where the licensed driver responsible for the vehicle
is not within an audible distance and immediately available for moving the vehicle.
(b) Restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to parking, standing and/or stopping of commercial
vehicles on the streets of the City of Avenal:
(1) No commercial vehicle shall be parked or otherwise left unattended on the streets of the City
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except:
(i) While loading or unloading property when it is necessary to do so between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. In such situations, a commercial vehicle may be parked on the
streets of the City for a period which shall not exceed sixty (60) minutes, unless additional
time in excess of sixty (60) minutes is reasonably necessary to complete such loading or
unloading of property.
(ii) While a commercial vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of
a service. to or on property in the block in which such vehicle is parked, and it is necessary
to perform such service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. In such situations, a
commercial vehicle may be parked on the streets of the City for a period which shall not
exceed sixty (60) minutes, unless additional time in excess of sixty (60) minutes is
reasonably necessary to complete such service.
(2) No commercial vehicle shall be parked or otherwise left unattended on any street, or portion
thereof, in a residential district, as defined in the City of Avenal's Zoning Ordinance, except:
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 25
(i) A commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from
or to any building or structure located on the restricted street.
(ii) A commercial vehicle delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair,
alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street
for which a building permit has previously been obtained.
(3) No commercial vehicle shall park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any private
residential property as defined in the City Zoning Ordinance, except:
(i) A commercial vehicle making pickups or delivery of goods, wares, and merchandise from
or any building or structure located on the restricted street.
(ii) A commercial vehicle delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair,
alteration, remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street
for which a building permit has previously been obtained.
(c) Permits. The City Manager may issue permits relating to parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., exempting uses as may be deemed necessary in the public interest.
(Ord. 2000-10, 2000: Ord. 95-04, 1995: Ord. 86-09 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1987)
4-4.723 Truck parking restrictions.
When authorized signs are in place giving notice of such restriction, no person shall park any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons on any public City street or alley for a period of time
longer than four (4) hours, except when loading or unloading property or when such vehicle is parked in
connection with and in aid of the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which the
vehicle is parked.
4-4.724 Loading zones—Yellow curb marking—Use limitations.
(a) Upon the passage of a resolution by the City Council the City Manager is authorized to determine
and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
(1) At any place in the business district;
(2) Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used
for the purpose of public assembly.
(b) In no event shall more than one-half (½) of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading
zone purposes.
(c) Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones.
4-4.725 Loading and unloading—Procedures and time restrictions.
(a) Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of
materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.
(b) The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or
pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.
(c) Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall
include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time
necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 26
(d) Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to
accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the
privileges hereby granted.
4-4.726 Loading and unloading—Zone use restrictions.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than
loading or unloading of passengers for such time as is specified in Section 4-4.725.
4-4.727 Bus zones—Red curb marking—Use limitations.
(a) The City Manager is authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and
unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.
(b) Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection.
(c) No bus zone shall exceed eighty (80') feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has
been presented to the City Traffic Engineer showing the necessity therefor, the City Traffic Engineer
may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty-five (125') feet.
(d) The City Manager shall paint a red line stencil, with white letters "NO STANDING", together with the
words "BUS ZONE" upon the top of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone.
(e) No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone.
4-4.728 Closing of highways to vehicular traffic authorized when.
The City Manager may determine that certain streets should be temporarily or permanently closed to
vehicular traffic after review of traffic studies or reports which reflect such necessity for closing the street.
Article 8. Trucks and Commercial Vehicles
4-4.801 Advertising vehicles.
4-4.802 Truck routes—Establishment.
4-4.803 Trucks permitted to use other streets when.
4-4.804 Truck routes—Exceptions to applicability of provisions.
4-4.805 Truck routes—Council authority.
4-4.806 Commercial vehicles—Use of certain streets prohibited.
4-4.801 Advertising vehicles.
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for advertising purposes or any advertising vehicle
equipped with a sound amplifying or loud speaking device upon any street or alley at any time within the
central business district, except when such use has been approved by the City Manager.
4-4.802 Truck routes—Establishment.
Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a
street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 27
tons, the City Manager is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as
"Truck Routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons.
4-4.803 Trucks permitted to use other streets when.
When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the
operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons shall drive on such
route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons coming from a truck route having ingress and egress
by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or
deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any buildings or structures located on such
restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual bona fide repair,
alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a
building permit has previously been obtained therefor.
4-4.804 Truck routes—Exceptions to applicability of provisions.
The provisions of Sections 4-4.802 through 4-4.805 shall not apply to:
(a) Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission; or
(b) Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or
repair of any public utility.
4-4.805 Truck routes—Council authority.
Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be
truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons.
4-4.806 Commercial vehicles—Use of certain streets prohibited.
(a) Whenever any resolution of this City designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a
street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the City Manager shall erect and
maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.
(b) Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the Council are hereby declared to be
streets the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission.
Article 9. Miscellaneous Driving Rules
4-4.901 No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.
4-4.902 Limited access roadways.
4-4.903 Barriers and signs—Placement—Driver obedience required.
4-4.904 Driving over new pavement and markings prohibited.
4-4.905 Commercial vehicles not to use private driveways when.
4-4.906 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
4-4.907 Driving through funeral procession.
4-4.908 Private parking facilities open to the public.
4-4.909 Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 28
4-4.901 No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic.
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection, or a marked crosswalk, unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any trafficcontrol
signal indication to proceed.
4-4.902 Limited access roadways.
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances
and exits as are lawfully established.
4-4.903 Barriers and signs—Placement—Driver obedience required.
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street
unless of a type approved by the City Manager or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or
destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any department
of this City.
4-4.904 Driving over new pavement and markings prohibited.
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or
freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in
place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings, or when any such device
is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.
4-4.905 Commercial vehicles not to use private driveways when.
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway
approach or sidewalk area, or the driveway itself, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.
4-4.906 Riding or driving on sidewalk.
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any
sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways, and excepting when it is necessary for any
temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; provided further, that said sidewalk area
shall be substantially protected by wooden planks two (2?) inches thick, and written permission shall be
previously obtained from the City Manager. Such wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon
such sidewalk area during the hours from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
4-4.907 Driving through funeral procession.
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a
parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and
traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the
orders of the Police Department.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 29
4-4.908 Private parking facilities open to the public.
The City Manager may determine that there are privately owned and maintained off-street parking
facilities that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking, and as such,
Sections 22350, 22507.8, 23103, 23109 and Division 16.5, commencing with Section 38000 of the
Vehicle Code, should be made applicable for the well-being and safety of motorists and pedestrians.
Such off-street parking shall be described by ordinance or resolution and enforceable after posting of
such notice to enforce these specified sections by the owner or operator as specified in the Vehicle Code.
4-4.909 Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited.
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or to catch on, or hold onto with his hands or by other
means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving moving power therefrom.
Article 10. Abandoned Vehicles
4-4.1001 Findings—Purpose of provisions—Abandoned vehicle as nuisance.
4-4.1002 Definitions.
4-4.1003 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
4-4.1004 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
4-4.1005 Administration and enforcement.
4-4.1006 Administrative costs for vehicle removal.
4-4.1007 Franchises for vehicle removal.
4-4.1008 Notice to remove vehicle—Contents—Service requirements.
4-4.1009 Waiver of notice of intention to abate.
4-4.1010 Vehicle removal—Request for hearing—Time limits.
4-4.1011 Hearing procedure—Determination.
4-4.1012 Disposal of removed vehicle.
4-4.1013 Notification of removed vehicles to Department of Motor Vehicles.
4-4.1014 Removal costs assessed against land.
4-4.1001 Findings—Purpose of provisions—Abandoned vehicle as nuisance.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State
under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned vehicles or parts thereof as public
nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and declarations:
The accumulation and storage of abandoned vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property,
not including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private
property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents
and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of
abandoned vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, except as
expressly hereinafter permitted, is a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the
provision of this chapter.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 30
(Ord. 89-09 § 1, 1989)
4-4.1002 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
(a) "Abandoned" means to desert, surrender, forsake or cede the voluntary relinquishment of
possession of a thing by the owner with intention of terminating his ownership, but without
vesting it in any other person.
(b) "City" means the City of Avenal.
(c) "Highway" means a way or place, of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street.
(d) "Owner of the land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is
located, as shown on the last equalized assessment.
(e) "Owner of the vehicle" means the last registered owner and the legal owner of record.
(f) "Public property" does not include "highway."
(g) "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn
upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks.
4-4.1003 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned vehicles within the City. It shall supplement
and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted
by the City, the State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 89-09 § 3, 1989)
4-4.1004 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
(a) This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner
where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard.
(b) This exception shall not, however, authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as
defined under provisions of law other than this chapter.
(Ord. 89-09 § 4, 1989)
4-4.1005 Administration and enforcement.
Except as otherwise provided for herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by regularly salaried full-time employees of the City, County or City and County. Removal of
vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. Any such authorized
person may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine a vehicle or
parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle or part thereof declared to be nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 31
In accordance with Section 22665 of the Vehicle Code, the City Council may, by resolution, request
the California Highway Patrol to administer this chapter.
(Ord. 89-09 § 5, 1989)
4-4.1006 Administrative costs for vehicle removal.
The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as
administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this
chapter.
4-4.1007 Franchises for vehicle removal.
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such
person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or
cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
4-4.1008 Notice to remove vehicle—Contents—Service requirements.
A notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be
given at least ten (10) days before such abatement and removal. The ten-day notice shall contain a
statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the
owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in
person at a hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of
the vehicle on the land, with the reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to
abate shall be made, by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the equalized
assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition
that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
(Ord. 89-09 § 7, 1989)
4-4.1009 Waiver of notice of intention to abate.
Not less than a ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as a public
nuisance must be issued, unless the property owner and the owner of the vehicle have signed releases
authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof. However, the notice of
intention is not required for removal of a vehicle or part thereof which is inoperable due to the absence of
a motor, transmission or wheels and incapable of being towed, is valued at less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) by a person specified in Vehicle Code Section 22855, and is determined by the local agency to
be a public nuisance presenting an immediate threat to public health or safety, provided that the property
owner has signed a release authorizing removal and waiving further interest in the vehicle or part thereof.
Prior to final disposition under Vehicle Code Section 22662 of such low-valued vehicle or part for which
evidence of registration was recovered pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22661, subdivision (a), the local
agency shall provide notice to the registered and legal owners of intent to dispose of the vehicle or part,
and if the vehicle or part is not claimed and removed within twelve (12) days after the notice is mailed,
from a location specified in Section 22662, final disposition may proceed. No local agency or contractor
thereof shall be liable for damage caused to a vehicle or part thereof by removal pursuant to this section.
This section applies only to inoperable vehicles located upon a parcel that is (1) zoned foragricultural
use or (2) not improved with a residential structure containing one or more dwelling units.
(Ord. 89-09 § 8, 1989)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 32
4-4.1010 Vehicle removal—Request for hearing—Time limits.
(a) Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the City Council within ten
(10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, or at the time of signing a
release pursuant to Section 4-4.1009, a public hearing shall be held by the City Council or any other
board, commission, or official of the City, County or City and County as designated by the City
Council. Such hearing shall address the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof as an abandoned vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and cost of removal
of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.
(b) If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of
the vehicle on the land within such period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a
hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. Notice of the
hearing shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to
the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not
received within ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove the City
shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without
holding a public hearing.
(Ord. 89-09 § 9, 1989)
4-4.1011 Hearing procedure—Determination.
(a) All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the City Council or its designee, which shall hear
all facts and testimony it deems pertinent on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the
circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. The City Council or its
designee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the
vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with
the reasons for such denial.
(b) The City Council or its designee may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems
appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time
for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the
conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council or its designee may find that a vehicle or part
thereof has been abandoned on private or public property, and order the same removed from the
property as a public nuisance as provided in Section 4-4.1012. The order may determine the
administrative cost and costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on
which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of
the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site.
(c) If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the
landowner and that the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Council
or its designee shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property
upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the landowner.
(Ord. 89-09 § 10, 1989)
4-4.1012 Disposal of removed vehicle.
Five days from the date of mailing notice of the order under Section 4-4.1011 to the landowner and
vehicle owner, the vehicle or part thereof may be removed. The vehicle or part thereof may be disposedof
by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler's yard or any suitable site operated by a local authority,
or other final disposition consistent with subsection (e) of Section 22661 of the Vehicle Code. After a
vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 33
which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to
Section 5004 of the Vehicle Code, in which case the vehicles may be reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 89-09 § 11, 1989)
4-4.1013 Notification of removed vehicles to Department of Motor Vehicles.
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to
the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time, there
shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including,
but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership or license plates.
(Ord. 89-09 § 12, 1989)
4-4.1014 Removal costs assessed against land.
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against the owner of the
parcel of land pursuant to Section 4-4.1010 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the date of
order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the
Government Code and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. The assessment shall have
the same priority as other City taxes.
(Ord. 89-09 § 13, 1989)
Article 11. Pedestrians
4-4.1101 Establishment of marked crosswalks.
4-4.1102 Pedestrians must use crosswalks when.
4-4.1103 Obstruction of public right-of-way.
4-4.1101 Establishment of marked crosswalks.
(a) The City Manager shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other
places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at intersections and at other places, where the City
Manager determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway.
(b) Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less
than four hundred (400) feet in length, and such crosswalks shall be located as nearly as practicable
at midblock.
(c) The City Manager may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk
directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated.
4-4.1102 Pedestrians must use crosswalks when.
No pedestrian in the business district shall cross a roadway other than by a marked crosswalk or an
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 34
4-4.1103 Obstruction of public right-of-way.
No pedestrian shall in any manner obstruct the right-of-way or passage of cars, vehicles, or
pedestrians, or any combination thereof on any right-of-way, street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or any other
right-of-way which has been established in the City.
(Ord. 82-05, 1982)
Article 12. Heavy Vehicles and Machinery
4-4.1201 Heavy vehicles and equipment—Permit required.
4-4.1202 Heavy vehicles and equipment—Conditions for granting permit.
4-4.1203 Flange wheel machinery—Restrictions on streets.
4-4.1201 Heavy vehicles and equipment—Permit required.
No person shall move or operate upon any of the City streets any vehicle with a load or loads in
excess of those permitted by the Vehicle Code without a written permit from the City Manager.
4-4.1202 Heavy vehicles and equipment—Conditions for granting permit.
The City Manager may, by written permit, authorize a load or loads in excess of those allowed for in
the Vehicle Code, if, in his judgment, the streets upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely
withstand the additional weight, or if the applicant will guarantee to the City that all costs of repair to the
streets or to the public property of the City damaged by the movement of such load or loads will be paid in
full. Such permit shall be granted upon such conditions and upon depositing such bond as the City
Manager in his discretion may require.
4-4.1203 Flange wheel machinery—Restrictions on streets.
No person shall operate over the City streets any vehicle or piece of equipment which has lugs,
cleats, flanges or other projections on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or
corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat bearing surface will be in contact
with the pavement at all times.
Article 13. Violation—Penalty
4-4.1301 Violations deemed infractions—Penalty.
4-4.1301 Violations deemed infractions—Penalty.
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, except Section 4-4.722, is guilty of an
infraction and shall be punished as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2 of this Code insofar as applicable to
infractions.
(b) Any person found in violation of Section 4-4.722 of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be
punishable:
(1) For a first violation by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00);
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 35
(2) For a second violation within a period of one year, by a fine of not more then three hundred
dollars ($300.00);
(3) For a third violation within a period of one year, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00);
(4) For a fourth violation within a period of one year by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00); and
(5) For a fifth violation within a period of one year, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
(c) In addition, the City and/or its agent may, after ninety-six (96) hours have elapsed since the issuance
of a citation for a fifth violation of Section 4-4.722 as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, cause
a commercial vehicle to be towed and stored with a storage facility.
(d) The registered and legal owner of a commercial vehicle towed and stored pursuant to this section
shall immediately be given written notice of the removal and the grounds for removal. The notice
shall also include:
(1) The name and location of the place to which the commercial vehicle has been removed; and
(2) The amount of mileage on the commercial vehicle at time of removal.
If the City and/or its agent is not able to ascertain the name of the owner and/or is unable to
give notice to the owner as set forth herein, the City and/or its agent shall comply with the notice
provisions contained within Section 22653 of the California Vehicle Code.
(e) The registered and legal owners of a commercial vehicle towed and stored pursuant to this section
shall be given the opportunity for a post-storage hearing to determine the validity of the storage. The
post-storage hearing shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) A notice of the storage shall be mailed or personally delivered to the registered and legal
owners within forty-eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, and shall include:
(i) The name, address, and telephone number of the agency providing the notice;
(ii) The location of the place of storage and description of the commercial vehicle, which shall
include, if available, the name or make, the manufacturer, the license plate number, and
the mileage;
(iii) The authority and purpose for the removal of the vehicle; and
(iv) A statement that, in order to receive their post-storage hearing, the owners or their agents,
shall request the hearing in person, writing, or by telephone within ten (10) days of the date
appearing on the notice.
(2) The post-storage hearing shall be conducted within forty-eight (48) hours of the request,
excluding weekends and holidays. The City may authorize its own officer or employee to
conduct the hearing, if the hearing officer is not the same person who directed the storage of
the vehicle.
(3) Failure of either the registered or legal owner, or his or her agent, to request or to attend a
scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing requirement.
(f) Persons operating or in charge of any storage facility where commercial vehicles are stored pursuant
to this section, shall comply with the requirements of California Vehicle Code Sections 22651.1 and
22658(h) through (k), inclusive.
(Ord. 2003-01, 2003)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 36
Article 14. Reserved
Article 15. Public Preferential Parking on Public Streets
4-4.15.010 Definitions.
4-4.15.011 Establishment of public preferential parking zones in public areas.
4-4.15.012 Findings.
4-4.15.013 Notice of public preferential parking zones.
4-4.15.014 Issuance of permits.
4-4.15.015 Nonresident public preferential parking permits.
4-4.15.016 Permit conditions.
4-4.15.017 Prohibitions.
4-4.15.018 Locations and restrictions.
4-4.15.019 Permit fees.
4-4.15.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
"Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle as defined by the California Vehicle Section 260 and any
subsequent amendments thereto.
"Motor vehicle" includes an automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other motor-driven form of
transportation not in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds of gross weight.
"Nonresident permit" means a permit issued by the City Manager, or his or her designee, to a
nonresident of the City of Avenal, for use on a motor vehicle or commercial vehicle in those preferential
permit parking areas where the City Council, has by resolution, authorized the use of such permits.
"Resident permit" means a permit issued by the City Manager, or his or her designee, to a resident of
the City of Avenal, for use on a motor vehicle or commercial vehicle in those preferential permit parking
areas where the City Council, has by resolution, authorized the use of such permits.
"Public area" includes both commercial and residential zones within the City of Avenal.
"Semi-trailer" is any separate vehicle which is not driven or propelled by its own power, but which, to
be useful, must be attached to and become part of another vehicle, and then losses its identity as a
separate vehicle.
"Trailer" is any separate vehicle, not driven or propelled by its own power, but drawn by some
independent power.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.011 Establishment of public preferential parking zones in public areas.
The City Council may designate by ordinance certain public areas or any portions thereof, as a
public preferential parking zone for the benefit of persons in ownership and/or possession of any motor
vehicle and/or commercial vehicle as defined by this section.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 37
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.012 Findings.
Each preferential parking zone may be designated by the City Manager, or his or her designees,
upon the finding that such zone is necessary to provide reasonably available and convenient parking for
the benefit of residents of the City of Avenal. Such findings shall be based upon the following criteria
established to the satisfaction of the City Council:
(a) Commercial vehicles do, or may, substantially and regularly interfere with the use of the majority
of available public street and/or alley parking spaces by other residents of the City of Avenal;
(b) The interference by vehicles referred to in subsection (a) of this section occurs at regular and
significant intervals. For purposes of this article, such interference shall be presumed to be
regular and significant if it occurs, under typical circumstances, not less frequently than three (3)
times per week, Monday through Friday; and
(c) No alternative solution is feasible or practical.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.013 Notice of public preferential parking zones.
No public preferential parking ordinance or resolution shall apply until signs or markings giving
adequate notice thereof have been placed.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.014 Issuance of permits.
(a) The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for the issuance of permits pursuant
to this article. Applicants for such permits shall present such proof, as may be required by said
department, of residence in the City of Avenal and of the number of commercial vehicles and/or
motor vehicles registered to the applicant. No more than one permit shall be issued for each
registered motor vehicle. Applicants requesting more than a total of one permit may be granted
additional public parking permits by the City Manager, or his or her designee, upon a showing that
there is more than one vehicle registered to or regularly used by the applicant, and that insufficient
alternate off-street parking is available to the applicant during the effective hours of the preferential
parking zone.
(b) The City Manager, and his or her designee, shall prescribe appropriate application forms and
procedures with respect to such permits. The form of the permit shall be prescribed by the City
Manager and shall be affixed in a visible location on the left hand portion of the subject vehicle's rear
bumper.
(c) Resident permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain effective for a period of one calendar
year or fraction thereof, or so long as the applicant continues to reside in the City of Avenal or until
the public preferential parking zone for which such permit was issued is eliminated, whichever period
of time is less.
(d) Permits, if issued to nonresidents, shall expire three (3) days after the date of issuance. No more
than three (3) nonresident permits may be issued to any one person within any twelve (12) month
period of time.
(e) Each permit shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions set forth in this article and of the public
preferential parking zone for which it was issued, including conditions or restrictions which may be
altered or amended from time to time. The issuance of such permit shall not be construed to be a
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 38
permit for, or approval of, any violation of any provisions of this Code or any other laws or
regulations.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.015 Nonresident public preferential parking permits.
The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized upon application to issue nonresident
permits to persons not residing within the City of Avenal for use thereby. The City Council may, by
resolution or ordinance, prohibit or regulate the issuance and use of nonresident permits in any public
preferential permit parking area.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.016 Permit conditions.
Each permit issued pursuant to this article shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) While parked or standing pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, the operator of the vehicle
shall not idle the vehicle's engine for longer than fifteen (15) minutes, nor race the vehicle's
engine, nor use "jake" brakes, nor blow air horns.
(b) While parked or standing pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, no commercial vehicle shall be
loaded or unloaded or have cargo transferred to or from the commercial vehicle.
(c) While parked or standing pursuant to a permit issued hereunder, no refrigeration unit on the
vehicle shall be operated within three hundred (300') feet of any human dwelling place except
with the consent of the person in charge of each such dwelling place.
(d) No maintenance of any vehicle shall be performed on any vehicle while it is parked or standing
on a public street pursuant to a permit issued hereunder.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.017 Prohibitions.
(a) No vehicle shall be parked or stopped adjacent to any curb in any public preferential parking zone in
violation of any posted or noticed prohibition or restriction unless such vehicle shall have prominently
displayed, in the manner set forth herein, a permit indicating an exemption from such restriction or
prohibition.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, rent or lease, or cause to be sold, rented or leased for any
value or consideration any public preferential parking permit. Upon conviction of a violation of this
subsection, all public preferential permits issued to, or for the benefit of, the commercial vehicle or
motor vehicle for which the sold, rented or leased permit was authorized, shall be void.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any public preferential
parking permit except as provided for in this article.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
4-4.15.018 Locations and restrictions.
The City Manager or his or her designees shall install, at such streets or alleys or portions thereof as
have been declared to be public preferential parking zones, appropriate signs or markings giving notice of
such parking restrictions.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 39
4-4.15.019 Permit fees.
The fee for public preferential parking permits shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 97-02 (part), 1997)
Article 16. Towed Vehicle Recovery Program
4-4.16.010 Name of program.
4-4.16.011 Purpose of fund.
4-4.16.012 Establishment of administrative fee.
4-4.16.013 Reimbursement of fee for towed vehicle.
4-4.16.014 Effective date.
4-4.16.010 Name of program.
This article and chapter shall be known as the "Avenal Towed Vehicle Recovery Program Fund."
(Ord. 2004-01 (part), 2004)
4-4.16.011 Purpose of fund.
The City finds and determines as follows:
(a) City peace officers are authorized to remove vehicles from City roads and store such vehicles
as provided in, without limitation, California Vehicle Code Sections 14602.6 and 22650 et seq.,
and establish an administrative cost recovery program for such removal and storage.
(b) Under the City-County Law Enforcement Services Agreement ("Services Agreement"), the
Sheriffs Department of the County of Kings has agreed to provide general law enforcement
within the corporate limits of the City of Avenal. While engaged in performing such services and
function, any and all appointed deputies of the Sheriffs Department have been deemed to be
officers or employees of the City to the extent that such services and functions are within the
scope of the Services Agreement and are municipal functions. Hereinafter, deputies providing
services and functions within the scope of the Services Agreement within the corporate limits of
the City of Avenal shall be referred to as the "Avenal Law Enforcement Agency."
(c) A need exists for a program to establish an orderly procedure for the storage and return of
vehicles to their lawful owners and to provide the appropriate method of reimbursement for that
government service.
(d) A special fund is hereby established for the receipt and expenditure of administrative fees
collected pursuant to this Article. This special fund shall be known and designated as the
"Avenal Towed Vehicle Recovery Program Fund."
(e) Balances remaining in the fund at the close of any fiscal year shall be deemed to have been
collected for the purposes specified herein and shall be carried forward and accumulated in the
fund for those purposes.
(Ord. 2004-01 (part), 2004)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 40
4-4.16.012 Establishment of administrative fee.
(a) A fee to reimburse the City of Avenal for administrative costs incurred in the administration of
procedures for removing vehicles shall be charged by the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency for the
benefit of the City to the owner of a vehicle removed pursuant to California Vehicle Code Sections
14602.6, 12500(a) and 22651. Charges shall be in accordance with and by the authority of Section
22850 et seq., of the California Vehicle Code and Section 53158 of the California Government Code.
(b) Fees to be collected under this Article shall not exceed the actual administrative costs incurred by
the City through the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency relating to the removal, impoundment, storage
and release of the vehicle, as determined and fixed by the City Council from time to time.
(c) Fees to be collected under this article shall be proposed by the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency or
their designee, and shall not go into effect until approved by resolution of the City Council of the City
of Avenal.
(d) The Avenal Law Enforcement Agency is hereby authorized to adopt rules, regulations, and
procedures as are necessary for the removal, impoundment, storage, and release of impounded
vehicles.
(e) The Sheriff of the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency is also hereby authorized to adopt rules,
regulations, and procedures as are necessary for the imposition, collection and administration of fees
authorized by this Article, subject to the requirements of Sections 22850 et seq., of the California
Vehicle Code. Any rules, regulations and procedures to be established by the Sheriff under this
subsection shall be agreed upon by the City Council prior to their adoption and implementation.
(Ord. 2004-01 (part), 2004)
4-4.16.013 Reimbursement of fee for towed vehicle.
All or any part of a fee collected under this Article may be reimbursed to the owner or persons in
lawful possession of the vehicle, if the fee was incurred because:
(a) The vehicle was towed and stored at the order of the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency, to
examine the vehicle for evidence of a crime;
(b) The vehicle was towed and stored by the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency and towing or
storage was not authorized by any of the provisions of the California Vehicle Code; or
(c) Officers, agents, or employees of the Avenal Law Enforcement Agency ordered a vehicle towed
and stored when in fact the vehicle was not subject to towing and storage.
(Ord. 2004-01 (part), 2004)
4-4.16.014 Effective date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in full force and effect at 12:01 a.m. April 25, 2004.
(Ord. 2004-01 (part), 2004)
Chapter 5 PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS AND PRIVATE WATCHMEN
Sections:
4-5.01 Definition.
4-5.02 Registration—Required.
4-5.03 Registration—Procedures.
4-5.04 Qualifications.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 41
4-5.05 Uniforms.
4-5.06 Badge design restrictions.
4-5.07 Vehicle insignia restrictions.
4-5.08 Complaints.
4-5.01 Definition.
"Private patrol system" is any business which intends to furnish or does furnish any private
policeman, watchman or guard to patrol any territory or to guard or watch property of another person
within the incorporated boundaries of Avenal.
(Ord. 83-02 § 1, 1983)
4-5.02 Registration—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a private patrol watchman or for any person holding a
private patrol license to employ or permit any person to act as a private patrol watchman unless such
person registers with the Avenal Police Department.
(Ord. 83-02 § 2, 1983; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
4-5.03 Registration—Procedures.
The person named in the register as a private patrol watchman shall, within three (3) working days
after his registration, present himself to the Avenal Police Department to be photographed and
fingerprinted. The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall forthwith cause said person to be
photographed and fingerprinted and such photographs and fingerprints shall be filed in the permanent
records of the Avenal Police Department.
(Ord. 83-02 § 3, 1983; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
4-5.04 Qualifications.
All employees or applicants must be of good moral character and good mental character. Personnel
of a private patrol system shall not have been convicted of any felony or of any narcotic law or any law
involving moral turpitude and which conviction would, in the judgment of the Avenal Police Department,
indicate that such employees or applicants are not of good moral character.
(Ord. 83-02 § 6, 1983; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
4-5.05 Uniforms.
Every operator of a private patrol system shall adopt a characteristic uniform and all private patrol
watchmen employed by such operator shall wear such uniform at all times while engaged in the
performance of the duties of his employment. The characteristic uniform proposed to be adopted by the
holder of a private patrol system permit and any uniform proposed to be worn by a private watchman must
first be approved by the Avenal Police Department.
(Ord. 83-02 § 4, 1983; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 42
4-5.06 Badge design restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or display, or cause to be worn or displayed, any badge or
insignia similar in design to that used by the Sheriff's Department and City Police Department, and no
badge or insignia of any design shall be worn or displayed or used in any manner unless the same has
been first approved by the Avenal Police Department. Any badge or insignia worn by a private watchman
or private patrol watchman shall have imprinted thereon, in letters of a size approved by the Avenal Police
Department, the name of the employer of the private watchman or the name of the private patrol
watchman system by whom the private patrol watchman is employed as the case may be and in addition
to such name there may be imprinted thereon the words "private officer," or "private patrol watchman,"
"private watchman," "watchman" or "guard."
(Ord. 83-02 § 5, 1983; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
4-5.07 Vehicle insignia restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any private patrol system to use or operate vehicles of the same color as that
of the Police Department or Sheriff's Department. No seals, decals or insignias are to be placed on the
vehicles but the name of the company and the words, "private patrol" must be placed on the side of the
doors; lettering to be not less than three (3) inches in height and the lettering shall be in contrast to the
color of the background upon which they are placed.
(Ord. 83-02 § 8, 1983)
4-5.08 Complaints.
The Avenal Police Department is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to file, or cause to be
filed, with the directors of the Bureau of Private Investigators and Adjustors of the State, a complaint
against any person holding a license to carry on the business of private patrol watchman issued by such
director, whenever he believes good cause exists therefor.
(Ord. 83-02 § 7, 1983; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
Chapter 6 DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS
Sections:
4-6.01 Discharge of weapons prohibited.
4-6.02 Penalty for violation.
4-6.03 Destruction of weapon.
4-6.01 Discharge of weapons prohibited.
It is unlawful to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged within the Avenal City limits, any
firearm, rifle, pistol, shotgun, cannon, air rifle, air gun, B.B. gun, pellet gun, gas operated gun, spring gun,
slingshot, bow, crossbow, or any other weapon designed to discharge or propel any projectile capable of
causing injury; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(a) Peace officers when acting in the line of duty;
(b) Persons otherwise lawfully acting to protect life or property;
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 43
(c) Persons so discharging in or upon an educational institution as a curricular activity or a
business establishment licensed by the City of Avenal for such purposes; or
(d) Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who has obtained a permit from the City of Avenal
to discharge one of the above-referenced weapons for an allowable business and/or personal
purpose as provided for within this chapter and/or the remaining portions of the Avenal
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 97-05 (part), 1997)
4-6.02 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating
any provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of this chapter's requirements, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding six (6) months, by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by
both fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or
corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 97-05 (part), 1997)
4-6.03 Destruction of weapon.
Any weapon of any nature used in the commission of any misdemeanor as provided within this
chapter, shall, upon determination by the Avenal Chief of Police, or his agents, that continued possession
of the weapon would be likely to result in endangering the safety of others, be surrendered to the Avenal
Chief of Police, or his agent(s). Any weapon surrendered under this section, except upon the certificate of
a judge of a court of record, or of the district attorney of the county, that the retention thereof is necessary
or proper to the ends of justice, may be: (1) offered by the Avenal Chief of Police, or his agents, for sale at
public auction to persons licensed pursuant to California Penal Code Section 12071 to engage in
businesses involving any weapon purchased; (2) destroyed by the Avenal Chief of Police, or his agents,
so that it can no longer be used as such a weapon; and/or (3) used by the Avenal Chief of Police, or his
agent(s), as such Police Department sees fit.
Where following confiscation of any weapon under this section the Avenal Chief of Police, or his
agents, determines that return of the weapon would not be likely to result in endangering the safety of
others, the police department shall notify the owner of the weapon of the procedure for the return of any
weapon which has been confiscated.
No stolen weapon used in the commission of any misdemeanor as provided within the chapter, shall
be sold or destroyed pursuant to this section, unless reasonable notice is given to its lawful owner, if his
or her identity and address can be reasonably ascertained.
(Ord. 97-05 (part), 1997; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
Chapter 7 FIREWORKS
Sections:
4-7.01 Purpose.
4-7.02 Sale of fireworks.
4-7.03 Discharge of fireworks.
4-7.04 Applicants.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 44
4-7.05 Permits for retail sale of fireworks.
4-7.06 Insurance.
4-7.07 Revocation.
4-7.01 Purpose.
The City of Avenal has determined that in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens within the City and metropolitan area, it is necessary to regulate the sale and discharge of safe
and sane fireworks.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
4-7.02 Sale of fireworks.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or display for sale any "safe and sane fireworks" as
defined with Section 12529 of the California Health and Safety Code (hereinafter referred to as
"fireworks"), within the City of Avenal and metropolitan area without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the City Manager of the City of Avenal, or designee, as provided herein.
(b) Fireworks may be sold within the City of Avenal and metropolitan area only from June 28 to July 4 of
any year, unless July 4 falls on a Sunday, in which case the period for the sale of fireworks shall end
on July 5. The hours of operation of any fireworks stand shall be limited to 12:00 noon to 11:00 p.m.
on June 28 and 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily during the other days identified above except the last
day when sales must cease no later than 12:00 midnight. The sale of any fireworks shall be made
strictly in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, Article III, Chapter 10 of the Kings County
Ordinance Code, and the laws of the State of California.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
4-7.03 Discharge of fireworks.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire, set off, discharge, explode, use to, cause to, or permit to be
fired, set off, discharged, exploded or used, any fireworks within the City of Avenal and metropolitan area
except for that period beginning at 9:00 a.m. on July 1 and ending at 12:00 midnight on July 4 of any year,
unless July 4 falls on a Sunday, in which case the period ends at 12:00 midnight on July 5.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
4-7.04 Applicants.
Applicants for a City of Avenal fireworks permit must satisfy the following requirements:
(a) Each applicant must have had its principal place of business and permanent meeting place
within the City of Avenal for a period of at least one year prior to the date of application for a
permit; and
(b) Each applicant shall provide any and all documentation that the City Manager, or designee, may
request in order to establish that all requirements of this section have been satisfied.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 45
4-7.05 Permits for retail sale of fireworks.
All applications for a fireworks permit shall comply with the provisions of Section 12500 et. seq. of
the California Health and Safety Code, Subchapter 6, Article V, of Title 19 of the California Administration
Code, and any and all rules and regulations established by the State of California, the County of Kings,
and the City of Avenal. In addition, each applicant shall be governed by the following:
(a) An application for a fireworks permit shall be filed with the City Manager, or designee, on or
before June 1 of each year, along with payment of a nonrefundable permit fee established by
resolution of the City Council, fireworks permits are not transferable.
(b) The City Manager, or designee, shall issue permits. Permits denied for failure to comply with
Sections 4-7.04, 4-7.05 or 4-7.06 may be appealed to the City Manager or designee, and
thereafter to the City Council.
(c) No fireworks permit will be granted to an applicant if the following items are not properly and
completely prepared and presented to the City Manager, or designee, on or before June 1 of
the calendar year during which the fireworks will be sold:
(1) State Fire Marshall's license;
(2) Temporary seller's permit from the State Board of Equalization;
(3) Property owner's permission form (original) signed and currently dated;
(4) Storage of safe and sane fireworks form;
(5) Address of property where stand will be located;
(6) Certificate of insurance as required by the City of Avenal; and
(7) County of Kings fireworks permit obtained in accordance with Chapter 10, Article III, of the
Kings County Ordinance Code.
The City Manager, or designee, may extend the June 1 filing date if the City Manager,
or designee, determines in his or her sole discretion, that an applicant has attempted in
good faith and with due diligence to satisfy all of the requirements in subsections (a) and
(c) of this section and that as a result of action or inaction on the part of other persons or
entities, which are beyond the applicant's control, the applicant has been unable to satisfy
the requirements of subsections (a) and (c) within the required time periods.
(d) No change of stand locations will be permitted without the prior approval of the City Manager, or
designee,
(e) All fireworks stands must be removed on or before 12:00 midnight July 5 of each respective
year, unless July 4 falls on a Sunday, in which case the period for the stand removal ends at
12:00 midnight on July 6, provided, however, that all unsold fireworks stock and accompanying
litter shall be removed from the stand on or before 5:00 p:m. on the last day.
(f) No person shall sell, or offer for sale, any fireworks within a distance of one hundred (100') feet
of any pump or dispensing device of any flammable liquids.
(g) No fireworks stand shall be located within thirty (30') feet of any adjacent buildings, burnable
materials, grass, paper, or like flammable materials.
(h) No fireworks stand shall be located closer than ten (10') feet from any public roadway or back of
curb, or in any location which does not otherwise meet the approval of the City Manager, or
designee,
(i) No sale of display of fireworks will be allowed inside any permanent building.
(j) Each fireworks stand shall have minimum of two (2) exits which shall be located and provided
on opposite sides. Each shall be at least thirty-two (32?) inches wide. Fireworks stands with only
three (3) sides and open from the back will not require exits.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 46
(k) If stands are operated at night, only electric lights may be used.
(l) "No Smoking" signs shall be located on all sides of the stand. Each sign all have the words "No
Smoking" in red letters, not less than two (2?) inches in height, with a minimum one and one-half
(1-½) inch stroke on a white background.
(m) One approved two and one-half (2-½) gallon pressurized, water-type fire extinguisher and/or
one five (5) pound multi-purpose ABC fire extinguisher or garden hose fully charged with shutoff
nozzle attached, shall be provided in the stand's sale area. There shall be no exceptions to
this requirement. The fire extinguisher must be in operating condition, with an up-to-date
inspection tag indicating that the fire extinguisher has be serviced within the past year.
(n) Fireworks signs shall not create a traffic hazard and must be approved by the City Manager, or
designee.
(o) All permittees shall instruct all employees and persons who handle fireworks in any capacity, of
the hazards of fireworks and with these rules and safety precautions governing fireworks.
(p) All persons selling fireworks shall be trained in emergency procedures, including the use of fire
extinguishers.
(q) Persons employed for the sale of fireworks shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. Proof
must be shown at any time when requested by the City Manager, or designee.
(r) No person under sixteen (16) years of age shall purchase fireworks.
(s) No sleeping inside the fireworks stand will be permitted at any time.
(t) The stand and surrounding area shall be maintained in a clean, neat and orderly condition at all
times and be free from any condition that would create a "fire nuisance."
(u) No person shall use or handle fireworks while under the influence of intoxicating liquids or
narcotics. Alcohol and narcotics are prohibited within the fireworks stands.
(v) Smoking shall be prohibited where fireworks are stored or handled.
(w) No person, other than a member of the organization or a volunteer who is associated with the
organization having a permit, shall be permitted to sell or to otherwise participate in the sale of
fireworks.
(x) No permit issued or authorized shall be transferable or assignable.
(y) No person shall light, or cause to be lighted, any fireworks or other combustible article within
any stand or within two hundred (200') feet thereof.
(z) The applicant's state license, County fireworks permit, City fireworks permit, and temporary
sales permit issued by the State Board of Equalization shall be displayed in a prominent place
in the fireworks stand.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
4-7.06 Insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the eligible organization shall procure a certificate of insurance
acceptable to the City of Avenal. The certificate shall name the City of Avenal, its officers, agents and
employees as additional insureds in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
combined bodily injury and property damage for each occurrence. The certificate must specify the time,
location and dates to be covered by the policy.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 47
4-7.07 Revocation.
Any violation of these provisions, or any other City ordinance, or the terms and conditions of the
permit, of state law or administrative regulations, or safety rules of the City Manager, or designee, shall
be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit. Any such violation shall be determined in the sole
discretion of the City manager, or designee. The decision of the City Manager, or designee, with regards
to revocation may be appealed to the City Council.
(Ord. 98-02 § 1 (part), 1998)
Chapter 8 SKATEBOARD REGULATIONS
Sections:
4-8.01 Application.
4-8.02 Definition.
4-8.03 Use and operation.
4-8.01 Application.
This chapter applies to the use and operation of skateboards on all streets, alleys, sidewalks and
rights-of-way in the City, whether public or private, and all other property owned by the City, and upon
private property for which a request for application of this chapter has been established by resolution of
the Avenal City Council.
(Ord. 92-02 (part), 1992)
4-8.02 Definition.
"Skateboard" when used in this chapter means a plank, or board approximately two (2') feet long
with a wheeled skate, or skates attached thereto, foot or motor propelled without a steering apparatus.
(Ord. 92-02 (part), 1992)
4-8.03 Use and operation.
(a) Except as provided below, no person shall use or operate a skateboard on a public or private
through street or alley in the City if there is a sidewalk adjacent and parallel to the street. If no such
sidewalk is present, skateboards may be operated in the street as far on the right-hand side of the
roadway as is practicable in the same direction as traffic.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision herein, no person shall use or operate a skateboard on the
streets or sidewalks and property owned or controlled by the City within the commercial zoned areas
of the City, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Kings Street;
(2) State Route 269 (Skyline Boulevard).
Skateboarding shall be prohibited on all other public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and all other public
property or private property upon the request of the owner, as the City Council may from time to time
designate by resolution.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 48
(c) No person shall use or operate a skateboard on any public or private street, alley, or sidewalk, or
right-of-way, or on any property owned by the City in a manner which endangers the safety of any
other person or property. No person using or operating a skateboard on a street, alley, sidewalk,
right-of-way or any other property owned by the City shall pass a pedestrian at a distance closer than
five (5') feet. If such street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or public property is not sufficiently wide to
allow the skateboard to pass the pedestrian while maintaining a five (5') foot distance, the
skateboarder shall cease to operate the skateboard and walk past the pedestrian until such time the
skateboarder can maintain a five (5') foot distance.
(d) No person shall use or operate a skateboard within twenty (20') feet of the entrance to any shop,
store, or commercial building while such shop, store or commercial building is open for business.
(e) The use of ramps, jumps or any other portable device used to force the skateboard off the pavement
is prohibited on any public street, alley, sidewalk or public property or private property for which the
owner has requested prohibition.
(f) No person shall be towed on a skateboard by the use of any mechanical device.
(g) No person shall use or operate a skateboard more than one-half (½) hour after sunset or one-half
(½) hour prior to sunrise without the use of an arm-mounted light or reflective arm band or reflective
clothing. For the purpose of this subsection, light colored clothing may be considered reflective
clothing.
(Ord. 92-02 (part), 1992)
Chapter 9 SKATEBOARD FACILITIES
Sections:
4-9.01 Use and operation.
4-9.02 Liability.
4-9.03 Validity.
4-9.04 Effective date.
4-9.01 Use and operation.
(a) In any skateboard park or facility owned or operated by the City, any person riding a skateboard, inline
skates, and/or similar device, shall wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads.
(b) The Public Works Department shall cause a sign or signs to be posted at all such parks or facilities
providing reasonable notice of subsection (a) of this section and stating that any person failing to
comply with subsection (a) of this section will be guilty of an infraction and subject to citation.
Subsequent violations by the same person within one hundred twenty (120) days shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
(c) Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section and who is injured while
using the park or facility shall be deemed negligent.
(d) The City shall prepare and post rules for use of city-owned skateboard facilities consistent with this
chapter. Said rules shall be adopted by resolution by the City Council and shall be amended as
needed and/or required.
(Ord. 2002-07 § 1, 2002)
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 49
4-9.02 Liability.
This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes
upon the City, or any officer or employee thereof, a mandatory duty of care towards persons or property
within the City or outside of the City so as to provide a civil liability for damages, except as otherwise
imposed by law.
(Ord. 2002-07 § 2, 2002)
4-9.03 Validity.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be
effective without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
severable. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter irrespective of the
validity of any particular portion thereof.
(Ord. 2002-07 § 3, 2002)
4-9.04 Effective date.
Due to the immediate health and safety concerns regarding the skateboard facilities that are subject
to this chapter, the City Council hereby declares this an emergency ordinance and therefore ordains that
the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in effect on December 12, 2002.
(Ord. 2002-07 § 4, 2002)
Chapter 10 SPORTS/RECREATIONAL FACILITIES LAW
Sections:
4-10.01 Title.
4-10.02 Use and operation.
4-10.03 Posting of rules and regulations.
4-10.04 Violations.
4-10.01 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Sports/Recreational Facilities Law of the City of Avenal.
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, 8-12-2009)
4-10.02 Use and operation.
(a) For the safety of the community and the public, the City Council adopts the "Rules and Regulations"
in Appendix 1 which may be amended by the City Council from time to time as needed or required
for safe and reasonable use and operation of City-owned parks, sports complexes and other
recreational facilities.
(b) The Public Works Department shall cause the Rules and Regulations adopted under this chapter to
be posted at all times on all City-owned parks, sports complexes and other recreational facilities.
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 50
(c) All persons on City-owned parks, sports complexes and other recreational facilities must comply with
the Rules and Regulations adopted under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, 8-12-2009)
Editor's note—
Appendix 1, referenced above, is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in
the City offices.
4-10.03 Posting of rules and regulations.
The Public Works Department shall cause a sign or signs to be posted on all City-owned parks,
sports complexes and other recreational facilities, stating that any person failing to comply with the Rules
and Regulations adopted under this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to citation and the
penalty provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Avenal Municipal Code and that each subsequent
violation, by the same person, within ninety (90) days shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, 8-12-2009)
4-10.04 Violations.
(a) Any person who violates any of the Rules and Regulations adopted under this chapter shall be guilty
of an infraction and subject to citation and the penalty provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Avenal
Municipal Code. Each subsequent violation, by the same person, within ninety (90) days of a prior
violation shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(b) Any person who, while in violation of any of the Rules and Regulations adopted under this chapter,
causes an injury to self or to another person or to any property whatsoever is deemed to be a public
nuisance.
(c) In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law, and pursuant to Government Code Section 37359,
any person who violates any of the Rules and Regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter shall be
a trespasser subject to all civil and criminal liability therefor.
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, 8-12-2009)
Chapter 11 POLICE DEPARTMENT [1]
Sections:
4-11.01 Chief of Police.
4-11.02 Law enforcement officer's training.
4-11.01 Chief of Police.
(a) Office Created: There is hereby created a Police Department in the City which shall consist of aChief
of Police and as many employees as the City Council may designate from time to time based on
recommendation by the Chief of Police for the safety and security of the Community and its Citizens.
(b) Appointment and Removal: Unless otherwise directed by the City Council, the Chief of Police shall
be appointed by the City Manager from a list of eligible candidates obtained through the City's normal
recruitment procedures. The Chief of Police shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager and may
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 51
be removed by the City Manager at any time thereafter, in accordance with the Personnel Manual of
the City and, if applicable, any written contract entered into between the City Council and the Chief of
Police.
(c) Supervision and Control: The City Manager shall be the immediate supervisor of the Chief of Police
and all policies, directives and orders from the City government to the Chief of Police shall be made
by or transmitted through the City Manager as executive head of the City government. The Chief of
Police shall report directly to the City Manager and not to the City Council or individual members
thereof or to any other committee or commission.
(d) Powers and Duties: The Chief of Police shall direct the administration and operations of the Police
Department and, in addition to policies transmitted to him/her by the City Manager, shall establish
other policies, directives, rules and regulations for the administration and operations of the
Department as he/she sees fit. The Chief of Police shall serve as the employing authority for the
appointment of any position within the Department, other than his/her own and shall have the power
to suspend or dismiss any employee consistent with the provisions of the City Personnel Manual. Not
withstanding anything to the contrary, all positions with the Department shall be filled and/or vacated
only after the consent and approval by the City Manager is obtained.
(e) Responsibilities: The Chief of Police shall lead by professional example and by participating as a
member of the City management team and shall organize the Police Department to accomplish this
mission and shall coordinate and control the operations of major divisions within the Department as
well as its relations with other law enforcement agencies. Other responsibilities shall include, but
shall not necessarily be limited to, such activities as the review and evaluation of the Department
toward meeting goals and objectives, planning for departmental needs and programs, including the
preparation and submission of such budget material that may be required, providing advice and
counsel to the City Manager on matters pertaining to law enforcement, providing information and
maintaining external relations with the public.
(Ord. No. 2010-02, 5-27-2010)
4-11.02 Law enforcement officer's training.
(a) The City Council of the City of Avenal declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State
of California under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California
Penal Code.
(b) Pursuant to Sections 13510.1 and 13512 of said Chapter 1 the Avenal Police Department will adhere
to the standards for recruitment and training established by the Commission on Peace Officer
Standards and Training.
(c) The Commission and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed necessary to ascertain
that the peace officer personnel of the Avenal Police Department adhere to the standards for
recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and
Training.
(Ord. No. 2010-02, 5-27-2010; Ord. No. 2010-05, 10-28-2010; Ord. No. 2010-07, 12-9-2010)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Title 4 PUBLIC SAFETY
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 52
Editor's note— Ord. 2010-02, adopted May 27, 2010, set out provisions intended for use as title 4,
chapter 10, §§ 4-10.01, 4-10.02. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers,
these provisions have been included as title 4, article 11, §§ 4-11.01, 4-11.02. (Back)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Chapter 2 - CARD ROOMS
Chapter 3 - INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Chapter 4 - JUKE BOXES
Chapter 5 - JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 6 - OIL AND GAS WELLS
Chapter 7 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Chapter 8 - CITY PARKS—HOURS
Chapter 9 - CURFEW FOR MINORS
Chapter 10 - PROHIBITION AGAINST THE PRESENCE OF MINORS IN PREMISES UPON WHICH ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES ARE SOLD
Chapter 11 - PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
Chapter 12 - STREET, SIDEWALK AND ITINERANT VENDORS
Chapter 13 - BINGO GAMES
Chapter 14 - GRAFFITI CONTROL
Chapter 15 - LOITERING
Chapter 16 - CITATION SYSTEM FOR JUVENILES, JUVENILE LOITERING AND CURFEW VIOLATIONS AND
COST RECOVERY
Chapter 17 - DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIAL
Chapter 18 - PARTIES IN RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES
Chapter 19 - REWARDS FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO ARREST AND CONVICTION
Chapter 20 - TOBACCO SELF SERVICE DISPLAYS
Chapter 21 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
Chapter 1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Sections:
5-1.01 Mechanical amusement device defined.
5-1.02 Licenses—Required.
5-1.03 Licenses—Issuance—Revocation—Fees.
5-1.04 Licenses—Posting.
5-1.05 Exceptions.
5-1.06 Certain gambling devices prohibited.
5-1.07 Tokens—Use prohibited.
5-1.08 Tokens—Sale or distribution prohibited.
5-1.01 Mechanical amusement device defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, "mechanical amusement device" shall mean any machine or device
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated by the public generally by
manipulating special equipment whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special
number or numbers or a high total score when the element of skill in such manipulation predominates
over chance or luck.
5-1.02 Licenses—Required.
Every person displaying for public patronage, or keeping for operation, any mechanical amusement
device, shall first obtain a license from the City upon the payment of a license fee. Applications for such
licenses shall be made to the Police Chief.
5-1.03 Licenses—Issuance—Revocation—Fees.
Every applicant for a license to display or keep for operation any mechanical amusement device,
before being granted such license, shall pay a quarterly fee of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars per
machine for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each such mechanical amusement
device. Quarterly license fees shall not be prorated for parts of quarterly license periods. Such licenses so
issued shall be purely permissive and shall not grant the licensee any fixed interest or property rights
therein. Such licenses shall be revocable at any time by the Police Chief. The Police Chief may, at his
discretion, limit, revoke, refuse, take up, or fail to issue a license to any applicant at any time if, in the
judgment of the Police Chief, it appears to the best interests of the public health, safety, and morals of the
people of the City that such action be taken.
5-1.04 Licenses—Posting.
The licenses required by the provisions of this chapter shall be posted permanently and
conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein such device is to be operated or
maintained for operation.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
5-1.05 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any vending machine so operated as to sell and
deliver merchandise only, which merchandise is equivalent in market value to the value of the coin
deposited, without the payment or delivery of anything except the merchandise therein kept for sale.
5-1.06 Certain gambling devices prohibited.
The provisions of this chapter shall in no way be construed to authorize, license, or permit any
gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism which has been judicially determined to be a gambling
device or is in any way contrary to law, or which may be contrary to any future law of the State.
Mechanical amusement devices shall be used for amusement purposes only. Payoffs shall be in violation
of the provisions of this chapter.
5-1.07 Tokens—Use prohibited.
The use of tokens or other devices to operate coin-operated machines within the City is prohibited.
(Ord. 83-03 (part), 1983)
5-1.08 Tokens—Sale or distribution prohibited.
The sale or other distribution of tokens to operate coin-operated machines within the City is
prohibited.
(Ord. 83-03 (part), 1983)
Chapter 2 CARD ROOMS [1]
5-2.01 License required.
5-2.02 Card room—Defined.
5-2.03 Application for license.
5-2.04 Employee work permits.
5-2.05 Suspension and revocation.
5-2.06 Nontransferable.
5-2.07 Card room regulations.
5-2.08 License fee for card rooms.
5-2.09 Club licenses.
5-2.10 Exemptions.
5-2.11 State law violations.
5-2.12 Effective date.
5-2.01 License required.
No person shall engage in, or carry on, or maintain or conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried
on, maintained or conducted, any card room in the City without first having secured a license from said
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
city so to do, according to each and every requirement of this chapter, or without complying with each and
every regulation contained herein pertaining to such card room.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.02 Card room—Defined.
For the purpose of this article a "card room" is hereby defined to be any space, room or enclosure,
furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards
and similar games, and the use of which is available to members of any non-profit society, club, fraternal,
labor or other organization, or to the public or any portion of the public, provided that "card room" shall not
include a room to which the public is admitted and in which the sole card game played is duplicate bridge.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.03 Application for license.
(a) An applicant for a card room license shall submit his application to the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer of the City which application shall be under oath, and shall include, among other things, the
true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. The term "persons
financially interested" shall include all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis
of gross or net revenue. The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all persons
financially interested in the business shall be shown on such application. The application shall also
be accompanied by fingerprints and recent photographs of the applicant and of persons financially
interested in the business. A license may be issued only to persons who have resided in the County
of Kings for at least two (2) years immediately preceding the issuance of such license.
(b) The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall issue a license, unless he/she finds that:
(1) The applicant or any person financially interested has previously been convicted of a felony and
a period of ten (10) years has not expired from date of termination of confinement, parole and/or
probation; or
(2) The applicant or any person financially interested has previously been convicted of one of the
following misdemeanor violations, and a period of ten (10) years has not elapsed from the date
of termination of confinement, parole and/or probation:
(i) Any theft from a person;
(ii) Any theft involving cheating;
(iii) Any series of petty thefts;
(iv) Any crime involving pimping, pandering or prostitution;
(v) Any crime involving bookmaking or gaming;
(vi) Any crime involving narcotics or dangerous drugs; or
(3) The applicant or any person financially interested is not, in the opinion of the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer, a fit and proper person to operate a card room; or
(4) The card room is to be located within any area of the City which is wholly residential; or, if the
card room is to be located adjacent to a residential area, and, in the opinion of the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer, the issuance of the card room license would tend to cause a police
problem or public nuisance; or
(5) The card room is to be located within six hundred (600) feet of a public school, church, hospital,
or children's playground, or any other public facility where the presence of the card room might
tend to promote a demoralizing effect, or cause a law enforcement problem, or create a public
nuisance.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
(c) The action of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in denying such a license on the basis of subsection
(3) or subsection (4) or subsection (5) of this section shall be subject to an appeal to the City Council.
Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the denial of such
license. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period the action of the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer in denying such license shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.04 Employee work permits.
(a) Card room employees must obtain a work permit from the Chief Law Enforcement Officer. Card
room employees for the purpose of this article are defined as dealers, overseers, and others directly
connected with the operation and supervision of the card tables, excluding waitresses, bartenders,
culinary workers and others not connected with such operation and supervision. Applications for
such work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the
applicant and such information as may be deemed by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer necessary
to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a card room work permit. The
application shall also be accompanied by the fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant
for submission to the Department of Justice for a criminal history background check. A work permit
shall be issued only to persons who have resided in the County of Kings for at least one year
immediately preceding the issuance of such work permit. Subject to Subsection (b) hereinbelow, the
Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall issue a work permit unless he/she finds that:
(1) The applicant has previously been convicted of a felony and a period of ten (10) years has not
expired from date of termination of confinement, parole and/or probation; or
(2) The applicant has previously been convicted of one of the following misdemeanor violations,
and a period of ten (10) years has not elapsed from the date of termination of confinement,
parole and/or probation:
(i) Any theft from a person;
(ii) Any theft involving cheating;
(iii) Any series of petty thefts;
(iv) Any crime involving pimping, pandering or prostitution;
(v) Any crime involving bookmaking or gaming;
(vi) Any crime involving narcotics or dangerous drugs; or
(3) The applicant is not, in the opinion of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, a fit and proper person
to engage in such work. Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by a fee, such
fees shall be established by the City Council, by resolution, and shall be valid for a period of one
year. The fee shall not be refunded if a work permit is refused, revoked or suspended as
hereinafter provided. Only one such work permit shall be required each year, even though the
holder of a work permit may change his place of employment within the City; or
(4) The applicant is disqualified from holding a state gambling license, for any of the reasons
specified in California Business and Professions Code §19850.
(b) Any application for a work permit shall be subject to objection by the state division. If the division
objects to the issuance of a work permit, it shall be denied. Such denial may be reviewed in
accordance with the Gambling Control Act (California Business & Professions Code § 19801, et
seq.)
(c) The action of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in denying such a work permit on the basis of the
applicant not being a fit and proper person shall be subject to appeal to the Council. Notice of such
appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the denial of said work permit. Upon
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
failure to file such notice within the ten (10) day period, the action of the Chief Law Enforcement
Officer in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.05 Suspension and revocation.
The Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall have the right for cause to revoke or suspend any card
room license or card room work permit issued hereunder and to take possession of such permits. Any of
the grounds upon which the Chief Law Enforcement Officer shall be required to refuse to issue an initial
card room license or card room work permit shall also constitute grounds for such revocation or
suspension. In addition, the failure of the holder of a card room license or card room work permit to
comply with the provisions of this article shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of
such license or work permit. The action of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in this respect shall be
subject to an appeal to the City Council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed in writing with the City Clerk
within ten (10) days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day
period, the action of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in revoking or suspending the license or work
permit shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.06 Nontransferable.
No person shall be granted a license to conduct more than one card room. No card room license
shall be assignable or transferable.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.07 Card room regulations.
(a) Hours of Operation.
(1) Before it shall be allowed to operate, each gambling establishment shall adopt a schedule of
hours of operation, after the schedule has been approved by the Chief Law EnforcementOfficer.
Such approved schedule of hours shall be clearly posted at the gambling establishment so as to
give law enforcement and patrons adequate notice of the hours of operation.
(2) Unless otherwise restricted, it is unlawful to operate any card room or card game between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. of any day and 9:00 a.m. of the same day within the corporate limits of the
City, excepting Saturdays and Sundays.
(b) Location of Gambling Establishment.
(1) No gambling establishment may be located in any zone which has not been specifically
approved for such a business and none may be located near any of the unsuitable areas, as
specified in California Business and Professions Code § 19852(a)(3);
(2) Not more than one card room shall be located at any one address; and
(3) All card rooms shall be located on the ground floor.
(c) Type of Games Played. No person shall deal, play, or carry on, open, or cause to be opened, or
conduct, either as owner or employee, whether for hire or not, any game of faro, monte, roulette,
landsquenet, rouge-et-noir, rondo, tan, fan-tan, poker in any of its various forms, seven-and-a-half,
twenty-one, hokey-pokey, or any banking or percentage game played with cards, dice, dominoes, or
any device, for money, chips, checks, credit, or other representative of value, or bet at or against any
of said prohibited games in any card room.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
(d) Wagering Limits. Before it shall be allowed to operate, each card room shall adopt rules for wagering
limits in each game, after the rules have been approved by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer.
During hours of operation, such rules shall be clearly posted at the gambling tables where games are
offered, to provide patrons with adequate notice of those rules.
(e) Number of Tables. No more than one hundred (100) tables shall be allowed to operate in this
jurisdiction and no more than seven (7) tables shall be permitted in any card room.
(f) Patron Security and Safety. Each card room licensee shall be responsible and liable for its patrons'
safety and security in and around the gambling establishment. Before it shall be allowed to operate,
each card room shall adopt a plan to provide for the safety and security of patrons, after the plan has
been approved by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer.
(g) Miscellaneous. In addition to those regulations set forth hereinabove in Section 5-2.07, subsections
(a) through (f), except as hereinafter provided, no personnel shall operate a card room in violation of
any of the following regulations:
(1) No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall be permitted at any card table, or
participate in any game played thereat;
(2) Not more than seven (7) players shall be permitted at any one table;
(3) All card rooms shall be open to law enforcement inspection during all hours of operation;
(4) The cashing of bank checks for players shall not be permitted in any card room;
(5) Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be to supervise the game
and see to it that it is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this article and the
provisions of the Penal Code of the State of California. This person may have more than one
table under his/her supervision. This person may participate in a game under his/her
supervision, but only if no other game under his/her supervision is being played at the time
he/she plays;
(6) No signs or other insignia advertising or relative to card rooms shall be displayed in any manner
on or in the premises occupied as a card room; and
(7) No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in any card room.
(h) Exemptions. The provisions of Subsections 5-2.07(a)(2), 5-2.07(b)(3), 5-2.07(e), 5-2.07(g)(2), (4),
and (5), shall not apply to a nonprofit society, club, fraternal labor or other organization which has
qualified for a license without fee under Section 5-2.09.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.08 License fee for card rooms.
There shall be collected for each card table licenses hereunder a fee per table per month, payable
quarterly in advance. The fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.09 Club licenses.
(a) A nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization having adopted by-laws and duly
elected officers or directors and members and having been in actual existence and operation for
more than one year, may be granted a license without fee by the Chief Law Enforcement Officer, if
he/she determines, from affidavits and evidence submitted to him/her that:
(1) The card tables are for the exclusive use of the members of the society, club, fraternal, labor or
other organization;
(2) No charge is made for use of the card tables;
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
(3) Dues of the society, club or organization are payable not more often than once each month; and
(4) The playing cards or the furnishing of card tables for use by members is, in fact, only an
incidental reason for the existence of the club.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of an applicant seeking a license without fee to furnish to the Chief Law
Enforcement Officer such evidence as he/she may require in order to determine whether the
applicant qualifies for such a license.
(c) The action of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in denying a license without fee shall be subject to
an appeal to the City Council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the City clerk within ten (10)
days after the denial of such license without fee. Upon failure to file such a notice within the ten (10)
day period, the action of the Chief Law Enforcement Officer in denying such license without fee shall
be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.10 Exemptions.
Constituent lodges of fraternal organizations which have had lodges in California for twenty-five (25)
years or more, and whose general laws or ordinances prohibit gambling or card playing for money on the
premises occupied by such lodges, shall not be required to apply for or obtain a license:
(a) When the card tables are for the exclusive use of members of the fraternal organizations, or
non-paying guests; and
(b) No charge is made for use of the card tables.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.11 State law violations.
The City Council of the City hereby declares that it is not the intention of this article to permit the
licensing of any card room for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the State of California,
including, but not limited to those games enumerated in California Penal Code § 330, which section
includes banking and percentage games.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
5-2.12 Effective date.
(a) This ordinance shall go into effect and be in full force and effect at 12:01 a.m. on the 31st day after
its passage.
(b) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of this chapter. The City Council of the City hereby declares that it would have passed this
chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, words, or phrases be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 99-01 (part), 1999)
FOOTNOTE(S):
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Prior Ord. history: 88-05, 91-06, 91-09. (Back)
Chapter 3 INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Sections:
5-3.01 Definitions.
5-3.02 Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
5-3.03 Exceptions.
5-3.04 Validity.
5-3.05 Penalty.
5-3.01 Definitions.
(a) "Alcoholic beverage" is herein defined to include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every fluid or
solid containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is used for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.
(b) "Open container" is any can, bottle, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has
been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which has been partially removed.
5-3.02 Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
Except as provided in Section 5-3.03, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume, drink, exhibit,
or possess an open container of any alcoholic or intoxicating beverage on any public street, sidewalk,
way, alley, or in any public parking lot, public park or public recreation area in the City of Avenal.
5-3.03 Exceptions.
The provisions of Section 5-3.02 shall not apply in one or more of the following conditions:
(a) Section 5-3.02 shall not be deemed to make punishable an act or acts which are prohibited by
any statute of the State of California.
(b) A written permit to possess alcoholic intoxicating beverages in a specific public park, or
recreation area or other designated area shall be obtained from the City of Avenal at least
twenty-four (24) hours before using the park, recreation area or other designated area. Only the
permit holder or individual obtaining alcoholic beverages from the permit holder shall be exempt.
(Ord. 89-11 § 1, 1989)
5-3.04 Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or purpose of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
5-3.05 Penalty.
Any person violating Section 5-3.02 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and if convicted of
such infraction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation; (2) a
fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation within one year; and a fine not
to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation within one year.
Chapter 4 JUKE BOXES
Sections:
5-4.01 Connections with loudspeakers.
5-4.01 Connections with loudspeakers.
No person conducting a business, including restaurants and drive-in businesses, shall operate or
maintain, or cause, allow, or permit to be operated or maintained, in connection therewith any sound
equipment consisting of a juke box or other similar device when such equipment is connected to a
loudspeaker located outdoors, or when a loudspeaker is located indoors but is devised or placed in such
a manner as to emanate sound for the purpose of attracting the public or passersby outside the premises;
provided, however, this prohibition shall only apply in those cases where three (3) or more private
dwellings are located within a distance of two hundred (200) feet from the loudspeaker.
Chapter 5 JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Sections:
5-5.01 Definitions.
5-5.02 Permission to engage in business—Required—Applications—Granting—Revocation.
5-5.03 Records—Purchases and receipts.
5-5.04 Records—Sales.
5-5.05 Reports.
5-5.06 Holding period.
5-5.07 Hours of operation.
5-5.08 Purchases, trades, and receipts from minors.
5-5.09 Furnishing false information.
5-5.01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and
phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Itinerant junk peddler" shall mean a person who goes about from house to house or place to
place gathering up, receiving, collecting, buying, or selling secondhand valves, stopcocks, rig
irons, cables, boilers, engines, tools, pipe, machinery or parts thereof, appliances, any
previously used article or thing, old rope, iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, pieces of metal, wire,
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 11
rags, slush, empty bottles, paper, bagging, or any old article or thing not to be used in its former
state or condition.
(b) "Junk dealer" shall mean any person who, at a fixed place of business, carries on, conducts,
maintains, or engages in the business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in or acquiring old
rope, iron, brass, copper, tin, lead, pieces of lead, wire, rags, slush, empty bottles, paper,
bagging, or any old article or thing not to be used in its former state or condition.
(c) "Oil tool exchange" shall mean and include any person having a fixed place of business in the
City and engaged in carrying on the business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in
secondhand oil well tools and oil well equipment.
(d) "Secondhand dealer" shall mean any person who, at a fixed place of business, carries on,
conducts, maintains, or engages in the business of buying, selling, exchanging, or otherwise
dealing in or acquiring any article or thing which has been sold and used before; provided,
however, any person dealing in, buying, selling, or exchanging secondhand household furniture
or household goods only shall not come within the meaning of this definition nor be regulated by
the provisions of this chapter.
5-5.02 Permission to engage in
business—Required—Applications—Granting—Revocation.
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying, selling, gathering
up, or collecting secondhand valves, stopcocks, rig irons, cables, boilers, engines, tools, pipe,
machinery or parts thereof, appliances, any previously used article or thing, or old rope, iron, brass,
copper, tin, lead, pieces of metal, wire, rags, slush, empty bottles, paper, bagging, or any old article
other than those set forth in this section not to be used in its former state or condition, whether at a
fixed place of business or as an itinerant junk peddler, or to engage in the business of conducting an
oil tool exchange without first making an application to the Police Chief and receiving his permission
to engage in such business as provided in this chapter.
(b) Applications. Such applications shall be in writing and shall contain the name of the applicant, the
persons interested in the business with the applicant, the business address, if at a fixed place of
business, or the residence address, if the applicant is an itinerant junk peddler. Such applications
shall be filed with the Police Chief together with a fee for the same. The fee shall be established by
resolution by the City Council.
(c) Granting. The Police Chief shall, within ten (10) days after such application is filed, make an
investigation concerning the character of the applicant and grant the permission asked for unless it
shall appear from such investigation that the morality, honesty, or integrity of the person making such
application does not justify the granting of such permission.
(d) Revocation. If any person shall fail to obey any of the provisions of this chapter or shall conduct his
business in an unlawful manner, the Council may revoke the permission of such person to conduct
such business.
(Ord. 91-06 § 4, 1991)
5-5.03 Records—Purchases and receipts.
Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer, and person conducting an oil tool exchange shall keep at his
place of business, and every itinerant junk peddler shall keep and have in his possession, a substantial,
well-bound book (not loose leaf), the pages of which shall be numbered consecutively and in which there
shall be entered in the English language at the time of the purchase or receiving of any personal property
an exact description of such personal property purchased or received by him; the date of the purchase or
of receiving the personal property; the price paid therefor; the name and address of the place of business;
a description of the person from whom the personal property was purchased or received; the license
number of the motor vehicle used by or belonging to the parties making the sale; the signature of the
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 12
seller or person from whom the personal property was received; and all particular and prominent marks of
identification which may be found on such property. Such book shall at all times be open to the inspection
of the Police Chief, City Attorney, District Attorney, any police officer or constable, or any peace officer
and shall not in any manner be concealed from them.
5-5.04 Records—Sales.
There shall also be kept in the book required by the provisions of Section 5-5.03 of this chapter,
written or printed entirely in the English language in a clear and legible manner, a record showing the
names and descriptions of all persons to whom shall be sold, traded, or otherwise disposed of any article
or thing; the license number of the motor vehicle used by or belonging to such persons; the name and
description of each such article or thing so sold, traded, or disposed of; and the date of such sale, trade,
or disposition. Such record of the sale or other disposition of each article shall be made on the same page
in the book as contains the record of the purchase or receiving of such article, as set forth in Section 5-
5.03 of this chapter, and in such position on the page as will easily and readily show the disposition of
each and every article received by such dealer or peddler.
5-5.05 Reports.
Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer, itinerant junk peddler, and person conducting an oil tool
exchange shall at least once every week make a written report to the Police Chief at his office, either
personally or by mail. Such report shall show the exact description of all personal property purchased or
received by him prior to the time of making such statement and since the making of the last prior
statement; the date of purchase or of receiving the personal property; the price paid therefor; the name,
address, and place of business of the person from whom the personal property was purchased or
received; all particular and prominent marks of identification which may be found on such property; and
the place where such property will be exposed to public view as set forth in Section 5-5.06 of this chapter.
5-5.06 Holding period.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, all personal property received or collected by junk
dealers, secondhand dealers, itinerant junk peddlers, or persons conducting an oil tool exchange shall be
held for a period of at least seven (7) days after the report to the Police Chief is made as set forth in
Section 5-5.05 of this chapter and before such personal property shall be sold or otherwise disposed of.
In addition, such persons shall keep such personal property exposed to public view, during business
hours, from the time of purchasing or receiving such personal property until the expiration of seven (7)
days after such report to the Police Chief.
When the consent of the Police Chief is obtained, personal property purchased, received, or
collected as set forth in this chapter may be sold or disposed of at once.
5-5.07 Hours of operation.
No junk dealer, secondhand dealer, itinerant junk peddler, or person conducting an oil tool exchange
shall purchase, receive, gather up, or collect any personal property as set forth in Section 5-5.02 of this
chapter between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
5-5.08 Purchases, trades, and receipts from minors.
It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer, junk dealer, or person conducting an oil tool
exchange to purchase, trade for, or receive any article or thing from any minor under the age of eighteen
(18) years, except when written permission is given by the parent or guardian of such minor person or by
the Police Chief.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 13
5-5.09 Furnishing false information.
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish false information in connection with the sale or
exchange of any goods sold to any secondhand dealer, junk collector, or person conducting an oil tool
exchange.
Chapter 6 OIL AND GAS WELLS
Sections:
5-6.01 Findings and determinations.
5-6.02 Permits—Required—Applications—Issuance—Conditions.
5-6.03 Permits—Signatures.
5-6.04 Permits—License fees.
5-6.05 Permits—Bonds.
5-6.06 Restricted locations.
5-6.07 Restricted locations—Modifications—Standards of limitations.
5-6.01 Findings and determinations.
The Council hereby deems it necessary to the public peace, health, safety, and interest that the
drilling, boring, or otherwise sinking and/or operating or maintaining of gas or oil wells within the City be
regulated as set forth in this chapter.
5-6.02 Permits—Required—Applications—Issuance—Conditions.
(a) Required. No person, firm, or corporation, whether as a principal, agent, or otherwise, shall drill,
bore, or otherwise sink, operate, or maintain any oil or gas well without a valid, current, and
subsistent permit from the Council so to do first being had and obtained.
(b) Applications. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Council in writing. Such applications
shall state the name of the applicant, the definite location of the proposed well and appurtenant
structures, the purpose for which the well is to be drilled, bored, or otherwise sunk or dug, and a
statement that:
(1) If such permit is granted, such well will be drilled, bored, or otherwise sunk or dug at the location
shown in the application; and
(2) The permit for the well and appurtenant structures contemplated, if granted by the Council, may
contain a provision as a condition thereof that the well be located at the place so designated
and that otherwise the permit shall lapse and become and remain void.
Such applications shall be filed on application forms furnished by the City, and the Council
hereby reserves the right to refuse to consider any application not so filed.
(c) Applications—Accompanying data. Each such application shall be accompanied by two (2) duplicate
maps or plats correctly showing the exterior boundaries of the properties covered by the leases
under or pursuant to which the well applied for is to be drilled, together with the names and
addresses of the lessors and the descriptions of the properties owned by each respective lessor. The
application shall also describe the areas covered by any adjoining leases owned or drilled by the
applicant or in which the applicant is interested. The Council deems that the public peace, health,
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 14
safety, interest, and convenience of the City require that the Council be fully advised with reference
to such matters when considering such applications. The respective areas shall be designated either
by colored boundary lines or by shading so as to accurately indicate the extent thereof respectively.
(d) Issuance: Conditions. Any permit issued upon such application may contain a provision as a
condition thereof that any misrepresentation of fact contained in such application shall be grounds for
the revocation of the permit and that all the rights of the permittee therein named shall cease and
terminate.
(e) Duties of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall attend to all details in connection with the presentation
of such applications and the actual issuing of such permits.
5-6.03 Permits—Signatures.
When the Council has authorized the issuance of any permit required by the provisions of this
chapter, the permit shall be signed by the Public Works Director.
5-6.04 Permits—License fees.
No fee shall be charged for any permit required by the provisions of this chapter, but each permittee
shall pay, for each derrick, well, and/or operation referred to in, or authorized by, any such permit, an
annual license fee or operating charge of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fee shall be payable
annually in advance on the basis of a calendar year. Only the first annual charge shall be prorated. No
such license fee or operating charge, or any part thereof, shall be refunded. Such license fee or operating
charge shall continue to be paid for each well:
(a) While drilling, mining, pumping, or other operations in or about the well continue, including the
production therefrom of oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from a flowing well;
(b) While the derrick remains standing;
(c) Until the well referred to in such permit has been fully, completely, and satisfactorily abandoned
in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas of the Department of
Natural Resources of the State and the rules and regulations of the City relating to the
abandonment of such wells; and
(d) Until the premises relating to such well have been cleaned and restored as nearly as
reasonably possible to the same condition as that in which they existed at the time of the
granting of such permit.
The license fee or operating charge established for all wells shall become due and be payable on the
date of the granting of such permits by the Council. The annual fees shall become due and payable on
the first day of each and every calendar year. If any license fee or operating charge is not paid within
fifteen (15) days after the license fee or operating charge becomes due and payable, a penalty shall
accrue upon such license fee or operating charge in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). Unless such license
fee and such penalty thereon is paid within fifteen (15) days after the date upon which such license fee
and penalty become delinquent, the Council may declare any such permit forfeited, and all rights of the
permittee thereunder shall cease and terminate.
5-6.05 Permits—Bonds.
Every permittee shall, either before or at the time of securing the permit required by the provisions of
this chapter, deliver to the City Clerk a bond, approved by the City Attorney as to form and by the Mayor
as to sureties, for the principal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) payable to the City, indemnifying
the City against any loss which may be suffered by the City or to any public property therein located or to
any public street, avenue, alleyway, or place within the City by reason of the drilling, redrilling, existence,
operation, abandonment, or conduct of the well referred to in such permit, or the violation of the terms
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 15
and conditions of such permit, or the failure of the permittee to remove the derrick and/or its
appurtenances, or any act, whether of commission or omission, on the part of the permittee or any agent
or contractor employed in connection with the well referred to in the permit or any agent or contractor
acting under direction of the permittee.
A good and sufficient bond, as required by the provisions of this section, shall at all times be kept in
full force and effect by the permittee upon any well for which such permittee has been granted a permit
until the permittee has been released from such obligation by completion of the terms of the permit issued
and a consent to such release has been granted by the Council. Unless such permittee keeps such bond
in full force and effect, as set forth in this section, the Council may declare any such permit forfeited, and
all rights of the permittee thereunder shall cease and terminate.
5-6.06 Restricted locations.
No permit shall be granted to drill, bore, or otherwise sink, operate, or maintain any gas or oil well in
such manner that the center of the well hole is or shall be:
(a) Within two hundred (200) feet of any public street, sidewalk, or highway, except any alley, in
public use prior to the commencement of drilling such well, and intersecting or lying within any
block or other subdivision unit, unless otherwise permitted by the Council where the limits of the
property will not permit such spacing, but in no event less than one hundred (100) feet from
such public street, sidewalk, or highway;
(b) Within two hundred (200) feet of the outer boundary of the parcel of land on which such well is
located or, where several contiguous parcels of land uninterrupted by any street or sidewalk are
operated as a single unit, the outer boundary of all parcels of land included within such unit,
unless otherwise permitted by the Council where the limits of the property will not permit such
spacing, but in no event less than fifty (50) feet of such outer boundary;
(c) Within two hundred (200) feet of any steam boiler, building, or source of ignition, unless
otherwise approved by the Council upon a property the limits of which will not permit such
spacing, but in no event within less than fifty (50) feet of such boiler, building, or source of
ignition; and
(d) Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any school building or other place of public assemblage,
such as a church or public library. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply when any
such property has been officially closed to public use and proof of such fact has been
established to the satisfaction of the Council.
No permit shall be granted for the drilling, maintaining, or constructing of any oil or gas well in any
areas of the City except those areas which have been or shall be designated as unrestricted districts, as
distinguished from those areas which have been or may be designated as residential or business districts.
5-6.07 Restricted locations—Modifications—Standards of limitations.
With respect to the standards of limitations of the location of oil and gas wells as set forth in Section
5-6.06 of this chapter, the Council hereby retains the authority to modify and alter such standards of
limitations from time to time as the public welfare and interest may, in the judgment of the Council,
require; provided, however, the limitations of location fixed after the issuance of a permit and while the
permit is valid and subsisting shall be deemed not to affect such permit.
Chapter 7 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS [1]
Sections:
5-7.01 Definitions.
5-7.02 Use and operation.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 16
5-7.03 Violations nuisances.
5-7.04 Violations.
5-7.01 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter only unless otherwise specified or adopted:
(a) "Solicitor" means any person who requests or intends to request receipt of any money
whatsoever from a property owner or occupant, regardless of the reason therefor.
(b) "Peddler" means any person who offers to exchange any item, good, service or information for
money or anything having any monetary value whatsoever.
(c) "Money" includes but is not limited to cash, check, coin, currency, credit card payment, debit
card payment, gold, silver, promissory notes or promise to pay.
(d) "Person" means any natural person, individual, partnership, trust, corporation, association,
society, club or other entity and shall not include any public entity or its officers, employees,
agents or contractors while performing their official duties or duties under a public contract.
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 3, 1-14-2010)
5-7.02 Use and operation.
(a) For the purpose of increasing the safety and privacy of her or his dwelling, a property owner or
occupant may provide notice of her or his prohibition of all door-to-door solicitors or peddlers or both
from entering upon, knocking at or ringing the doorbell of the dwelling of such property owner or
occupant, located within zoning district R-E, R-1, R-2 or R-3, by posting one of the following signs in
a conspicuous area of such premises:
(1) NO SOLICITORS.
(2) NO PEDDLERS.
(3) NO SOLICITORS OR PEDDLERS.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor or peddler to enter upon, knock at or ring the doorbell of the
dwelling of a property owner or occupant who has posted one of the signs in subsection (a) in a font
no smaller than 18-point.
(c) Subsection (b) shall not constitute an infraction under the following circumstances:
(1) During a bona fide emergency when there exists an imminent threat of loss of life or property or
threat of great bodily harm within a reasonable proximity to the dwelling.
(2) On October 31 of each year.
(3) As to any person who has the consent or an invitation from the property owner or occupant of
the dwelling.
(d) Any sign posted pursuant to this section must comply with Title 8, Chapter 4 of the Avenal Municipal
Codes.
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 3, 1-14-2010)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 17
5-7.03 Violations nuisances.
Not having been requested or invited by the owner or occupant of a private residence so to do, the
practice of going in and upon private residences in the City by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant
merchants, or transient vendors of merchandise to solicit orders for the sale of goods, wares, or
merchandise or to dispose of, peddle, or hawk goods, wares, or merchandise is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and an infraction.
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 3, 1-14-2010)
5-7.04 Violations.
(a) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to
citation and the penalty provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
(b) The second and each subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter, within the preceding
twelve (12) calendar months, by the same person, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and may be
abated pursuant to the provisions of section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of
California. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty
provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 2009-05, § 3, 1-14-2010)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § 2, adopted Jan. 14, 2010, repealed the former title 5, chapter 7, §§
5-7.01, 5-7.02. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted a new chapter 7 as set out herein. (Back)
Chapter 8 CITY PARKS—HOURS
Sections:
5-8.01 Trespassing or loitering on public parks and recreation areas.
5-8.02 Exceptions.
5-8.03 Penalty.
5-8.01 Trespassing or loitering on public parks and recreation areas.
No person shall enter on or remain on any park, recreation facility, recreational area, building or
improvement owned, maintained, or operated by the City of Avenal between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
the time of sunrise of the following day and who is not required by his employment to be on said facility.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 18
5-8.02 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply during such time as said facility is open to the public by written order or
direction of the City of Avenal.
5-8.03 Penalty.
Any person violating Section 1 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and if convicted of such
infraction, shall be punishable by a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
Chapter 9 CURFEW FOR MINORS
Sections:
5-9.01 Curfew restrictions for minors.
5-9.02 Responsibility of parents and guardians.
5-9.03 Violations of provisions by minors.
5-9.04 Violations of provisions by parents and guardians.
5-9.05 Penalties for violations.
5-9.06 Aiding or abetting.
5-9.07 Loitering upon the public way.
5-9.08 Obstructing the public way.
5-9.01 Curfew restrictions for minors.
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to appear in or upon any public
street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place or
public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, whether in a
vehicle or not, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on any day and 5:00 a.m. of the immediately following
day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply when:
(a) The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person
having control or charge of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or
older;
(b) The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or parents or legal
guardian or other adult person having control or charge of the minor, or by his or her spouse
eighteen (18) years of age or older;
(c) The minor is returning directly to his or her home or other place of residence from a public
meeting, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or
school activity;
(d) The presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with or required with respect to
a business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged;
(e) The minor is going directly to his or her place of employment or returning directly to his or her
home or other place of residence after having left his or her place of employment.
(Ord. 2000-04 (part), 2000: Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995: Ord. 92-05 (part), 1992)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 19
5-9.02 Responsibility of parents and guardians.
No parent, guardian, or other person having legal control or charge of any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years shall permit such person to violate the provisions of Section 5-9.01 of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-05 (part), 1992; Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
5-9.03 Violations of provisions by minors.
Any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years found violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
placed under arrest and ordered to appear at a specified hour before the Municipal Court in the City, and,
in case of failure to appear, the Municipal Court shall issue a bench warrant for his or her arrest and shall
bind such minor over to the Juvenile Court if the Municipal Court shall find sufficient grounds that there
has been a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 92-05 (part), 1992; Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
5-9.04 Violations of provisions by parents and guardians.
Every parent, guardian, or other person having legal control or charge of any minor under the age of
eighteen (18) years and who permits such minor to violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
5-9.05 Penalties for violations.
(a) Any minor violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(b) Any minor violating the provisions of this chapter may be immediately apprehended and lawfully
detained pursuant to Section 5-9.03. The vehicle being driven by the minor (if applicable), may be
lawfully parked at the police officer's discretion and the vehicle shall be released to the minor's
parent, guardian, or other person having legal control or charge of the minor. Appropriate
proceedings may be instituted under and pursuant to the provisions of the juvenile court law as set
forth in the Welfare and Institutions Code of the State of California.
(c) Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal control or charge, permanent or temporary,
of any minor person, who suffers or permits or lets, either willfully or negligently, such minor violate
the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county
jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995; Ord. 2000-04 (part), 2000)
5-9.06 Aiding or abetting.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or knowingly aid, abet or assist any minor in violating Section
5-9.01.
(Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
5-9.07 Loitering upon the public way.
No person shall loiter or stand in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk, crosswalk, or other
public way open for pedestrian travel or otherwise occupy any portion thereof in such a manner as
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 20
unreasonably to annoy or molest any pedestrian thereon or as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with
the free passage of pedestrians.
(Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
5-9.08 Obstructing the public way.
No person shall sit, lie, or sleep in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to persons sitting on the curb portion of any sidewalk or street
while attending or viewing any parade permitted by this Code; nor shall the provisions of this section
apply to persons sitting upon benches or other seating facilities provided for such purpose by municipal
authority or permitted by this Code.
(Ord. 95-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
Chapter 10 PROHIBITION AGAINST THE PRESENCE OF MINORS IN
PREMISES UPON WHICH ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ARE SOLD
Sections:
5-10.01 Prohibition.
5-10.02 Penalties for violations.
5-10.03 Exceptions.
5-10.01 Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to be allowed in premises upon which alcoholic beverages are sold.
(Ord. 83-06 (part), 1983)
5-10.02 Penalties for violations.
(a) Any minor who enters a place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold shall be guilty of an
infraction.
(b) Any person who allows a minor to be in premises upon which alcoholic beverages are sold shall be
guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 83-06 (part), 1983)
5-10.03 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to off-sale premises.
(Ord. 83-06 (part), 1983)
Chapter 11 PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
Sections:
5-11.01 Definitions.
5-11.02 Permit required.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 21
5-11.03 Permit—Application—Content.
5-11.04 Permit—Application—Procedures.
5-11.05 Permit—Fees.
5-11.06 Permit—Revocation.
5-11.07 Minors.
5-11.08 Rules and regulations.
5-11.09 Permit—Required for each location.
5-11.10 Required report of management changes.
5-11.11 Sanitation.
5-11.12 Dance floor.
5-11.13 Exemptions from provisions.
5-11.14 Enforcement.
5-11.15 Penalties.
5-11.01 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Jitney dance" shall mean a dance where a separate charge or fee is imposed for single or
individual dances.
(b) "Public dance" shall mean any dance not held or conducted in a private residence where music
is provided by or where live music or a disk jockey, this does not include "juke boxes."
(c) "Public dance hall" shall mean any room, place or space, except in a private residence, where
dancing is held or carried on; provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
require any permit for the maintenance of a bona fide school of instruction in the pastime of
dancing.
(Ord. 85-06 § 1, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 1, 1991)
5-11.02 Permit required.
(a) Public dance. It is unlawful for any person or entity to give, hold, conduct, manage, or operate a
public dance within the City of Avenal, except at a place or premises for which a license or permit
has been issued and is in force and effect.
(b) Public dance hall. It is unlawful for any person or entity to open, conduct, or carry on, or to participate
in the opening, conducting, or carrying on of a public dance hall in the City of Avenal without having
a valid and existing license or permit to do so.
(Ord. 85-06 § 2, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 2, 1991)
5-11.03 Permit—Application—Content.
No permit shall be issued to any person or entity unless written verified application therefor is
presented to the City's Police Department showing the following facts:
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 22
(a) The name and address of the applicant. If any applicant should be a partnership, then names
and addresses of the partners thereof; and if any applicant should be an association, the names
and addresses of the officers thereof; and if the applicant should be a corporation, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors thereof;
(b) The particular place for which the permit is desired or at which any dance is to be held;
(c) The name of the owner of the place or premises in or at which the dance is to be held;
(d) Such persons who, from time to time, will be in charge and who will be responsible for the order
and due observance of the provisions of this chapter;
(e) The number and date of the dances to be held pursuant to the permit or the length of time for
which the permit is desired, which shall not in any event be for a longer period than one year;
(f) A statement that the applicant is the sole party, either directly or indirectly, interested in the
dance or dance hall or premises for which the permit is sought and that no other person or
entity is or will be in any manner interested therein, directly or indirectly, during the continuance
of the permit; and
(g) A covenant and promise by the applicant: (i) to comply with the provisions of this chapter and
the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter; (ii) to consent to the entry by police officers
upon the subject premises; and (iii) to cause the premises to be vacated in the event such rules
and regulations are violated.
(Ord. 85-06 § 3, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 3, 1991; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-11.04 Permit—Application—Procedures.
(a) Upon receipt of such application, the City's Police Department shall undertake an investigation to
determine and report the following:
(1) Whether the applicant and person to have direct management of the premises are of good
moral character;
(2) Whether the premises for which the permit is sought complies with the provisions of this
chapter;
(3) Whether the premises for which the permit is sought complies with any other law or health or
fire regulation applicable thereto;
(4) Whether the premises are properly ventilated;
(5) Whether, pursuant to applicable guidelines and regulations, including but not limited to the
Uniform Plumbing Code, the premises are supplied with separate and sufficient toilet
conveniences for each sex within the building in which the dance is located; such determination
may be based on the allotment of one-half (½) the occupant load to be males and one-half (½)
females, or based on the requirement that the total occupant load not exceed the sanitary
facilities located within the premises, or based on such other requirements which the City's
Police Department determines reasonable under the circumstances;
(6) Whether no entrance or exit exists except through the dance hall; and
(7) Whether the premises are safe and proper for the purpose for which they shall be used.
(b) If the City's Police Department determines that the application satisfies the above requirements,
such department shall provide this information to the City Manager. The City Manager, may, upon
payment of the fee specified, issue the permit. In the City Manager's discretion, the City Manager
shall have the power to deny any application if it appears that the applicant, or the person to have
direct management of the premises is not a suitable or proper person to carry on the business for
which the permit is sought, or if the premises proposed to be used in the conduct of the business
shall be deemed not to be a suitable or proper place therefor, or if the protest and objections of
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 23
private residents in the immediate vicinity of the premises, or if the health, welfare or public morals of
the community warrant such denial. The City Manager may issue a permit upon which such
conditions he or she determines would cure the situations which would otherwise result in denial of
the permit. The City Manager, in his/her discretion, may issue a permit while the applicant fails to
satisfy one or more requirements in this chapter, if the City Manager determines the health, safety
and welfare of the public would not be unreasonably impacted.
(c) In the event of a refusal by the City Manager to issue such permit, the applicant therefor may appeal,
in writing, to the City Council which shall hear the matter, including the application and the reason for
refusing it, at the next scheduled City Council meeting, regular or special. Such appeal must be
presented to the City Council prior to the expiration of fifteen (15) days from the date of the City
Manager's denial of the application. The Council may either grant the permit or refuse the same, if in
its discretion, it finds the application or the premises where the applicant proposes to hold the
dances do not comply with the provisions of this chapter. The decision of the City Council shall be
final.
(Ord. 85-06 § 4, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 4, 1991; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-11.05 Permit—Fees.
The license fee for such permit shall be established by a resolution of the City Council. At the
expiration of any permit by the lapse of time, the permit may be renewed at the discretion of the City
Manager with the concurrence of the City's Police Department, without any investigation, provided the
license fee is paid in advance. Future license fees may be increased or decreased or otherwise modified
by resolution of the City Council.
Ord. 85-06 § 5, 1985; Ord. 90-01 § 1, 1990; Ord. 91-08 § 5, 1991; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-11.06 Permit—Revocation.
For any violations of the provisions of this chapter or for any cause deemed sufficient, the City
Council, upon five (5) days notice to the holder of a permit issued under this chapter, may suspend or
revoke such permit. If at any time, the permit of any applicant shall be revoked, no new permit will be
granted to such applicant or to any person or entity who was an agent or employee of such applicant at
the time of such violation or at the time of the application for a new permit.
(Ord. 85-06 § 6, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 6, 1991)
5-11.07 Minors.
(a) It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager, or the person in charge of any place licensed under
the provisions of this chapter, or for any employee of such place at any time when alcoholic
beverages are actually on sale or are being offered free in the place, to harbor, admit, receive or
permit to be in, or remain in or about such place during the time when dancing is actually being
carried on or conducted or permitted, any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years unless
such person is accompanied by his or her parent, spouse or legal guardian; provided, however, that
the foregoing provisions shall not prohibit the entry of such persons into any dining room located in
or upon the premises; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed so as to
prevent minors from attending any public place or being in any public dance hall or place where
alcoholic beverages are not sold or given away; and provided further, that nothing in this chapter
shall be construed to prevent the holder of any license issued hereunder from closing his/her bar and
permitting minors to dance in such hall or place during such time as no alcoholic beverages are on
sale or offered without charge therein. In the event that any place or hall licensed hereunder is used
for a public dance at which minors are allowed to attend, all alcoholic beverages must be under lock
and key so that no person except the owner or his agent shall have access thereto.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 24
(b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, or any other provisions of this code,
no person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall attend any place or hall licensed under this
chapter to be used for a public dance unless the person is accompanied by his or her parent, spouse
or legal guardian.
(c) It is unlawful for any person under age twenty-one (21) years falsely to represent himself or herself
as being of the age of twenty-one (21) years or more for the purposes of obtaining admission to any
premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 85-06 § 7, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 7, 1991)
5-11.08 Rules and regulations.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to conduct, operate, or carry on a public dance or a public
dance hall in violation of the following rules and regulations:
(a) No immoral or obscene dancing shall be permitted.
(b) No person under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall be permitted to remain at any public
dance.
(c) No jitney dance shall be permitted.
(d) No owner or manager of a dance hall shall undertake to furnish dancing partners.
(e) Any member of the City's Police Department shall be admitted free of charge to any public
dance or public dance hall and shall have the power and duty to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(f) The City's Police Department may require at any public dance held within the City the presence
of uniformed security personnel. The number of uniformed security personnel shall be
determined by the Police Department. The cost of such security personnel shall be the
responsibility of the licensee.
(g) No dancing shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the same day.
(h) No person shall smoke on a public dance floor while dancing.
(Ord. 85-06 § 8, 1985; Ord. 88-01, 1988; Ord. 91-08 § 8, 1991; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-11.09 Permit—Required for each location.
No permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall authorize the conducting, operating or
carrying on of the permitted business except at the single location and upon the individual premises
described in such permit.
(Ord. 91-08 § 9, 1991)
5-11.10 Required report of management changes.
In the event that any licensee shall desire to change the individual designated in the permit as the
person to have direct management of the subject premises, the licensee shall forthwith notify the City
Manager, proposing the name of the person to be substituted in the management and control of the
premises. The person so proposed shall be investigated by the City's Police Department. If such a person
is of a satisfactory character and standing under the guidelines of this chapter, the City Manager may
consent to such changes. In the event that the person does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter,
the permit may be suspended by the City Manager, in his or her discretion, pending the proposal of some
other person of a satisfactory character in nature.
(Ord. 91-08 § 10, 1991; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 25
5-11.11 Sanitation.
No permit shall be granted under the provisions of this chapter unless the hall or place in which the
dance is to be held shall comply with this chapter. The holder of such permit shall keep such premises,
hallways leading thereto, and the immediate vicinity in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and
have all stairways, hallways, other passages and rooms connected with such premises at all times open,
adequately lighted and properly ventilated.
(Ord. 91-08 § 11, 1991)
5-11.12 Dance floor.
It is unlawful for any person to carry on, or conduct, or assist in carrying on, maintaining or
conducting any public dance hall or dance in connection with any business or place where alcoholic
beverages are sold or served, in any room, place or space which does not contain a floor space allocated
to dancing.
(Ord. 91-08 § 12, 1991)
5-11.13 Exemptions from provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to any dance, the income of which, over
and above a sufficient sum to pay the actual expenses of the dance, is devoted to public charity or to any
dance at which the only fee collected is a sufficient sum prorated among persons present to pay the
actual expenses of conducting the dance.
(Ord. 85-06 § 9, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 13, 1991)
5-11.14 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, proprietor, manager, or occupant of any hall, room,
building or place permitted under the provisions of this chapter to have present at all times, when dancing
is carried on in such hall, room, building or place, a qualified person or persons whose duty it shall be to
see that the provisions of this chapter are lawfully carried out.
(Ord. 91-08 § 14, 1991)
5-11.15 Penalties.
Any person or entity which violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.
(a) The first conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). A
second conviction of the same provision within a period of one year, shall be punishable by a
fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00). A third
or subsequent conviction of the same provision within a period of one year, shall be punishable
by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). For purposes of this section, a bill of forfeiture shall be deemed to be a
conviction of the offense charges. A person or entity shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each day or during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is committed,
continued or permitted by the person or entity.
(b) Any person or entity willfully failing to pay a lawfully imposed fine for a violation of any provision
of this chapter within the time authorized by the court and without lawful excuse having been
presented to the court on or before the date the fine is due is guilty of a misdemeanor
regardless of full payment of the fine after such time. Upon conviction thereof, punishment shall
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 26
be a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six (6) months or by both a fine and imprisonment.
(c) In the event of a violation of this chapter, in addition to the specified remedies, the City Attorney
may institute any appropriate prosecution, action or other proceedings to punish the perpetrator
of such violation; to prevent such unlawful conduct; to prevent the unlawful use of the subject
premises; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct of business or use in or about such premises.
(Ord. 85-06 § 10, 1985; Ord. 91-08 § 15, 1991)
Chapter 12 STREET, SIDEWALK AND ITINERANT VENDORS [1]
Sections:
5-12.01 Purpose and intent.
5-12.02 Application of general provisions.
5-12.03 Definitions.
5-12.04 License required for street vendors.
5-12.05 Exceptions to license requirement.
5-12.06 Application—Form.
5-12.07 Investigation of applicant.
5-12.08 Form of license.
5-12.09 License fees.
5-12.10 Exceptions to license fees.
5-12.11 Posting and keeping of license.
5-12.12 Display of name of licensee.
5-12.13 Expiration of license.
5-12.14 Renewal of license.
5-12.15 Hours of business.
5-12.16 Nuisances.
5-12.17 Violations.
5-12.18 Enforcement.
5-12.19 Seizure of goods.
5-12.20 Return of goods.
5-12.21 Disposition of goods.
5-12.22 Revocation of license.
5-12.23 Hearing on revocation of license.
5-12.24 Appeals.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 27
5-12.01 Purpose and intent.
The City Council finds and declares that unlicensed street, sidewalk and itinerant vendors ("street
vendors") pose a health and safety risk to the City and its citizens due to the possibility of improper
handling and packaging of food, the potential for contamination and spoliation, the sale of defective
products and goods which are potentially harmful to the buyer, the perpetration of fraudulent and deceitful
business practices and the risk of harm by imposters posing as street vendors. The purpose of this
chapter is to require licensing and supervision of street vendors and to set reasonable time, manner and
place regulations on street vending as required for the public health and safety.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.02 Application of general provisions.
Unless the provisions of this chapter otherwise provide, all of the provisions of Title 3, Chapter 1, of
the Avenal Municipal Code, relating to business licensing, are applicable to the licenses referred to in this
chapter.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.03 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
(a) The phrase "street vendor" shall mean and include peddlers, hawkers, sidewalk vendors and
other itinerant merchants and transient vendors and shall refer to a person who travels about
selling previously fabricated or prepared food, produce, goods or wares for contemporaneous
delivery.
(b) The phrase "previously fabricated or prepared" means manufactured, prepared, raised or
otherwise produced in final form at an established place of business.
(c) The phrase "established place of business" refers to a geographically fixed location.
(d) The word "vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, any conveyance moved by human, animal,
mechanical or motor power.
(e) The term "street vendor" does not apply to salespeople who solicit orders from or sell to dealers
for resale or to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes or to bidders for public works or
supplies.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.04 License required for street vendors.
Any person engaging in, or vehicle used in, the business of a street vendor shall have a valid license
to engage in or be used in such business.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.05 Exceptions to license requirement.
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following persons:
(a) Any street vendor who has an established and properly licensed place of business in the county
at which the food, produce, goods or wares sold are produced, prepared, displayed, or sold, or
the employees of such street vendors.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 28
(b) Any farmer who sells produce owned and grown or raised by himself or herself, or any of such
farmer's employees who sell such produce on the farmer's behalf.
(c) Any bona fide charitable, patriotic, educational, benevolent or fraternal organization that
engages in the street vending business if the proceeds from such business, above normal
expenses, are to be used exclusively in carrying out the purposes of the organization.
(d) Any commercial traveler selling food, produce, goods or wares on a wholesale basis.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.06 Application—Form.
The application for a license shall contain the information required by Section 3-1.10 of Title 3,
Chapter 1, of the Avenal Municipal Code, with the addition of the following information:
(a) Name and description of the applicant;
(b) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
(c) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold;
(d) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the
exact relationship;
(e) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor,
other than traffic violations, and the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty
assessed therefor;
(f) A description of all vehicles that will be used in the street vending business for the conveyance
of food, produce, goods or wares. The description shall include the license and registration
numbers of any motorized vehicle, advertising or business markings on the exterior of each
vehicle, and the capacity and nature of storage facilities within each vehicle;
(g) A description of the geographic area where the business will take place; and
(h) The address of the location where the food, produce goods or wares proposed to be sold, or
orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such food, produce,
goods or wares are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of
delivery.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.07 Investigation of applicant.
(a) Immediately upon receipt of such application and upon payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00), the City Clerk shall transmit such application to the appropriate City employee, For the
purpose of investigation applications filed under this chapter, the City employee duly designated shall
serve as the sole investigating officer.
(b) Within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, the City employee duly designated shall
investigate, determine and report to the City Clerk whether the applicant is of good character and
business responsibility and whether operation of the proposed business will comply with the
applicable food, health, safety and sanitation laws, ordinances and regulations. As part of this
investigation, the applicant shall bring all vehicles described in Section 5-12.06(f) of this chapter to a
location designated by the City employee for inspection.
(c) By filing an application, the applicant shall be deemed to have waived any and all objections to, and
to have thereby authorized, any and all investigations concerning their business history, past
employment, and property ownership.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 29
(d) The investigating City employee may require the applicant to be fingerprinted and/or photographed
by the Avenal Police Department.
(e) If the investigating City employee finds that the applicant is not of good character or business
responsibility, the City Clerk shall refuse to issue a license unless thereafter instructed to issue the
same by the City Council after appeal to the City Council by the applicant pursuant to Section 5-
12.24.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-12.08 Form of license.
A license shall contain the information required by Section 3-1.09 of Title 3, Chapter 1, of the Avenal
Municipal Code, and in addition shall contain the following information:
(a) A description, including license and registration numbers for motorized vehicles, of each vehicle
authorized by the license to be used in the street vending business;
(b) The name, description, and current address of the licensee;
(c) A statement that the license applies only to the person whose name appears on the face of the
license.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.09 License fees.
The annual license fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) plus an additional fee of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for each vehicle proposed to be used by licensee. The City Clerk shall issue a
separate license in the name of the licensee for each vehicle for which an additional license fee has been
paid pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.10 Exceptions to license fees.
A license under this chapter shall be issued without payment of a license fee to any honorably
discharged soldier, sailor, or marine of the United States. Also, for cause deemed sufficient, the City
Council may waive the payment of the license fee.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.11 Posting and keeping of license.
The provisions of Title 3, Chapter 1, Section 3-1.18 of the Avenal Municipal Code shall apply to a
license issued pursuant to this section. In addition, street vendors required to have a license are required
to exhibit such license at the request of any citizen or peace officer.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.12 Display of name of licensee.
It is unlawful for any licensee to use, or allow to be used, any vehicle in the street vending business,
unless the exterior of such vehicle shall bear, on both sides thereof, in contrasting letters not less than
three (3?) inches in height, identifying information including the name, address and telephone number of
the owner, operator or business.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 30
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.13 Expiration of license.
All permits issued under the terms of this chapter shall automatically expire one year from the date of
issuance.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.14 Renewal of license.
Any person who holds a valid annual license issued under this chapter may file an application for
renewal of said license by applying in writing to the City Clerk not sooner than sixty (60) days prior to, nor
later than thirty (30) days prior to, the expiration date of the existing permit. The application for renewal
shall be in the form prescribed by the City Clerk, and the applicant shall sign a statement, under penalty of
perjury, that the facts set forth in the original application have not changed, except such changes as are
set forth in the renewal application. Upon compliance with the provisions of this section and uponpayment
of the prescribed license fee, the City Clerk shall issue a renewal license in the same manner as is
provided for the original license. If a renewal application is not filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the
expiration date of the existing license, the licensee shall file a new application under the provisions of this
chapter and pay the required application fee.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.15 Hours of business.
It is unlawful for any street vendor to sell, peddle, hawk, or vend any food, produce, goods or wares
away from an established place of business between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of any day and 5:00 a.m. of
the following day.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.16 Nuisances.
Not having been requested or invited by the owner or occupant of a private residence so to do, the
practice of going in and upon private residences in the City by street vendors to solicit orders for the sale
of goods, wares, merchandise or services, or to dispose of, peddle or hawk goods, wares, merchandise
or services is declared to be a nuisance. Such nuisance shall be punishable as an infraction as provided
in Section 5-12.17 of this chapter and may be summarily abated by the City in a civil action. Each day
such condition continues shall be a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.17 Violations.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, which shall
be punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first conviction and by an additional
fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each and every subsequent conviction. A person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which a violation of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by the person.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 31
5-12.18 Enforcement.
The Police Officers of the City shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall abate any
nuisance as described in Section 5-12.16 of this chapter. Any peace officer may require any person who
is required to have a license and who is seen vending within the city limits of the City of Avenal to
produce his or her license and may enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be
violating the same.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-12.19 Seizure of goods.
Upon reasonable belief that a street vendor is in violation of Section 5-12.04 of this chapter, the
street vendor's goods may be seized and retained by the appropriate City employee or any peace officer.
The goods so seized shall be held at such place and in such manner as is reasonable under the
circumstances, and until disposed of as provided in Section 5-12.21 of this chapter. The City employee
duty designated or peace officer shall record the date and place of seizure and information pertaining to
the person from whom the goods were seized, and to the extent practical, the quantity, type, condition
and other information pertaining to the goods.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.20 Return of goods.
The City employee duly designated or any peace officer may return goods seized pursuant to
Section 5-12.19 upon receipt of proof of licensing pursuant to this chapter and upon receipt of proof of
ownership of the goods. The City employee or peace officer may require reasonable payment, not to
exceed the value of the goods, to cover costs incurred for storage of the goods.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.21 Disposition of goods.
(a) If for any reason the goods cannot be released to the owner within forty-eight (48) hours after coming
into custody of the designated City employee or peace officer, or for any shorter period of time that
the City employee deems necessary in the case of perishable goods, the City employee may sell the
goods by public auction or by private sale at fair market value. Prior to any such sale, the City
employee shall determine that the sale of the goods will not impair the prosecution of any person
who is or may be charged with a crime related to the goods.
(b) All of the proceeds derived from the sale of the goods shall be held by the designated City employee
for a period of not less than six (6) months, during which time the owner of the goods may submit
satisfactory proof of licensing and ownership and obtain possession of the proceeds. The City
employee may require the payment by the owner of an amount sufficient to cover the costs incurred
for the storage and sale of the goods, in an amount not to exceed the value of the goods. If, after
retention of the proceeds for a period of at least six (6) months, no demand is made or if proof of
licensing and ownership is not supplied, the designated City employee shall deposit the proceeds of
the sale of the goods in the general fund of the City of Avenal.
(c) If any seized goods remain unsold after being offered for sale pursuant to this section, the
designated City employee may dispose of the goods by donating them to a charitable organization or
by turning the goods over to the City's refuse collector.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 32
5-12.22 Revocation of license.
A license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the City Council after notice
and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of
a street vendor;
(c) Any violation of this chapter;
(d) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
(e) Conducting the business of street vending in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health, safety or
general welfare of the public.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.23 Hearing on revocation of license.
Notice of the hearing on revocation of a license shall be made in writing, setting forth specifically the
grounds of revocation and the time and place of such hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address or delivered to him personally at least thirty (30) days
prior to the date set for hearing.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
5-12.24 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the investigating City employee or the City Clerk in failing to
issue a license as provided in this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council of the City of
Avenal. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after notice of
the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address a written statement setting
forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The City Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in
Section 5-12.23 for notice of hearing on revocation of license. The decision and order of the City Council
on appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 96-05 § 1 (part), 1996)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Prior ordinance history: 88-06 and 91-06 § 5. (Back)
Chapter 13 BINGO GAMES
Sections:
5-13.01 Definitions.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 33
5-13.02 Bingo games for charitable purposes permitted.
5-13.03 Organizations eligible for licenses to conduct bingo games.
5-13.04 Bingo game licenses required.
5-13.05 Application procedure.
5-13.06 Filing of application—Fee.
5-13.07 Action upon receipt of application.
5-13.08 Reports on applications.
5-13.09 Application renewal.
5-13.10 Issuance of permit.
5-13.11 Notification of denial by department.
5-13.12 Appeal in event of application denial or restriction.
5-13.13 Changes in conditions during license period.
5-13.14 Information.
5-13.15 Revocation of licenses.
5-13.16 Suspension or revocation—Notice—Hearing.
5-13.17 Contents of licenses—Expiration.
5-13.18 Posting of licenses.
5-13.19 Nontransferability of license.
5-13.20 Posting of costs, prizes and rules.
5-13.21 Record of prizes.
5-13.22 Inspections.
5-13.23 Bingo games open to public.
5-13.24 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
5-13.25 Maximum amount of prizes.
5-13.26 Profits to be kept in separate funds or accounts.
5-13.27 Inspections of records.
5-13.28 Financial interests in licensees only.
5-13.29 Exclusive operation by licensees.
5-13.30 Bingo games to be conducted only on property owned.
5-13.31 Minors not to participate.
5-13.32 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
5-13.33 Hours of operation.
5-13.34 Participants to be present.
5-13.35 Use of credit prohibited.
5-13.36 No admission charge.
5-13.37 Receipt of profits prohibited—Penalties.
5-13.38 Injunctive relief.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 34
5-13.01 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, "bingo" is defined as follows: A game of chance in which prizes are
awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or
symbols selected at random.
(Ord. 89-07 § 4, 1989)
5-13.02 Bingo games for charitable purposes permitted.
Bingo games for charitable purposes are hereby authorized pursuant to Section 19(c), of Article IV of
the Constitution of the State and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-07 § 1, 1989)
5-13.03 Organizations eligible for licenses to conduct bingo games.
All organizations listed and authorized by Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State, as the same
now reads, or as said section may be hereafter amended, shall be eligible to apply to the City for a
license to conduct bingo games in the incorporated limits of the City under the provisions of said Section
326.5 and the provisions of this chapter provided the proceeds of such games will be used for charitable
purposes.
(Ord. 89-07 § 2, 1989)
5-13.04 Bingo game licenses required.
No organization shall engage in, carry on, maintain or conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried
on, maintained, or conducted, a bingo game in the incorporated area of the City without first having
secured a license in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the
regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operations of bingo games.
(Ord. 89-07 § 3, 1989)
5-13.05 Application procedure.
The application procedure provided for in this chapter shall be followed with regard to the licenses
sought pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 89-07 § 5, 1989)
5-13.06 Filing of application—Fee.
Every person, upon payment of the appropriate fee, desiring a license pursuant to this chapter shall
file an application with the City Manager, or his/her designee, upon a form to be provided by the City
Manager or his/her designee. The application shall be filed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the conduct of
any bingo game and shall specify:
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 35
(a) The name, address, and telephone number of the local applicant organization and a statement
that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State
of California.
(b) The name and signature of at least two (2) officers, including the presiding officer of the
corporation or community chest and the trustee of any trust.
(c) A list of the names of the members of the applicant organization who will operate and staff the
bingo game.
(d) A detailed schedule of the dates, hours, location, and occupancy capacity of such location of
each bingo game to be held.
(e) A detailed description of the record system to account for the receipts, prizes, expenses, and
profits of each bingo game.
(f) A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the
provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California and this chapter, as they
may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be
summarily suspended by the City upon the violation of any such provisions, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary.
(g) The applicant shall also submit, with its application a letter or other evidence from the Franchise
Tax Board of the State of California showing that the applicant is exempted from the payment of
the bank and corporation tax by applicable sections of the Revenue and Taxation Code as listed
in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State of California or is a mobile park association or
senior citizens organization.
(h) The application shall be verified as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of
California for the verification of pleadings.
(i) The address of which notices, when required, shall be sent or mailed and the names of any
individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to
accept service of process on behalf of the licensee.
(j) Whether the application is for a new license or the renewal of an existing license.
(k) Certification by the applicant that the organization or group applying currently operates in the
City.
(Ord. 89-07 § 6, 1989)
5-13.07 Action upon receipt of application.
The filing of an application for a license shall be deemed a consent by the applicant for the City to
undertake an investigation to determine if all the statements on the application are true. The filing shall
also be deemed a consent to investigate the officers of the applicant and the person who will be
responsible for the operation of the bingo game and those persons assisting therein as to any criminal
record which they may have. Upon the receipt of an application for a license, the City Manager, or his/her
designee, shall transmit copies of the application to the Avenal Police Department for a background
investigation, to the Kings County Fire Chief to determine if fire regulations have been or will be complied
with, and to the Planning Department to determine if the appropriate zoning laws and regulations and
Building Code provisions have been or will be complied with.
(Ord. 89-07 § 7, 1989; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-13.08 Reports on applications.
Every officer and department to which an application is referred shall advise the City Manager, or
his/her designee, in writing of all material facts necessary to determine whether the license should be
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 36
granted, granted subject to conditions or denied together with their approval or disapproval of the
application.
(Ord. 89-07 § 8, 1989)
5-13.09 Application renewal.
The application for renewal shall be accompanied by the fee, proofs and be processed in all respects
as an original application.
(Ord. 89-07 § 38, 1989)
5-13.10 Issuance of permit.
Where a permit is issued, the permit shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance,
subject to annual renewal and payment of fees. Fees shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 91-06 § 6, 1991: Ord. 89-07 § 9, 1989)
5-13.11 Notification of denial by department.
In the event any officer or department to which an application is referred recommends against the
issuance of the license, the City Manager or his/her designee shall refuse to issue the license. The City
Manager may refuse to issue a license if, after consideration of the application and any other papers,
records and files the City Manager deems relevant, he/she determines that the operation of a bingo game
would be injurious to the health, safety and morals of the people of the City, or that the permit application
or proposed mode of operation of the bingo game is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
In the event the application for license is denied, the applicant shall receive written notification of such
denial and a refund of one-half (½) of the applicant's fee.
(Ord. 89-07 § 10, 1989)
5-13.12 Appeal in event of application denial or restriction.
In the event the City Manager, or his/her designee, refuses to issue such license or attaches
conditions thereto, the applicant may, within ten (10) days after the notice is given of such refusal or such
condition, appeal the same to the City Council who shall hold a hearing thereon and whose decision shall
be final. The Council may attach additional conditions to the license found by it to be necessary to protect
the public health, safety and well-being.
(Ord. 89-07 § 11, 1989)
5-13.13 Changes in conditions during license period.
Any change during the license period in the organization of the licensee, its principal officers, the
staff operating or assisting in the operation of the bingo game, or the condition of the premises shall be
immediately reported to the City Manager who shall refer such changes to the appropriate official who
shall make an investigation thereof, and if he/she deems appropriate, recommend the suspension and
revocation of the license or the imposition of additional conditions thereto, which suspension, revocation,
or additional conditions shall be appealable to the City Council as in the instance of an originalapplication.
(Ord. 89-07 § 12, 1989)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 37
5-13.14 Information.
Every officer and department to which the application, whether original or not, is referred may require
such additional information and the filing of such additional forms as they deem necessary.
(Ord. 89-07 § 13, 1989)
5-13.15 Revocation of licenses.
Any license issued to any person or firm may be revoked by the City Manager, or his/her designee,
at any time whenever the holder thereof violated any of the provisions of this chapter or is conducting a
bingo game in such a manner that the bingo game is detrimental to the good order of the City.
(Ord. 89-07 § 14, 1989)
5-13.16 Suspension or revocation—Notice—Hearing.
The holder of a bingo permit shall be given prompt notice of the revocation or suspension of the
license and shall immediately desist from conducting or operating any bingo game. The notice shall fix a
time and place, not less than five (5) nor more than sixty (60) days after service thereof, at which time the
holder of the permit may appear before the City Council and be granted a hearing upon the merits of the
suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 89-07 § 15, 1989)
5-13.17 Contents of licenses—Expiration.
In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, any license issued for bingo games for
charitable purposes shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and nature of the organization to which the license is issued.
(b) The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.
(c) The occupancy capacity of room in which bingo games are to be conducted.
(d) The date of the expiration of such license. Each license shall expire one year after the date of
issuance, unless a sooner date of expiration is set forth in such license.
(e) Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions
of this section.
(Ord. 89-07 § 16, 1989)
5-13.18 Posting of licenses.
Such licenses shall be posted in a prominent place during the conduct of any bingo game. The
licensee shall produce and exhibit the license when applying for the renewal thereof and whenever
requested to do so by the law enforcement officer or other officer authorized to issue, inspect, or collect
licenses and permits.
(Ord. 89-07 § 17, 1989)
5-13.19 Nontransferability of license.
Any license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, either as to the licensee or the
location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the license in question invalid.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 38
(Ord. 89-07 § 37, 1989)
5-13.20 Posting of costs, prizes and rules.
Such licensees shall post the costs, prizes and rules of each game to be played. Such signs shall be
posted during the conduct of the bingo game in a conspicuous place on the inside of the premises to be
used for the conduct of the bingo game.
(Ord. 89-07 § 18, 1989)
5-13.21 Record of prizes.
A record shall be kept, on forms approved by the City Manager or his/her designee, by the licensee
showing the name and written signature, the address and the telephone number of the winner and the
consecutive serial number on the receipt for the prize.
(Ord. 89-07 § 19, 1989)
5-13.22 Inspections.
No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a member of the Avenal Police
Department, any peace officer, or the City Manager or his/her designee to make an inspection, without
notice, of any premises licensed for bingo games. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining
whether the licensee organization and/or manager is complying with the provisions of this chapter and
State or Federal law.
(Ord. 89-07 § 20, 1989; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-13.23 Bingo games open to public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the licensee organization.
(Ord. 89-07 § 21, 1989)
5-13.24 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
Notwithstanding that the bingo games shall be open to the public, attendance at any bingo game
shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by
the Fire Department in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The licensee shall not reserve
seats or space for any person.
(Ord. 89-07 § 22, 1989)
5-13.25 Maximum amount of prizes.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) total in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. Total
prizes being offered at various stages during an ongoing series of numbers or symbols being called
toward a larger game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. 89-07 § 23, 1989)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 39
5-13.26 Profits to be kept in separate funds or accounts.
(a) With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section
23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a
special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits
shall be used only for charitable purposes.
(b) With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter, all
proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by
organization not within subsection (a) of this section. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable
purposes, except as follows:
(1) Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
(2) A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds before the
deduction of prizes or one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be
used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative
expenses, security equipment and security personnel.
(3) Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.
(Ord. 89-07 § 24, 1989)
5-13.27 Inspections of records.
The licensee shall keep a full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and
disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision, and any other phase of bingo
games which are authorized by this chapter. The City, by and through its authorized officers, shall have
the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, without prior notice, and the licensee
shall fully cooperate with the City by making such records available.
(Ord. 89-07 § 25, 1989)
5-13.28 Financial interests in licensees only.
No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except the licensee organization, shall
hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.
(Ord. 89-07 § 26, 1989)
5-13.29 Exclusive operation by licensees.
Bingo games shall be operated and staffed only by the members and manager of the licensee
organization. Such members or manager shall not receive a profit, wage, salary, or any other direct or
indirect consideration from any bingo game, nor shall they receive payments from the organization for
such purpose. Only the licensee shall operate such games or participate in the promotion, supervision or
any other phase of such games. This provision does not preclude the employment of security personnel
who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game by the organization conducting
the game.
(Ord. 89-07 § 27, 1989)
5-13.30 Bingo games to be conducted only on property owned.
An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this chapter shall conduct a bingo
game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 40
which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the
organization is organized. Nothing in the provision shall be construed to require that the property owned
or leased by or whose use is donated to the organization be used or leased exclusively by or donated
exclusively to such organization. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof
to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the
event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for the performance of the
purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new
license may be obtained by the eligible organization upon its qualifying for a license as set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 89-07 § 28, 1989)
5-13.31 Minors not to participate.
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
(Ord. 89-07 § 29, 1989)
5-13.32 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.
(Ord. 89-07 § 30, 1989)
5-13.33 Hours of operation.
No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m., except where
authorized by the license.
(Ord. 89-07 § 31, 1989)
5-13.34 Participants to be present.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at
the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.
(Ord. 89-07 § 32, 1989)
5-13.35 Use of credit prohibited.
No licensee shall issue chips, checks, tokens, markers or money to a patron on credit or loan
(including, but not limited to, IOU's and checks to be held) or allow any person to play on credit.
(Ord. 89-07 § 33, 1989)
5-13.36 No admission charge.
No fee, donation, dues or other charge shall be imposed as a requirement for admission or entry
onto any licensed bingo premises.
(Ord. 89-07 § 34, 1989)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 41
5-13.37 Receipt of profits prohibited—Penalties.
It shall be a misdemeanor under subsection (b) of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the State and
this section for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized
pursuant to this chapter, and all persons are hereby prohibited from violating said sections. A violation of
subsection (b) of said Section 326.5 and this provision shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the General Fund of the City. A violation of
any other provision of this chapter or of Penal Code Section 326.5 is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 89-07 § 35, 1989)
5-13.38 Injunctive relief.
The City may bring an action to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this
chapter.
(Ord. 89-07 § 36, 1989)
Chapter 14 GRAFFITI CONTROL
Sections:
5-14.01 Purpose.
5-14.02 Graffiti defined.
5-14.03 Graffiti prohibition.
5-14.04 Sale and possession of pressurized paint cans.
5-14.05 Removal of graffiti.
5-14.06 Violation.
5-14.01 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program for removal of graffiti from walls and structures
on both public and private property and to provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further
spread of graffiti in the City of Avenal. The increase of graffiti on both public and private buildings,
structures and places is creating a condition of blight within the City which results in a deterioration of
property and business values for adjacent and surrounding properties all to the detriment of the City. The
City Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance which should be abated
so as to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the City and to prevent the further spread of
graffiti.
(Ord. 91-11 (part), 1992)
5-14.02 Graffiti defined.
For the purposes of this chapter "graffiti" shall mean the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of
ink, chalk, dye or similar substances on public or private buildings, structures and places.
(Ord. 91-11 (part), 1992)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 42
5-14.03 Graffiti prohibition.
It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk, or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned
permanent structures located on public or privately owned real property with the City.
(Ord. 91-11 (part), 1992)
5-14.04 Sale and possession of pressurized paint cans.
The following regulation shall apply to the sale and possession of pressurized paint cans in the City:
(a) No person shall sell any pressurized can containing any substance commonly known as paint or
dye to anyone under the age of eighteen (18) years and no person under the age of eighteen
(18) years shall purchase any pressurized can containing paint or dye.
(b) No person shall have in his or her possession any pressurized can containing any substance
commonly known as paint or dye while in any public park, playground, swimming pool or
recreational facility in the City. This section shall not apply to authorized employees of the City
or an individual or authorized employee of any individual, agency or company under contract
with the City.
(Ord. 91-11 (part), 1992)
5-14.05 Removal of graffiti.
Graffiti may be removed by application of any of the following methods:
(a) Any person applying graffiti within the City shall have the duty to remove the same within
twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City or the public or private owner of the property
involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this
chapter. Where the graffiti is applied by juveniles, the parent or parents shall be responsible for
such removal or for the payment therefor.
(b) Whenever the City Manager or his/her designated representative determines that graffiti is so
located on public or privately owned structures on public or privately owned real property with
this City so as to be capable of being viewed by person utilizing any public right-of-way in this
City, the Police Chief, or his/her designated representative, is authorized, upon City Council
approval, to provide for the removal of the graffiti solely at the City's expense, without
reimbursement from the property owner upon whose property the graffiti has been applied,
upon the following conditions:
(1) In removing the graffiti the painting or repair of a more extensive area shall not be
authorized.
(2) Where a structure is owned by a public entity other than this City, the removal of the graffiti
may be authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction
over the structure.
(3) Where a structure is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti by City forces or by a
private contractor under the direction of the City may be authorized only after securing the
consent of the owner.
(c) Graffiti located on privately owned structures on privately owned real property within the City so
as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in this City may be
removed by the City at the owner's expense as a public nuisance pursuant to the following
provisions:
(1) Whenever the City Manager or his/her designated representative is apprised of the
presence of graffiti located on privately owned real property within the City, the City
Manager or his/her designated representative may cause a written notice to be served
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 43
upon the owner of the affected premises as such owner's name and address appears on
the last equalized assessment roll by depositing a copy of the notice in the U.S. Postal
Service enclosed in a sealed envelope and with the postage thereon fully prepaid. The mail
shall be registered or certified and addressed to the owner at the last known address of the
owner, and if there is no known address, then in care of the property address. The service
is complete at the time of such deposit. "Owner," as used herein, means any person in
possession and also any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest
in the premises as described by a preliminary title search from any accredited title
company. The failure of any person to receive such notice property shall not affect the
validity of any proceeding hereunder. The property owner shall have seven (7) days after
the date of the notice to remove the graffiti or be subject to City removal of the graffiti and
assessment of the costs of such removal as a lien on the subject property.
The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
Date:
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to
remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as ,
Avenal, California, which is visible to public view, within seven (7) days after the
date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so, then City employees or private City
contractors will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by
removal or painting over of the graffiti. The cost of abatement by the City
employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and
such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.
All person having any objection to, or interest in said matters are hereby
notified to submit any objections or comments to the City Manager for the City of
Avenal or his/her designated representative within seven (7) days from the date
of this notice. At the conclusion of this seven (7) day period the City may proceed
with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense
without further notice.
The service of this notice shall be made on the day the notice is dated and by
affidavit filed with the City Clerk.
(2) A like notice shall also be posted at a conspicuous place on the premises upon which the
graffiti is inscribed. The posting of this notice shall be made on the day the notice is dated
and affidavit filed with the City Clerk.
(3) If the owner fails to remove or cause the graffiti to be removed by the designated date, or
such continued date thereafter as the City Manager or his/her designated representative
approves, the City Manager or his/her designated representative shall so notify the City
Manager and the City Manager shall cause the graffiti to be abated by City forces or
private contract, and the City or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon
the premises for such purpose.
(4) Should the City be required to abate the graffiti as a public nuisance, it shall follow the
procedures set forth in Title 6, Chapter 5 of the Municipal Code of the City of Avenal
regarding costs of abatement and assessment of the costs of such regulations of Title 6,
Chapter 5 of the Municipal Code shall apply with full force and effect to this chapter.
However, the notice of lien for purposes of this chapter shall be in form substantially as
follows:
NOTICE OF LIEN
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 44
(Claim of City of Avenal)
Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 14,
Section 5-14.05 of the Avenal Municipal Code the City Manager of the City of
Avenal did on or about the ____________ day of ____________,
19____________ cause the painting over or removal of graffiti at the premises
hereinafter described in order to abate a public nuisance on said real property;
and the City Council of the City of Avenal did on the ;#rule; day of____________,
19____________ assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property
hereinafter described; and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof; and
that said City of Avenal does hereby claim a lien on such costs of abatement in
the amount of said assessment, to wit: the sum of ____________ dollars; and
the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in
full and discharged of record.
The real property herein before mentioned, and upon which a lien isclaimed,
is that certain parcel of land lying and being in the City of Avenal, County of
Kings, State of California and more particularly described as follows:
[insert property description]
DATED this ;#rule; day of ____________, 19____________.
____________
City Manager of
the City of Avenal
California
(Ord. 91-11 (part), 1992)
5-14.06 Violation.
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 91-11 (part), 1992)
Chapter 15 LOITERING
Sections:
5-15.01 Loitering defined.
5-15.02 Loitering on public ways.
5-15.03 Loitering on commercial premises.
5-15.04 Violations.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 45
5-15.05 Penalties.
5-15.01 Loitering defined.
For purposes of this chapter, "loitering" shall mean and include standing around or moving slowly
about, standing idly around, lagging behind, lingering, delaying or spending time idly.
(Ord. 92-04 (part), 1992)
5-15.02 Loitering on public ways.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter or stand in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or
crosswalk or other public way open for pedestrian travel or to otherwise occupy any portion thereof in
such a manner as to unreasonably annoy or molest any pedestrian thereon or as to obstruct or
unreasonably interfere with the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
(Ord. 92-04 (part), 1992)
5-15.03 Loitering on commercial premises.
(a) It is unlawful for any person to loiter in or upon, or to enter into and remain upon, any commercial
premises, such that a reasonable person would conclude that the person who is loitering at or upon,
or who has entered into and remains upon, such premises:
(1) Does not have a purpose legitimately connected with the business or activity of the legal
occupant of the premises; or
(2) Does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right; or
(3) Is causing public inconvenience or annoyance; or
(4) Is loitering at or has entered into and remains upon the premises under circumstances which
raise a reasonable suspicion of wrongful or criminal activity.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to loiter at or near the entrance to or the exit from any commercial
premises.
(Ord. 92-04 (part), 1992)
5-15.04 Violations.
It is unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with the lawful order of the Police, owner, occupant
or agent thereof to leave a public way or commercial premises, or, after complying with such lawful order,
to return within forty-eight (48) hours and to resume loitering as defined above.
(Ord. 92-04 (part), 1992)
5-15.05 Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine
not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. 92-04 (part), 1992)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 46
Chapter 16 CITATION SYSTEM FOR JUVENILES, JUVENILE LOITERING
AND CURFEW VIOLATIONS AND COST RECOVERY
Sections:
5-16.01 Intent.
5-16.02 Infractions, penalties, continuing violations.
5-16.03 Daytime loitering by minors.
5-16.04 Minor curfew, loitering or wilful misconduct—Cost recovery.
5-16.05 Aiding or abetting.
5-16.06 Penalty for violation.
5-16.07 Severability.
5-16.01 Intent.
To encourage juveniles to take advantage of education opportunities, to reduce the incident of
daytime burglary, reduce losses to daytime juvenile crime, and in reducing juvenile truancy to develop a
program to keeping juveniles out of the juvenile justice system.
(Ord. 95-13 § 1, 1995)
5-16.02 Infractions, penalties, continuing violations.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when a person under the age of eighteen (18)
years is charged with a violation of this chapter and a peace officer issues a notice to that minor to appear
in court, the charge shall be deemed an alternate misdemeanor/infraction unless the minor requests that
a petition be filed under Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. The amount of the fine
imposed shall be set by the Court.
(Ord. 95-13 § 2, 1995)
5-16.03 Daytime loitering by minors.
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is subject to compulsory
education or to compulsory continuation education, to appear in or upon the public streets, highways,
roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of
amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place, whether in a vehicle or not,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., on days when school is in session.
This section does not apply:
(a) When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or other adult person having the
lawful care or custody of the minor; or
(b) When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other
adult person having lawful care or custody of the minor; or
(c) When the minor is going or coming directly from or to their place of gainful employment or to or
from a medical appointment; or
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 47
(d) To students who have permission to leave a school campus for lunch or school related activity
and have in their possession a valid, school issued, off-campus permit.
(Ord. 95-13 § 3, 1995; Ord. 2000-5, 2000)
5-16.04 Minor curfew, loitering or wilful misconduct—Cost recovery.
(a) Determination by court. When, based on a finding of civil liability or criminal conviction for violations
of curfew, daytime loitering (truancy) or wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code
Section 602, a minor, under eighteen (18) years of age, is detained for a period of time in excess of
one hour, and such detention required the supervision of the juvenile offender by Avenal Police
Department employee(s), the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) having custody or control of the minor
shall be jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing such personnel over and above the
services normally provided by said department.
(b) Determination by Avenal Police Department or City Manager. As determined by the Avenal Police
Department or City Manager, or their designee, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor
committing any public offense amounting to an act of wilful misconduct in violation of Welfare and
Institutions Code Section 602, where police personnel provide services relating to the detention,
processing, or supervision of minors that are over and above the normal services usually provided by
the Avenal Police Department, may be assessed and billed for the cost of providing such personnel
for such services beyond those normally provided by such department.
(c) Appeal. Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this chapter may, within fifteen
(15) days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of said charges. Any
billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal the billing. Any
appeal regarding such billing shall be heard by the City Manager, or his or her designee, as the
hearing officer. Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of
the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the
police services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is
denied in part or in full, the amounts due to the City shall be paid within thirty (30) days after notice of
the decision of the hearing officer.
(Ord. 95-13 § 4, 1995; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-16.05 Aiding or abetting.
It is unlawful for any person to willfully or knowingly aid, abet or assist any minor in violating Section
5-16.03.
(Ord. 95-13 § 5, 1995; Ord. 2004-03 (part), 2004)
5-16.06 Penalty for violation.
Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal control or charge, permanent or temporary,
of any minor person, who suffers or permits or lets, either willfully or negligently, such minor violate the
provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not
exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(Ord 2004-03 (part), 2004)
5-16.07 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 48
(Ord. 2004-03 (part), 2004)
Chapter 17 DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIAL
Sections:
5-17.01 Legislative finding and authorization.
5-17.02 Definitions.
5-17.03 Display of adult material prohibited.
5-17.04 Violation—Penalty.
5-17.05 Public nuisance.
5-17.01 Legislative finding and authorization.
The City Council does find that there exists and has existed an increasing trend towards display of
adult materials at grocery stores, convenient stores, drug stores, video stores and other retail outlets
within the City. This Council recognizes that businesses which sell sexually orientated materials possess
serious objectional operational characteristics which when concentrated can have a deleterious affect
upon adjacent areas. It is recognized that many persons are offended by the public display of certain
sexual material. Further, such adult material is often displayed within the open view of children of tender
years and is easily accessible to them. The City Council finds that this material is adverse to the public
peace, morals and good order of young children. The Council further finds that it is in the best interest of
the public safety, welfare and convenience of the City to prohibit the display of adult material and to adopt
the following regulations so that adverse impacts upon young children are kept to a minimum.
(Ord. 96-01 (part), 1996)
5-17.02 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meaning:
"Adult material" means all material that is defined as "harmful matter" in Section 313(a) of the
California Penal Code. Adult material shall include, but not be limited to any magazine, newspaper,
publication, poster, display, video recording or advertisement (including advertising appearing on the
cover or wrapper of merchandise offered for sale or rent to the public) which contains on the outside any
photograph, picture, drawing or depiction of any of the following:
(1) The complete exposure of the entire nipple area or the entire areola area of any female breast;
and
(2) The complete exposure of the entire genitalia or buttocks of either males or females.
(3) This definition of "adult material" does not include any art or photograph publication which
devotes at least twenty-five (25) percent of the lineage of each edition to articles and
advertisements dealing with the subjects of art or photography. Nor does this definition apply to
any news periodical which reports or describes current events and which, from time to time,
publish photographs or depictions of nude or seminude persons when describing cultures in
which nudity or seminudity is indigenous to the population. The City Council finds that medical
publications or bona fide educational publications do not usually publish on their covers any
photograph or depiction which is included in the definition of adult material and that, therefore, it
is not necessary to define this type of publication.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 49
"Display" means exhibiting or exposing adult materials so that it is within open view of patrons,
invitees and visitors to the premises where such material is located, or are visible from any public street,
thoroughfare, sidewalk or pedestrian way or other residential or business premises except in a public
place where minors are excluded and except where devices commonly known as blinder racks are placed
in front of such material so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) of the material is not exposed to view. "Display"
includes the exhibiting of adult material from newsracks or newspaper vending stands.
"Person" means any individual partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
(Ord. 96-01 (part), 1996)
5-17.03 Display of adult material prohibited.
No person shall display adult material or permit or allow the display of adult material.
(Ord. 96-01 (part), 1996)
5-17.04 Violation—Penalty.
Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as prescribed in Section
17 of California Penal Code which states that every misdemeanor, except in cases when a different
punishment is prescribed by any law of this State, is punishable by imprisonment in the County Jail not
exceeding six (6) months or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or both. A violation
may also be punishable as an infraction subject to the procedures set forth in Penal Code Section 19.6
and 19.7. Any violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense for each and every day during which
such violation is continued, as provided in Section 1-2.01 of this Code.
(Ord. 96-01 (part), 1996)
5-17.05 Public nuisance.
In addition to the criminal penalty provisions provided by this Code, violation of any section or
sections of this chapter is declared to be public nuisance, and may be abated as such by the City.
(Ord. 96-01 (part), 1996)
Chapter 18 PARTIES IN RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES
Sections:
5-18.01 Definitions.
5-18.02 Certain noise prohibited.
5-18.03 Notification of liability.
5-18.04 Special security assignment.
5-18.05 Costs.
5-18.06 Collection of costs.
5-18.07 Appeals.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 50
5-18.01 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them respectively:
"Incident" means any response by the City of Avenal's Police Department to a loud or unruly
assemblage which occurs more than twenty-four (24) hours apart from each other. Multiple responses
which occur within twenty-four (24) hours of the first response shall be considered as one incident.
"Nonresidential zone" shall include all zones not included within the "residential zone" designation as
defined in this section.
"Party" or "assemblage" shall mean a group of persons meeting together for social, recreational or
amusement purposes.
"Residential zone" means residential zones as defined in this Code.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-18.02 Certain noise prohibited.
No person shall make, cause to suffer, or permit to be made upon any premises owned, occupied or
controlled by him any unnecessary noises or sounds which are physically annoying to persons of ordinary
sensitiveness or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time or place, as
to occasion physical discomfort to the inhabitants of any residential and/or nonresidential zone.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997)
5-18.03 Notification of liability.
When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held, and the City of Avenal's Police Department is
required to respond to the scene, whether or not in response to citizen complaints, and the senior Peace
Officer at the scene determined that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare,
then the senior Peace Officer shall notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the
property where the assemblage exists, and/or the person responsible for said assemblage, that such
person or persons, or in the case of a minor, the parents and/or guardians of such minor, shall be held
personally liable for the cost of providing additional law enforcement personnel on special security
assignment over and above the normal services provided by the Police Department in response to such
assemblage. Notification of liability shall be provided as follows:
(a) Such person or persons shall be given a warning in the form of notification by the senior Peace
Officer that the costs of any response by the Police Department totaling two (2) or more
responses within twenty-four (24) hours at the same location, or totaling four (4) or more
incidents within twelve (12) months to the same location, will be charged to such person.
(b) Such notice may include a written notice, receipt of which is signed by the owner, responsible
person or person in charge.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
5-18.04 Special security assignment.
The Police personnel necessarily utilized in responding to two (2) or more responses in twenty-four
(24) hours, or four (4) or more incidents within any twelve (12) month period at the same location to
control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special
security assignment over and above the normal services provided and the owner of the property and/or
the person in charge of the property where such assemblage occurs, and/or the person responsible for
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 51
such assemblage, shall be personally responsible for the costs of such special security assignment in an
amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the City of Avenal, or an agent thereof.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997)
5-18.05 Costs.
The cost of any such special security assignment as described within this chapter, shall include
damage to City/County property and/or injuries to city/county personnel. A fee charged will not be in
excess of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for a single response and/or incident.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997)
5-18.06 Collection of costs.
The City of Avenal reserves its legal option to elect any other legal remedies to collect any costs
and/or damages assessed under this chapter.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997)
5-18.07 Appeals.
Persons who are held personally responsible for costs and/or damages under this chapter, may
appeal such determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council. The appeal must be
filed within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the bill for costs and/or damages of a special security
assignment under this chapter. The City Council shall hear and determined the appeal not less than ten
(10) days, nor more than thirty (30) days following the filing of the appeal.
(a) Persons filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council under this chapter, shall be
notified by the City Clerk, by mail at least five (5) days prior to the hearing, of the date and time
of the hearing of their appeal. The City Council reserves the right to continue the hearing date
where necessary.
(b) The City Council, by resolution, may establish rules of procedure for the conduct of hearing
appeals.
(c) A copy of the order of the City Council shall be mailed to the appellant, and to any other person
requesting the same, by the City Clerk within five (5) working days after the hearing. The
decision of the City Council shall be final and binding upon all parties to the appeal.
(Ord. 97-06 (part), 1997)
Chapter 19 REWARDS FOR INFORMATION LEADING TO ARREST AND
CONVICTION
Sections:
5-19.01 Purpose.
5-19.02 Offer of reward by resolution.
5-19.03 Filing claim.
5-19.04 Time of payment.
5-19.05 Anonymity of informant.
5-19.06 Decision by City Manager.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 52
5-19.01 Purpose.
The City Council finds that there have been and are a variety of crimes that are committed in the City
of Avenal that are difficult to investigate and obtain sufficient evidence to apprehend and convict the
responsible person without the cooperation of knowledgeable witnesses; that it would be in the best
public interest for the protection and safety of persons and property within the City that there be a
procedure for giving rewards to persons who furnish information that leads to the arrest and conviction of
persons charged with crimes.
(Ord. 97-04 (part), 1997)
5-19.02 Offer of reward by resolution.
Specific authorization for offering a reward shall be by resolution of the City Council. Such resolution
will incorporate by reference the provisions of this chapter, set forth the amount of reward, the crime to
which it applies, and the terms and conditions in addition to those contained herein that will apply to a
specific reward.
(Ord. 97-04 (part), 1997)
5-19.03 Filing claim.
Any person claiming a reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of a person
charged with a crime, must, within ten (10) days of furnishing such information complete and file with the
Police Department a "claim for reward." Such claim form shall be provided by the Police Department and
shall be in the following form:
CLAIM FOR REWARD
I, ____________ (name), residing at ____________ (address), hereby claim reward in the
amount of ____________ for information that I have voluntarily furnished to the Kings County Sheriff
Department. This claim is made in accordance with Chapter 15, Title V of the Avenal Municipal Code
and Resolution ____________ of the Avenal City Council, a copy of which I have received.
I will cooperate with the Kings County Sheriff Department and the Kings County District Attorney
to the extent of furnishing information and testifying at any hearing or trial.
I recognize that the reward is limited to the amount set forth in the Resolution and that other
persons may claim this reward. In the event there is any dispute as to my entitlement to receive the
reward or the amount, I agree to having his claim determined by the City Manager as set forth in
Avenal Municipal Code Section 5-19.06.
I understand that payment of the reward is conditional upon the information/testimony that I
furnished being of a type and nature that would, and did, lead to arrest and/or conviction of the
defendant.
There has been no other offer or promise to me except as contained in the described
Resolution.
Dated: date rule; Signed: ____________
(Ord. 97-04 (part), 1997)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 53
5-19.04 Time of payment.
Rewards as provided herein shall not be paid until a criminal case is closed by sentencing of the
defendant. Rewards as provided herein shall not be paid upon judgment of acquittal of the defendant,
dismissal of charges against the defendant, or upon the expiration of five (5) years from the date the
information was furnished.
(Ord. 97-04 (part), 1997)
5-19.05 Anonymity of informant.
Upon request of the Sheriff of Kings County, and a finding by the City Council that it is in the best
public interest, the name of the claimant for a reward may be deemed confidential information and kept
anonymous.
(Ord. 97-04 (part), 1997)
5-19.06 Decision by City Manager.
The determination as to whether an individual(s) is qualified to receive a reward and the amount(s)
and the persons who shall receive such a reward or proportion thereof, shall be subject to the sole
discretion and approval of the City Manager after report and recommendation of the Sheriff of Kings
County. The decision of the City Manager shall be final and without appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 97-04 (part), 1997)
Chapter 20 TOBACCO SELF SERVICE DISPLAYS
Sections:
5-20.01 Purpose.
5-20.02 Definitions.
5-20.03 Sale of tobacco product merchandise.
5-20.04 Penalty for violation.
5-20.01 Purpose.
The City of Avenal has determined that in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of those
citizens within the City and metropolitan area, under the age of eighteen (18) years, it is necessary to
regulate the sale of tobacco products through self-service displays.
(Ord. 98-03 (part), 1998)
5-20.02 Definitions.
For the purposes of this section, the following definition(s) will apply:
"At least fifteen (15') feet away from the entrance" means within the premises of the licensed
establishment and not outside those premises.
"Self service display" is intended to include any array and/or presentation of tobacco product
merchandise by which a buyer may acquire possession of such tobacco product merchandise
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 54
without the assistance of the seller. For purposes of this section, a vending machine which
dispenses cigarettes, cigars and/or chewing tobacco is intended to be included within this definition.
(Ord. 98-03 (part), 1998)
5-20.03 Sale of tobacco product merchandise.
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it is unlawful for any person, business or tobacco
retailer to sell, permit to be sold, display, or offer for sale any cigarette or tobacco product distributed
from any self service display within the City of Avenal.
(b) Cigarette and tobacco product self service displays will be located at least fifteen (15') feet away
from the entrance of any premises issued an on-sale public premises license as defined in California
Business and Professions Code 23039 by the Department of Alcohol Beverage Control to sell
alcoholic beverages.
(Ord. 98-03 (part), 1998)
5-20.04 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person, business or tobacco retailer violating any
provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of this chapter's requirements, shall be punishable
by (1) a verbal warning for the first offense; (2) a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the
second offense within one year; and (3) a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for the
third offense within one year. Thereafter, any person business or tobacco retailer violating any provisionof
this chapter, or failing to comply with any of this chapter's requirements, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding six (6) months, by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by both
fine and imprisonment. Each such person, business or tobacco retailer shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, business or tobacco
retailer and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 98-03 (part), 1998)
Chapter 21 HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Sections:
5-21.01 Short title.
5-21.02 Purpose.
5-21.03 Definitions.
5-21.04 Historic Resources Commission.
5-21.05 Appointment and compensation of commission members.
5-21.06 Powers and duties of commission members.
5-21.07 Historic Resources Register.
5-21.08 Criteria for Historic Resources Register.
5-21.09 City Council deletions from the Register.
5-21.10 Provisions of the Code.
5-21.11 Maintenance of resources.
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 55
5-21.12 Appeal procedure.
5-21.13 Enforcement.
5-21.14 Effective date.
5-21.01 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "historic preservation ordinance."
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.02 Purpose.
The purpose of the regulations and standards in this chapter is to promote the public welfare within
the City of Avenal by providing for identification, protection, enhancement, and preservation of historic
resources, such as buildings, structures, and other sites in the City, which reflect the City's social heritage
and history, and continue to safeguard and protect such historic resources to benefit the community.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.03 Definitions.
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:]
"Historic preservation," as applied in this chapter, means the identification, protection, enhancement,
preservation, and use of historical resources, such as buildings, structures, sites, and districts within the
City of Avenal, through various regulations and standards, whether such resources are publicly or
privately owned.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.04 Historic Resources Commission.
A Historic Resources Commission shall be formed to make recommendations to the City Council as
to historic resources for designation and registration as historic resources in the City of Avenal. The staff
shall perform a survey of historic resources within the City of Avenal and forward a list of such historical
resources information to the Commission. The Commission shall further hold at least one public hearing
before making any recommendations to the City Council regarding designation or registration of any
historical resource from this list or other resources that may be reviewed by the Commission. The
Commission's recommendations regarding such resources shall be forwarded to the City Council, which
shall hold at least one public hearing before taking action on any recommendation. The Commission shall
receive input from City officials prior to making any recommendations to the Council. City officials shall
follow applicable laws. The Commission shall keep minutes of meetings, and shall appoint a Chairperson
and pro tempore to preside at meetings and otherwise.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 56
5-21.05 Appointment and compensation of commission members.
The Historic Resources Commission shall consist of five members. All five members shall be
appointed for a term of three years. Each member shall serve without compensation and shall be
appointed by a majority of the City Council, and have interest in the area of historic preservation or a
related field. Vacancies for an unexpired term shall be filled by appointment through a majority of the City
Council. Removal of a member for not attending multiple meetings or other reason pertaining to the best
interest of the community shall require a majority vote of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.06 Powers and duties of commission members.
The Historic Resources Commission shall have the power, along with the duty, to perform the
following acts:
(1) To keep a register of historic resources within the City of Avenal;
(2) To make recommendations to the City Council regarding additions or deletions of historic
resources from the register and on preservation issues;
(3) To make recommendations to the City Council regarding design review applications affecting
designated historic resources and regarding applications for permits involving the alterations of
historic resources, including demolitions;
(4) To provide an appeal regarding historic resource matters within the Commission's authority
involving the Planning Director and other City officials;
(5) To explore means for the preservation and use of historic resources;
(6) To promote protection of historic resources deserving of recognition; and
(7) To encourage private efforts to raise funds for historic development, but no authority is granted
to the Commission to acquire property or interest on behalf of the City.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.07 Historic Resources Register.
Upon establishment of the Historic Resources Register after review by the Historic Resources
Commission and City Council, with input from City officials thereto, sites within the City shall be
designated and made a part of the register. City officials shall initially conduct a survey of potential
historic resources within the City, for review by the Historic Resources Commission and the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.08 Criteria for Historic Resources Register.
The criteria, for designation of a proposed resource, shall include the following:
(1) The proposed resource or district identifies with a person or group making a significant
contribution to the heritage or history within the City; or
(2) The proposed resource or district identifies as an interest to the community or significant value
as part of the City's heritage or history; or
(3) The proposed resource or district identifies as the location of a significant historic event
involving the City's heritage or history; or
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 57
(4) The proposed resource or district identifies as outstanding or exemplary elements of
architectural design or craftsmanship of a particular historic period; or
(5) The proposed resource or district identifies as a source, site, or other repository of significant
interest involving the heritage or history of the community.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.09 City Council deletions from the Register.
Upon recommendations by the Historic Resources Commission to the City Council, a resource or
district shall not be deleted from the register, unless one of the following determinations has been made
related thereto by the City Council:
(1) The resource or district has been demolished or destroyed by natural or man-made means; or
(2) The resource or district no longer conforms to any of the findings in Section 5-21.08 of this
chapter, or has a clearly-established diminished historic significance; or
(3) The resource or district cannot be restored, rehabilitated, or stabilized, without causing an
economic hardship disproportionate to property's historic value; or
(4) The resource or district is not being properly maintained by the owner, which poses a significant
danger, hazardous condition, or nuisance to the community.
Deletions from the register shall require review by both the Historic Resources Commission and City
Council, with input by City officials following the applicable law.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.10 Provisions of the Code.
Any designations on the Historic Resources Register and other actions related to historic resources
under this chapter will require compliance with the City of Avenal Municipal Code and other applicable
law. Property owners will be required to comply with any code, including, but not limited to obtaining
permits, or other city requirements, including holding the City harmless and liability insurance
requirements. The Planning Director and other City officials shall conduct a survey under this chapter and
provide input to the Human Resources Commission and City Council based on applicable law.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.11 Maintenance of resources.
No routine maintenance or repair of any architectural or historical feature, including, but not limited to
any exterior painting, brick, or any other interior or exterior work related to the historical value or
significance, may be commenced unless first approved by the City Planning Director. Each owner of a
designated historical resource shall be required to maintain and keep the resource free of danger or other
hazardous conditions, and to keep such resources in a manner that encourages their reasonable uses,
and to prevent deterioration and decay. As noted in Section 5-21.09, each owner must comply with any
City requirements.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.12 Appeal procedure.
Any applicant or other interested person dissatisfied with any decision made under this chapter may
appeal such decision in writing with reasons for the appeal within sixty (60) days of the adverse decision
to the Historic Resources Commission and, subsequently, to the City Council. Appeals shall be heard by
Title 5 PUBLIC WELFARE
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 58
the Historic Resources Commission within forty-five (45) days, and by the City Council within forty-five
(45) days after the appeal decision by the Historic Resources Commission, consistent with agenda
preparation procedures and schedule of the hearing body. Any appeals under this chapter shall be
accompanied by the applicable city fee to cover the cost of handling the request.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.13 Enforcement.
The Planning Director, or other city official authorized by the City Manager, shall be authorized to
enforce provisions of this chapter and to take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with any of the regulations, standards, and other City requirements. Such action may also include, but not
be limited to, filing a court action.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
5-21.14 Effective date.
This chapter shall go into effect immediately upon its passage.
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 10-8-2008)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - ANIMALS AND FOWL
Chapter 2 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 3 - SEWER SERVICES
Chapter 4 - WATER SERVICES
Chapter 5 - MAINTENANCE AND ABATEMENT OF PROPERTY NUISANCES
Chapter 6 - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HANDLERS
Chapter 7 - TRASH ENCLOSURES
Chapter 1 ANIMALS AND FOWL
Sections:
6-1.01 Definitions.
6-1.02 Chief of Animal Control.
6-1.03 Rabies vaccinations.
6-1.04 Dog licenses.
6-1.05 Prohibited conduct.
6-1.06 Animals to be impounded.
6-1.07 Diseased or vicious animals.
6-1.08 Notices to owners of animals impounded.
6-1.09 Hearings following impoundment.
6-1.10 Redemption.
6-1.11 Redemption fees.
6-1.12 License fees to be paid upon redemption.
6-1.13 Records of impounded animals.
6-1.14 Epidemics.
6-1.15 Duty to report bites.
6-1.16 Right to contract for animal control services.
6-1.17 Penalties for violations.
6-1.18 Use of license and other revenue.
6-1.19 Interference with officer.
6-1.20 Vicious dogs.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
6-1.01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and
phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Division of Animal Control Services" shall mean that section of the local government, or its
designated contract agent, which is specifically charged with the regulation and enforcement of
laws dealing with animals within its jurisdiction.
(b) "Chief of Animal Control" shall mean that person designated as Director of Animal Control for
the local government and his duly authorized officers.
(c) "Animal control shelter" shall mean the facilities provided for the impounding of animals.
(d) "Health Officer" shall mean that person appointed by the Board of Supervisors of the County
and any other person duly authorized by him to act on his behalf.
(e) "Impoundment" shall mean the taking up and confining of an animal by the Chief of Animal
Control.
(f) "Kennel" shall mean any enclosure, premises, building, structure lot, or area in or not which
dogs or cats of at least four (4) months of age are kept, harbored, or maintained for commercial
purposes.
(g) "Owner" shall mean a member of the household or business where an animal is being kept or a
designated agent of that household or business.
(h) "Person" shall mean a fictional entity, such as a corporation, estate, association, partnership, or
trust, as well as one or more individual human beings.
(i) "Animal Control Officer" shall mean any Animal Control Officer, Humane Officer, or other officer
employed by the Department of Animal Control whose duties relate to the enforcement of this
chapter.
6-1.02 Chief of Animal Control.
(a) Responsibility. The Chief of Animal Control shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter,
and his duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) To administer the animal control shelter and keep such records as may be required by law or by
contract;
(2) To take up and impound animals which are in violation of this chapter or for the safekeeping of
the animal to protect its health and welfare;
(3) To remove and dispose of the carcass of any animal found on any public highway, street, alley,
or other place;
(4) To quarantine animals and to cooperate with the Health Officer; and
(5) To enforce the provisions of this chapter related to regulations and prohibitions as to the
number, type, and location of animals.
(b) Enforcement. The Chief of Animal Control and his officers shall have the duty of enforcing this
chapter and the laws of the State relating to the care, treatment, or impounding of animals or for the
prevention of cruelty thereto.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
(c) Authority to arrest. In the performance of their duties the Chief of Animal Control and his officers shall
have the authority to issue notices to appear in court pursuant to Chapter 5c (commencing with
Section 853.5) of Title 3 Part 2 of the Penal Code of the State for violations of State and Local animal
control laws. This authority is based on Section 607 (b) and (g) of the Civil Code of the State.
(d) Authority to enter premises. The Chief of Animal Control shall have the right to enter upon any
private or public property in the City of Avenal in order to examine or capture any dog thereon or
therein; provided, however, that no such officer or employee shall have the right to enter a house,
which is in use as residence without first having secured a search warrant therefore. The Chief of
Animal Control is authorized to enter upon any premises upon which any animal is kept, for the
purpose of taking up, seizing or impounding any animal found running at large, or staked, herded or
grazing thereon, contrary to the provisions of this Code, or for the purpose of ascertaining whether
such animal is registered as provided in this Code, or for the purpose of inspecting the premises to
ascertain whether any law of the City or State relating to the care, treatment or impounding of dumb
animals or the prevention of cruelty to dumb animals is being violated.
6-1.03 Rabies vaccinations.
Every dog owner, after his dog attains the age of four (4) months, shall procure every other year its
vaccination by a licensed veterinarian with a canine anti-rabies vaccine approved by and in a manner
prescribed by the State Department of Public Health.
6-1.04 Dog licenses.
(a) Requirements. The owner of every dog over the age of four (4) months owned and harbored in the
City shall obtain an animal license therefor. New residents shall have sixty (60) days in which to
acquire such license. The fee for such license shall be in accordance with the fee schedule provided
by resolution. The fee paid for the licensing of spayed or neutered dogs shall be one-half (½) or less
of such license upon the presentation of the proper certification. Any person who shall fail to pay
such license fee after such fee is due, or such dog is required to be licensed, shall pay a penalty in
accordance with the fee schedule. A license shall be obtained, but no license fee shall be payable,
for the licensing of any dog which is being used for guide purposes by a handicapped resident of the
City, or for a dog which has served as a member of the armed forces of the United States of
America, or for any dog currently being used by a local law enforcement agency for the purposes of
crime prevention or control.
(b) Exemptions. The licensing regulations of this chapter shall not be applicable to the following: dogs
used for diagnostic purposes or research, the use having been approved by the State Board of
Public Health pursuant to Section 1666 of the Health and Safety Code of the State; dogs which are
owned by veterinarians licensed by the State and which are kept or maintained on the premises
used by such veterinarians in their practice; and dogs kept by owners of pet shops for the purposes
of sale, circuses, animal exhibits; or other enterprises maintaining dogs for sale which have been
granted business licenses by the City.
(c) Tags. The Chief of Animal Control is hereby required to procure plates or tags having thereon the
number of the license and figures indicating the year for which the fee has been paid, and he shall
keep a record of the name of the owner or possessor and a description of the dog for which the
license is issued and the number of the license, and he shall deliver such tag to the person paying
for such license tag as provided by this chapter.
(d) Duplicate tags. Whenever a license tag has been stolen or lost, the owner or possessor of the dog
for which the tag was issued, upon the payment of the required fee may receive a duplicate tag for
the remaining portion of the licensed period.
(e) Wearing of tags by animals required. Any dog for which a license is hereby required shall have
around its neck a suitable collar, having attached thereto such plate or tag with such inscription
thereon as is required by this section.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
(f) Records. The owner or operator of any kennel, animal breeding facility, pet shop, or any place or
establishment where animals are sold shall keep a permanent record of the name, address, and
phone number of the purchaser of any canine along with the breed, color, sex, and age of each
canine sold or given away.
In addition, the owner or the operator shall forward such information to the Chief of Animal Control
within thirty (30) days after any sale of transaction.
The Chief of Animal Control shall have the right to inspect the records during normal business hours
related to sales or transactions under the provisions of this section.
6-1.05 Prohibited conduct.
No owner or possessor of any animal shall cause, permit, or allow the animal to do any of the
following:
(a) To be upon any public street, sidewalk, park, school ground, any public property, or upon any
unenclosed premises in the City unless the animal is properly licensed and saddled, harnessed,
haltered, or leashed by a substantial chain, lead rope, or leash, which chain, lead rope, or leash
shall be continuously held by some competent person capable of controlling such animal. All
cats shall be exempted from the provisions of this section;
(b) To trespass upon any private property without the consent of the owner thereof, and it shall
further be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal, after receiving written notice by
registered mail from any owner or tenant of private property, to allow or permit the animal to
remain upon the property or to habitually continue to trespass thereon;
(c) To suffer or permit such animal to habitually bark or act in such a manner as to continuously
disturb the peace of any citizen or otherwise be a public nuisance; and
(d) To be without proper and adequate food, water, shelter, care, and attention pursuant to Section
597F of the Penal Code of the State.
(e) To wilfully abandon any dog or other animal with the City.
(f) To keep any hive of bees within two hundred (200) feet of any residence, hospital, sanitarium,
public eating place, school, church, office building, store, hotel, apartment house,
roominghouse, or any other place of habitation. This section shall not apply to the keeping of
bees within an educational institution for study or observation, or within a physician's office or
laboratory for medical research, treatment, or other scientific purposes, provided they are not
permitted to fly at large.
(g) To keep the stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, building, or place in which any animal, fowl or bird is
kept in an unclean and unsanitary condition.
(h) To slaughter or cause to be slaughtered any animal within two hundred feet of any residence,
hospital, sanitarium, public eating place, school, church, office building, store, hotel, apartment
house, roominghouse, or any place of habitation. This subsection shall not apply to the
slaughter of animals within an educational institution for study or observation, or within a
laboratory or such other facility which has been approved for such use. In areas where
slaughtering is allowed, the entrails must be buried on-site to a depth of at least three feet within
two hours of slaughtering or shall be picked up and disposed of in an approved manner.
(Ord. 84-09 § 1, 1984)
6-1.06 Animals to be impounded.
Every animal kept or found in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be taken up and
impounded by the Chief of Animal Control. Such animal may be redeemed by the owner or person
entitled to its possession within seventy-two (72) hours thereafter on the payment of such fees and
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
charges as provided by resolution, but, if not so redeemed, such animal may be destroyed by the Chief of
Animal Control. If no person appears and redeems said dog within seventy-two (72) hours from the giving
of the notice as herein provided, the person in charge of the impound facility may cause and direct the
dog to be sold or may cause and direct the dog to be placed with a home by such person to be suitable.
The receipt for the sale thereof, shall be a valid title to the purchaser, subject, however, to the right of
redemption as set forth in this chapter.
In order to reduce the likelihood that dogs allowed to be at large shall breed unwanted animals, any
dog impounded for being at large which previously has been redeemed from the Animal Control Shelter
after impoundment for being at large shall be spayed or neutered at the redeeming owner's expense prior
to a second or subsequent redemption. The Chief of Animal Control may waive this requirement when
there are extenuating circumstances that justify waiver.
To ensure the sterilization of a redeemed animal, the owner shall be required to pay a seventy-five
dollar ($75.00) deposit to the City of Avenal prior to redeeming his/her dog for spaying or neutering. This
amount may be increased or decreased as the law changes and/or is modified. If the animal is not
sterilized within fourteen (14) business days from the date of redemption/payment of deposit, the deposit
shall be forfeited to the City. Once the animal has been sterilized, as evidenced by a written statement
signed by a licensed veterinarian, the entire deposit will be refunded to the owner within thirty (30) days of
the owner providing such evidence to the City. The forfeited funds may be expended only for programs to
spay/neuter dogs and cats.
In the event the Chief of Animal Control determines that a dog shall be spayed or neutered at the
redeeming owner's expense prior to redemption, the Chief of Animal Control shall notify the owner of this
requirement in writing and inform the owner of the owner's right to appeal as provided in this section.
The owner of the animal may, prior to the date specified by the Chief of Animal Control in the written
notice, appeal the determination of the Chief of Animal Control by filing a notice of such appeal with the
Chief of Animal Control. The City Manager shall appoint a hearing officer, who may be an employee of
the City.
The hearing shall be informal. The hearing officer shall determine, based on evidence presented,
whether the Chief of Animal Control correctly determined that the requirement to spay or neuter applies,
and if so, whether there are any extenuating circumstances which justify waiver of the requirement to
spay or neuter, or waiver of the requirement that the owner pay for the procedure. The decision of the
hearing officer shall be final.
(Ord. No. 2011-03, § 1, 3-24-2011)
6-1.07 Diseased or vicious animals.
Whenever the Chief of Animal Control shall have reasonable cause to believe that any animal, either
licensed or unlicensed, is diseased or vicious or dangerous to any person or other animal, the Chief of
Animal Control is hereby directed to take custody of such animal and impound the animal in a safe place
for such period of time as is required in order to observe, examine, and determine whether or not such
animal is diseased or vicious or dangerous or constitutes a menace to the public health or safety. It shall
be the duty of the Chief of Animal Control to observe and examine any such animal and determine
whether the animal is diseased or vicious or dangerous or does constitute a menace to the public health
or safety. If it is so determined, it shall be unlawful for any person to continue to maintain such animal;
otherwise, such animal shall be returned to the owner or person entitled to its possession.
6-1.08 Notices to owners of animals impounded.
Within twenty-four (24) hours after the impoundment of any animal, the Chief of Animal Control shall
notify the owner or possessor of the animal, if known, that the animal has been impounded and the date
of impounding. If the owner or possessor of such animal is not known to the Chief of Animal Control, the
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
Chief shall maintain records of such impoundment for at least thirty (30) days after the date of the
impoundment.
6-1.09 Hearings following impoundment.
Any owner or possessor of any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter that is (a) found to be
without proper and adequate food, water, shelter, care, and attention; or (b) found to be diseased or
vicious or dangerous to any person or other animal or has bitten any person or other animal shall be
entitled to a hearing conducted by the City Manager, Health Officer, or designee into such seizure within
ten (10) days following such impoundment provided such owner or possessor files a written request with
the Chief of Animal Control within three (3) days following the notice of such impoundment. In any case,
such owner or possessor shall be liable for all costs related to such seizure.
6-1.10 Redemption.
The owner or person entitled to the control or custody of any animal impounded, at any time before
the sale or other disposition thereof, may redeem the animal by paying all the proper fees and charges
thereon made by virtue of any of the provisions of this chapter. Whenever such animal is redeemed, the
person redeeming shall receive from the Chief of Animal Control duplicate receipts for the same. The
Chief of Animal Control shall give to any person redeeming such animal a receipt for the redemption
money.
6-1.11 Redemption fees.
The fees for animal shelter services in impounding and caring for animals shall be by type of animal
as follows, and no animal shall be released by its owner or possessor before such fees as are provided
by resolution are paid in full:
(a) Type A: Horse, mare, mule, ass, bull, ox, calf, or other animal of similar size;
(b) Type B: Sheep, lamb, goat, hog, or other animal of similar size;
(c) Type C: Dog;
(d) Type D: Cat; and
(e) Type E: Bird, fowl, rabbit, hamster, rodent, or other animal not specified or set forth in this
section.
6-1.12 License fees to be paid upon redemption.
If a license fee has not been paid for the then current period for any impounded dog, the party
redeeming, before redemption, shall pay such license fee.
6-1.13 Records of impounded animals.
The Chief of Animal Control shall keep a record of the number of all animals impounded, showing in
detail, in the case of each animal, the description, date of receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the
name of the person redeeming or purchasing, the fees and charges and proceeds of sales received on
account thereof, and such additional records as may be required.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
6-1.14 Epidemics.
The County Department of Health and Welfare may determine and declare that rabies are epidemic
or that another unusually dangerous health situation exists around dogs and other animals in the
jurisdiction, or in any part thereof. Upon the making of such description, the Health Officer shall prepare
and promulgate such rules and regulations as are necessary for the control of the dogs and other animals
within such area. Such rules and regulations of the Health Officer may include, but are not limited to, the
quarantine, vaccination, and destruction of diseased or suspected or stray animals by humane methods. It
shall be the duty of the Chief of Animal Control to assist the Health Officer in carrying out such rules and
regulations.
6-1.15 Duty to report bites.
It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge that any animal has bitten a human being to
report the fact immediately to the County Department of Health and Welfare, the Chief of Animal Control,
or the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction and to furnish complete information thereof.
6-1.16 Right to contract for animal control services.
The Council may contract for animal control service with the County or any humane society or other
organization, corporation, or association upon such terms and conditions as may be agreeable.
6-1.17 Penalties for violations.
Any person who commits any act declared by any provision of this chapter to be unlawful, or who
violates the provisions, or fails to comply with the mandatory requirement of any section or portion of this
chapter shall be punishable as for an infraction. Every violation shall be punishable by:
(a) A fine not exceeding Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars for a first violation;
(b) A fine not exceeding One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars for a second violation of
this chapter within one year; and
(c) A fine not exceeding Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars for each additional
violation of this chapter within one year.
6-1.18 Use of license and other revenue.
All revenue derived from the fee schedule (except for board fees), and all revenue derived from fines,
forfeitures, and penalties related to the enforcement and administration of these provisions, shall go to the
general fund.
6-1.19 Interference with officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere or attempt to interfere with any duly
authorized enforcement officer engaged in the performance of any duty imposed or authorized by this
chapter, or for any person to unlawfully take or attempt to take any dog or other animal seized pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter from the custody of such officer, or for any person to remove or attempt to
remove from impoundment any dog or other animal without first having redeemed such dog or animal as
provided in this chapter, or without first having obtained the permission of such officer to do so.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
6-1.20 Vicious dogs.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vicious dog owned by such person, or under his
control, to run at large. Any dog which viciously attacks other dogs or animals, or which has once bitten or
otherwise has physically attacked a human being without reasonable provocation, shall be conclusively
presumed to be vicious.
Any dog which has been taken into custody as the result of a complaint under this section shall be
held by the Animal Control Division of the City at the cost and expense of the owner of such dog pending
a resolution of the charges so filed and until a determination is made of the case.
When the charge has been finally determined, the court, in addition to other penalties imposed by
this chapter, may order that the dog be destroyed.
Chapter 2 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
Sections:
6-2.01 Liberal construction.
6-2.02 Applicability.
6-2.03 Responsibility to manage solid waste.
6-2.04 Rules and regulations.
6-2.05 Administration of chapter.
6-2.06 Definitions.
6-2.07 Solid waste management standards.
6-2.08 Solid waste separation requirements.
6-2.09 Health and safety issues.
6-2.10 Charges for collections.
6-2.11 Mandatory solid waste collection.
6-2.11.5 Mandatory recycling.
6-2.12 Establishment and re-establishment of credit.
6-2.13 Place of pickup.
6-2.14 Discontinuance and restoration of service.
6-2.15 Charges on premises where no water service charges are being made.
6-2.16 Solid waste collection.
6-2.17 Registration of solid waste collection and processing.
6-2.18 Designation of City service area(s).
6-2.19 Solid waste collection contract.
6-2.20 Registration required.
6-2.21 Reporting requirements.
6-2.22 Enforcement.
6-2.23 Written notices—Manner of giving.
6-2.24 City Council decision final.
6-2.25 Penalties.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
6-2.26 Validity of chapter.
6-2.01 Liberal construction.
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Avenal and to promote
an improvement in visual and physical quality of the environment, the City Council has determined that it
is necessary to adopt a coordinated City-wide program for the safe, economical and efficient collection,
storage. transportation and disposal of solid waste, and to assure adequate standards of service for the
collection, storage, transportation and disposal of solid waste. This chapter shall be liberally construed for
the accomplishment of these purposes.
(Ord. 94-05 § 1, 1994)
6-2.02 Applicability.
This chapter regulates the storage, segregation, collection, transportation, processing and
disposition of solid waste, greenwaste, medical waste, recyclables, special wastes, tires, and white goods
generated within the City of Avenal.
(Ord. 94-05 § 2, 1994)
6-2.03 Responsibility to manage solid waste.
It is declared that it is in the interest of public health and safety that the City control and manage the
segregation, storage, collection, transportation, processing and disposal of solid waste in the City of
Avenal.
(a) In this regard, the City is responsible for all aspects of management of solid waste. It may carry
out this responsibility itself or it may contract with persons to conduct such work.
(b) The City has full authority to regulate the collection, transportation, segregation, storage,
processing, and disposal of solid waste, including recyclables within the jurisdiction of the City of
Avenal.
(Ord. 94-05 § 3, 1994)
6-2.04 Rules and regulations.
The City Council shall, by resolution, establish additional rules and regulations to administer and
carry out the policy and purpose of this chapter as from time to time appear to be in the best interest of
public health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 94-05 § 4, 1994)
6-2.05 Administration of chapter.
The Utilities Director is charged with the administration of this chapter and the rules and regulations
adopted by the City Council. The Utilities Director is authorized to make necessary and reasonable
policies and procedures with respect to the accumulation, collection, transportation, processing, recycling.
and disposal of various types of solid waste, consistent with this chapter. The Utilities Director and the
Health Officer shall have the authority to enter, at any reasonable hour, upon the premises of any person
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
regulated by this chapter to determine compliance with this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted
by the City Council.
(Ord. 94-05 § 5, 1994)
6-2.06 Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted
consistent with the definitions set forth in Public Resources Code Section 40100 et seq., the Health and
Safety Code Section 25110 et seq., and Title 14 California Code of Regulations Section 17225 et seq.
The definitions set forth below shall apply throughout this chapter.
"Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (California Public Resources
Code Section 40000 et seq.) and all regulations adopted under that legislation, as may be amended from
time to time.
"Agricultural solid waste" means manures, culls, prunings or crop residues resulting from the
production, packing or processing of farm or agricultural products.
"Buy back facility" means a facility which receives source separated materials.
"Cleanup people" means those individuals or firms exclusively providing solid waste cleanup and
removal services at residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental locations.
"Collection vehicle" or "equipment" means any vehicle or equipment used in the collection of
residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental solid waste.
"Collector" means any person or firm who is engaged in solid waste collection services.
"Compost" means the product resulting from the controlled biological decomposition of organic
wastes that are source separated from the municipal solid waste stream or which are separated at a
centralized facility.
"Composting facility" means a permitted solid waste facility at which composting is conducted and
which produces compost.
"Container" means any bin, roll-off box, vessel, can or receptacle used for the collection of solid
waste for removal, whether owned by the collector, property owner or tenant.
"Contract" means a solid waste collection contract entered into pursuant to Section 6-2.16(a).
"Contract collector" means the person or firm under contract with the City pursuant to Section 6-
2.16(a).
"Council" means the City Council of the City of Avenal.
"Food waste" means all residential, commercial governmental, and institutional food product waste.
"Garbage" means the putrescible animal, fish, fowl, food, fruit, bakery goods or vegetable matter
resulting from the preparation, storage, processing, handling, decay, distribution, manufacturing or
consumption of such substance except suet, tallow, bones or meat trimmings that are not rejected by the
owner or producer as worthless or useless.
"Greenwaste" means all grass clippings, leaves, branches and tree trunks and other yard waste
generated at residential, commercial, governmental or institutional properties within the City.
"Health Officer" means the Health Officer of Kings County or his/her authorized representative.
"Litter" means all improperly discarded solid waste, including, but not limited to, convenience food,
beverage and other product packages or containers constructed of steel, aluminum, glass, paper, plastic
and other natural and synthetic materials thrown or deposited on lands and waters of the state, but not
including the properly discarded waste of the primary processing of agriculture, mining, logging, saw
milling or manufacturing pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 17225.42.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 11
"Local Enforcement Agency" means the agency which has been designated under the California
Integrated Waste Management Act as the Local Enforcement Agency within Kings County. The current
Local Enforcement Agency is the County Health Department.
"Material recovery facility" means a facility designed to recover, process, and dispose of solid waste
for the purpose of performing salvage and then disposing of the residual solid waste at an approved solid
waste disposal site.
"Medical waste" means biohazardous waste; sharps waste; waste which is generated or produced,
as a result of the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining
thereto or in the production or testing of biologicals pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section
25023.2.
"Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to human health or is indecent or offensive to the
senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of
life or property.
"Occupant" means every owner, tenant, leasee or person having care or control of any property or
premises.
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, political subdivision, governmental
agency, district, municipality, public or private corporation, for profit or nonprofit, or any other entity
whatsoever.
"Premises" means a tract or parcel of land with or without habitable buildings or appurtenant
structures.
"Public Works Director" means the Public Works Director of the City of Avenal or his authorized
representative.
"Putrescible waste" means organic material with a decomposition capacity to emit noticeable
quantities of odor and gaseous byproducts. Material in this category includes, but is not limited, to kitchen
waste, dead animals, and food waste.
"Recyclables" means solid waste that has a value. Material in this category includes, but is not
limited to, aluminum, glass bottles and jars, paper, newspaper, cardboard, plastic containers, tin and bimetal,
white goods, yard or greenwaste, and other materials which can be processed and returned to the
economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet
the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.
"Salvage" means the following:
(1) Verb. Segregation of recyclables from the solid waste stream by the generator of that solid
waste and preparation for sale by the generator, at a profit, in the commercial market.
(2) Noun. Solid waste which has been prepared by the generator at the site where generated and
which is saleable as a commodity.
"Service area" means the geographic area designated by the City Council in which the solid waste is
collected pursuant to Section 6-2.18.
"Solid waste" means all putrescible or nonputrescible solid and semisolid waste including, but not
limited to, recyclables, refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash, decaying vegetable and animal matter, ashes,
street refuse, greenwaste, industrial waste, swill, offal, tin cans, paper, medical solid waste, and other
offensive or nauseous substances excepting the following: agricultural solid waste, liquid-carried industrial
wastes, sewage, medical waste, and hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined and regulated
by State Law.
"Solid waste collection" means the commercial act of collecting, removing, or transporting solid
waste generated at residential, commercial, governmental, industrial, or institutional sites within the
incorporated territory of the City of Avenal, and hauling it to a facility for processing, transfer or disposal.
"Solid waste facility" means a disposal site, buy back facility, material recovery facility, transfer
station, or a site that engages in any solid waste processing, or any facility specified in the Public
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 12
Resources Code Section 40194. Solid waste facility shall include a commercial or industrial business
conducting salvage of recyclables, but shall exclude private residences engaged in the salvage of solid
waste generated on the premises for their own purposes.
"Solid waste processing" means the reduction, separation, composting, recovery, salvage,
conversion or recycling of solid waste and any activity conducted in a solid waste facility.
"Solid waste separation" means the placement of recyclables in separate containers or bags, or the
physical separation of recyclables from other solid waste. The term segregation shall be interchangeable
with separation.
"Special waste" means solid waste which has characteristics which make it unsuitable for collection
and/or processing by regular or routine methods, including but not limited to, tires, large white goods,
demolition debris. These wastes shall be collected and/or processed separately from the regular
collection and processing procedures.
"Source separation" means the separation or segregation of solid waste, at the place of generation
or production, of wastes and resources for separate collection, processing, recycling, reuse, recovery or
disposal.
"Utilities Director" means the Utilities Director of the City of Avenal or his authorized representative.
"White goods" means kitchen or other large appliances.
"Yard waste" means leaves, grass, weeds, and wood materials from trees and shrubs.
(Ord. 94-05 § 6, 1994)
6-2.07 Solid waste management standards.
The City Council shall by resolution establish standards for the storage, collection, and transportation
of solid waste, based on the recommendations of the Health Officer, Public Works Director and the
Utilities Director. The City Council may from time to time revise these standards.
(Ord. 94-05 § 7, 1994)
6-2.08 Solid waste separation requirements.
Except as set forth in Section 6-2.09(c), all persons within the City shall separate all recyclable from
all other solid waste generated at their premises and dispose of it only in accordance with the standards
established by the City Council. Such standards shall be by resolution and may be amended from time to
time as may be required to meet the requirements of the Act.
(a) The standard shall generally provide as follows:
(1) Require source separation of solid waste;
(2) Require placement of recyclables into different containers so as to facilitate segregation at
a solid waste facility.
(b) An owner, landlord or agent of an owner or landlord of a multi-family rental housing property,
mobile home park, trailer park or recreational vehicle park with (3) or more units, shall comply
with its separation responsibilities by establishing a collection and storage system for separated
recyclables at each premises.
(c) No person shall tamper or meddle with any refuse receptacle. No person other than the owner
thereof, the owner's agents or employees, or the City, or a licensed refuse collector shall
remove the contents from any refuse receptacle. No person, other than the City or the City's
authorized agent, shall remove recyclable materials which have been segregated from other
wastes and placed at a designated collection location for the purpose of collection and recycling
by the City or the City's authorized agent.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 13
(Ord. 2000-03, 2000: Ord. 94-05 § 8, 1994)
6-2.09 Health and safety issues.
(a) Private property shall be free of excess solid waste and litter. The owner, occupant and operator of
any premises, business, establishment, or other property, vacant or occupied, shall be responsible
for the safe and sanitary storage of all solid waste and recyclables accumulated on the property. The
property shall be free of excessive amounts of solid waste and litter, except that manure or wood,
leaves and other greenwaste may be accumulated, providing that no nuisance is created. What are
excessive amounts of solid waste and litter shall be determined by the Health Officer.
(b) Providing waste collection containers.
(1) No person shall maintain or use any residence, place of business, or other building or place
where persons reside, congregate or are employed which is not provided with means for the
sanitary removal of all solid waste.
(2) No person shall place or dump any solid waste or any offensive, unsightly or decaying matter of
any kind whatsoever anywhere in the City other than in an approved solid waste facility.
(3) No person shall place hot coals, hot ashes or other burning matter in any solid waste set out for
collection.
(c) Disposition of animal carcasses. Every owner, occupant and operator of any real property situated
within the City shall, upon reasonable notice given by the Health Officer, bury to a depth of at least
three (3') feet under the surface of the earth, or remove to a proper disposal site, all carcasses of
dead animals which have died or are upon any part of such real property.
(d) Accumulation of solid waste to be removed. Whenever any solid waste has been thrown or
deposited upon any street, road, or private or public premises, or has accumulated thereon, the
Health Officer shall give written notice to the owner, tenant or person having charge or control of
such street, road, or premises, to remove from the premises the substances so deposited or
accumulated. It is unlawful for the owner, tenant or person having charge or control of the premises
to neglect or fail to remove the solid waste from the premises within reasonable time, as determined
by the Health Officer, after the receipt of the notice.
(e) Food waste and agricultural by-products.
(1) Food waste. The owner or occupant of any agricultural property may allow food waste to be
accumulated, stored, disposed of, or used for stock feeding on the premises, as long as such
food waste is not permitted to become a nuisance due to the breeding or attraction of flies or
rodents, or from odors, or to create a hazard to the public health, safety or welfare, as
determined by the Health Officer. All such agricultural operations shall comply with the
Agricultural Solid Waste Management Standards, Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations,
commencing with Section 17801.
(2) Agricultural by-products. Culled fruits and vegetables and agricultural by-products which cannot
be used for animal feed, returned to the soil or recovered in another manner shall be disposed
of only to an appropriate licensed disposal site. Agriculture by-products or wastes, not of plant
or animal origin, such as nonhazardous packaging, plastic film or shop wastes, shall also be
disposed of in an appropriate licensed disposal site.
(f) Special wastes. Special wastes shall be collected and/or processed separately from regular solid
waste collection service. This waste shall not be placed in the waste containers, but shall be
collected and/or processed as set forth in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 6-2.07.
(Ord. 94-05 § 9, 1994)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 14
6-2.10 Charges for collections.
Charge for services rendered in the collection, removal, and disposal of solid waste be fixed by
resolution of the City Council and shall be collected by the City from the owner, occupant, tenant, landlord
or agent of an owner or landlord of any residential, commercial, industrial, institutional or governmental
property.
(Ord. 94-05 § 10, 1994)
6-2.11 Mandatory solid waste collection.
Mandatory service requirements. All persons within the City owning or in control of premises used as
an occupied residence, place of business, or other building or place where persons reside, congregate or
are employed shall subscribe to and thereafter use regularly scheduled solid waste collection service with
the appropriate contract collector at each such premises.
(Ord. 94-05 § 11, 1994)
6-2.11.5 Mandatory recycling.
Mandatory recycling service requirements. All person within the City owning or in control of premises
used as an occupied residence, place of business, or other building or place where persons reside,
congregate or are employed shall subscribe to and thereafter use regularly scheduled mandatory
recycling collection services with the appropriate contract collector at each such premises.
(Ord. 2000-01, 2000)
6-2.12 Establishment and re-establishment of credit.
As established by the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 94-05 § 12, 1994)
6-2.13 Place of pickup.
(a) In all cases of dispute or complaints arising from or concerning the place where the solid waste and
recycling receptacles shall be placed while awaiting the removal of their contents, the City Council,
or their authorizing representatives, shall forthwith designate the place and its decision be final.
(b) Refuse and garbage containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street and/or collection area for
pickup more that twenty-four (24) hours prior to pickup time, and such containers shall be removed
within the twenty-four (24) hour period following pickup. Within the twenty-four (24) hour period
following pickup, the refuse and garbage containers shall be placed in an area of which is as
inconspicuous as practical so as to minimize its visibility from public areas.
(c) The violations of any of the provisions of Section 6-2.13 shall result in the following actions by the
City:
(1) First violation. A written notice of the violation shall be issued to the person in violation of
Section 6-2.13 and a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be charged to such person as a one-time
charge for such violation. Said person shall pay the full amount of such charge within thirty (30)
days of the date of the issuance of the fine.
(2) Second violation. A written notice of the violation shall be issued to the person in violation of
Section 6-2.13 and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged to such person as
a one-time charge for such violation. Said person shall pay the full amount of such charge within
thirty (30) days of the date of the issuance of the fine.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 15
(3) Third and subsequent violations. A written notice of the violation shall be issued to the person in
violation of Section 6-2.13 and a fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) shall be charged to
such person as a one-time charge for such violation. Said person shall pay the full amount of
such charge within thirty (30) days of the date of the issuance of the fine.
(Ord. 2000-07, 2000; Ord. No. 2005-06, 6-23-2005)
6-2.14 Discontinuance and restoration of service.
(a) All bills for solid waste services shall be due and payable at the time as the bills are due and payable
for water service. If a bill is not paid within the time provided for, the water service of the person to
whom the charges are made may be discontinued until the amount of the deposit made to establish
credit for the solid waste service has been fully absorbed.
(b) A customer may have his or her water service discontinued for nonpayment of the solid waste bill for
service furnished at a previous location served by the City if the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days
after presentation at the new location. The City shall have the right of refusing or ceasing to deliver
water to a customer, if such person fails to comply with all the ordinances, resolutions and
regulations of the City with regard to solid waste service.
(c) A customer may have his or her solid waste service discontinued by giving notice of his or her desire
not less than two (2) days before its effective date. The customer shall be required to pay all charges
up until the effective date stated on such notice. When notice is not given, the customer shall be
required to pay for charges until two (2) days after the City has actual knowledge that the customer
has vacated the premises, or otherwise has discontinued his or her solid waste and water service.
(Ord. 94-05 § 14, 1994)
6-2.15 Charges on premises where no water service charges are being made.
Charges for solid waste collection service shall be made only to the person(s) who also have the
water service charge. Where premises are being used or occupied by any person who does not appear
as the responsible person for water service charges on those premises, then the charges shall be made
directly to the person who either owns or controls the premises, and who is chargeable for the water
service charges.
(Ord. 94-05 § 15, 1994)
6-2.16 Solid waste collection.
All collectors of solid waste shall comply with the following:
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to undertake any solid
waste collection in any area of the City without first entering into a contract with the City
pursuant to Sections 6-2.19(a) through 6-2.19(f) of this chapter.
(b) The following persons are not required to enter into a solid waste collection contract:
(1) A person hauling special solid waste such as professional gardeners, and clean up people;
persons collecting dead animals, bones, meat scraps, grease or other waste food products
for rendering or animal food; collectors of tires, collectors of salvage from commercial or
industrial premises, and persons who collect vegetable matter or food waste, without
charge, for use as food for animals. The foregoing persons, however, shall be subject to
the following provisions:
(i) Such hauling shall not replace the normal mandatory solid waste collection service
regulated under the provisions of Section 6-2.11(a) of this chapter.
(ii) The above person shall register in accordance with Section 6-2.17 of this chapter.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 16
(iii) Such persons shall comply with all applicable health and safety requirements and
standards for the collection, storage, processing and transportation of solid waste.
(iv) Such operators shall comply with all reasonable and applicable policies and
procedures made by the Utilities Director in accordance with Section 6-2.05 of this
chapter.
(v) Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the maintenance of a household
compost pile on private property.
(2) Persons who provide solid waste collection under license, permit, franchise or contract with
other governmental entities within the City of Avenal.
(c) In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, each solid waste contract collector shall:
(1) Provide pickup service to all persons within the City of Avenal owning premises used as an
occupied residence, place of business, or other building or place where persons reside,
congregate or are employed;
(2) Commence the mandatory service and facilities within thirty (30) days after the effective
date of the contract unless the City Council extends the time upon a showing of reasonable
grounds by the contract collector;
(3) Provide solid waste collection service in compliance with the performance standards
adopted by the City Council.
(d) Any person collecting, processing or transporting solid waste shall be responsible for the
prevention of littering or the creation of a nuisance at the loading point, processing location,
during transport, and during unloading operations.
(e) Each contract collector shall provide a minimum regular collection schedule for his or her
customers within the territory specified in the contract. The schedule shall be set forth in the
contract authorizing collection.
(f) The identification of solid waste and recyclables storage containers and vehicles used in the
collection and transportation of solid waste shall be governed by Title 14 of the California Code
of Regulations, Sections 17316 and 17344.
(g) Hauling of solid waste and parking of solid waste vehicles.
(1) The hauling of solid waste on public roads or highways shall be governed by California
Vehicle Code Sections 23114 and 23115.
(2) The parking of solid waste collection vehicles shall be governed by Title 14 of the California
Code of Regulations, Section 17343.
(h) Records required.
(1) Each contract collector shall keep and maintain such operating records as the Utilities
Director may require to ascertain the extent of compliance with this chapter, and shall, if so
requested by the Utilities Director, submit periodic reports of his or her operations.
(2) Each contract collector shall maintain a record of customer complaints, to include a record
of the action taken to resolve each complaint. Such record shall be available for inspection
by the Utilities Director for a period of at least three (3) years.
(i) Subject to the provisions of existing law, the vehicles and equipment of a contract collector may
be inspected by the Health Officer at any reasonable time, at the point of operation or at the
contract collector's service yard.
(j) The contract entered into under this chapter shall not be assignable or transferrable, either
voluntarily or by operation of law, without the written permission of the City Council.
(k) As a condition of entering into a solid waste collection contract, the City Council shall establish
terms and conditions under which containers for the collection of special waste shall be placed
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 17
in the contract collector's service area to serve the needs of the customers in such area. The
contract collector shall provide for placing and handling of such containers and dispose of
collected waste "free of charge" to the user.
(Ord. 94-05 § 16, 1994)
6-2.17 Registration of solid waste collection and processing.
(a) Except as set forth below, all persons who collect, remove, dispose of, transport, or process solid
waste shall register with the City as set forth in Section 6-2.20 of this chapter. Persons subject to this
requirement include, but are not limited to, collectors of special waste anywhere within the City of
Avenal.
(1) Collectors of special waste anywhere within the City of Avenal.
(b) The requirements of this section do not apply to the following:
(1) Persons within their own residence, whether owned or rented, who perform salvage of solid
waste generated at that location for their own purposes.
(2) All publicly operated solid waste facilities which operate under a State permit.
(Ord. 94-05 § 17, 1994)
6-2.18 Designation of City service area(s).
The City Council may divide the City into service areas for the purpose of solid waste collection
therein. The service areas shall be shown on a map of the City kept on file with the City Clerk. In order to
carry out the policy of this chapter the City Council, after notice and hearing as provided in Section 6-2.23
of this chapter, may in its sole discretion, modify, enlarge, divide, combine or otherwise apportion existing
service areas and execute new or revised contracts for solid waste collection in the service area as
modified, enlarged, divided, combined or otherwise apportioned.
(Ord. 94-05 § 18, 1994)
6-2.19 Solid waste collection contract.
The City Council may contract with collectors for exclusive rights to collect solid waste within specific
service areas on a set schedule. The contract will be for a set term, and will be issued on a competitive
basis.
(a) At times designated by the City Council, the City will solicit proposals from waste companies
engaged in solid waste collection. The requests for proposals will be for removal of solid waste
from any one or all of the service areas within the City.
(b) The solid waste collection proposal shall include the following information:
(1) The business address and, if different, any and all addresses where collection vehicles,
operating equipment or other facilities are located or will be kept, and the zoning
classifications of each such location;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and all owners and officers of
the business and their percentage of ownership;
(3) A description of all collection vehicles and equipment that the applicant owns or has under
his or her control for the collection or transportation of solid waste including make, year of
manufacture, mechanical condition, license number, and whether or not it is self-unloading;
(4) Types of service to be provided within a specified service area or portion thereof;
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 18
(5) The approximate number of customers to be served by the applicant, divided into the types
of service;
(6) A schedule of rates proposed to be charged for each type of service and a discussion as to
how the proposer desires to adjust rates over the term of the contract;
(7) A schedule of the frequency of service for each type of service;
(8) The term for which the proposer desires to have the contract;
(9) The disposal site where the applicant intends to dispose of the solid waste collected;
(10) If a joint venture or a partnership or a limited partnership, the names of all partners and
their percentage of participation and their permanent addresses; if a corporation, the
names and permanent addresses of all the officers;
(11) Such other information as the Utilities Director may require.
(c) The proposal shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) A map showing the service area or portion thereof in which the applicant proposes to
provide solid waste collection service or by reference to a service area number shown on
the map on file with the City Clerk;
(2) Security in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in the form of a faithful
performance bond, cash, negotiable bonds, instrument of credit, certificate of deposit, or
such other security as may be acceptable to the City. Such security shall be subject to
approval by the City Council and shall be maintained by the applicant during the entire
term of the contract. The security is for the purpose of securing compliance with all of the
terms and conditions contained in this chapter and for the protection of customers of the
applicant;
(3) A policy or policies of liability and property damage insurance, and automobile and truck
liability insurance, or certificates thereof, issued by a company or companies duly and
legally licensed to transact business in the State of California, covering personal injuries,
including wrongful death, and claims from property damage that may arise from the
operation under the contract and operation of automobiles and trucks. Such insurance
policy shall be issued at the expense of the applicant and maintained during the entire
period that the contract is in force and shall contain a provision that the policy will not be
cancelled without thirty (30) days prior written notice by the insurance company to the City
of Avenal. Such insurance policy shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney and shall
name the applicant and the City, the officers, employees and agents of the applicant and
the City, as additional insureds. The minimum limits on the insurance shall be not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for liability and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for automobile and truck liability;
(4) Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Utilities Director that the applicant has adequate
experience in the collection and transportation of solid waste;
(5) Facts demonstrating that the applicant owns or has access to suitable facilities for the
repair, maintenance, cleaning and storage of vehicles and equipment.
(d) The City Manager, Utilities Director and Public Works Director are responsible for the review
and evaluation of proposals and will recommend which proposer should be selected as the
contract collector.
(1) Prior to issuance of requests for proposals, the City Manager, Utilities Director and Public
Works Director shall establish an objective criteria to be used in evaluating and selection of
the preferred applicant. This criteria shall be included in the requests for proposals.
(2) The Utilities Director and Public Works Director shall review all proposals and make any
investigations or inspections deemed necessary or appropriate and shall report within thirty
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 19
(30) days to the City Manager with recommendations, including any recommendations for
special conditions relating to the proposal.
(3) The City Manager shall review all proposals and make such investigation as he or she
deems necessary and appropriate to insure that cost effective and quality services are
delivered.
(4) Upon the basis of the level of service proposed, the collection rates, any historical
evidence as to the quality of service, the Utilities Director and the Public Works Director
recommendations, evidence submitted and results of any investigations, the City Manager
shall make a finding on the qualifications of the applicant(s) under this chapter. On the
basis of his/her findings, the City Manager shall recommend to the City Council who should
be granted the contract.
(e) The City Manager shall, with the approval of the City Clerk, establish a date for a hearing before
the City Council on the issuance of the contract within a reasonable time after any required or
appropriate investigations, inspections or audits are completed.
(1) The City Manager shall prepare a report to the City Council recommending who should be
the contract collector within each service area. The report shall contain a discussion of the
basis for the recommendation and it shall contain recommended terms and conditions to
be included in the contract.
(2) Further notice of the hearing on the application shall be given to the general public by
publication as prescribed by law.
(f) At the conclusion of the hearing on the proposal for a collection contract, the City Council may,
in its sole discretion:
(1) Enter into or decline to enter into a contract subject to conditions or modifications deemed
by the Council to be necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Council may enter into no more than one contract per service area, except as allowed
in Section 6-2.18 of this chapter.
(3) The Council may place conditions on the contract which insure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and with the Act.
(4) The term of the contract shall be no less than one year and no more than five (5) years, as
determined by the City Council.
(5) As a condition of the City entering into the contract, the applicant shall agree to appear and
defend all actions against the City arising out of the exercise of the contract, and to
indemnify and save the City, its officers, employees and agents harmless of and from all
claims, demands, actions, or causes of action of every kind and description resulting
directly or indirectly, arising out of, or in any way connected with, the exercise of the
contract. The indemnification shall be a condition stated in the contract.
(g) Once the contract is in effect, the contractor may apply for a change in rates and/or a change in
frequency and type of collection.
(1) An application for a rate increase or decrease or a change in frequency of service for a
service area shall be filed with the City Manager who shall, with the approval of the City
Clerk, establish a date and time for a hearing before the City Council on the issue of the
rate increase or decrease or change in frequency of service, within a reasonable time after
filing of the application, taking into consideration the need to give the public notice of the
hearing as provided below.
(i) The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the
applicant and notice of the hearing to the general public by publication as required by
this chapter.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 20
(ii) The applicant shall give written notice to each customer within its service area. The
notice shall state the fact of the contract collector's application for a rate increase or
decrease or for a change in frequency of service and shall set forth the proposed
schedule of rates or frequency of service, the proposed effective date for the revision,
and the date, time and place set for the public hearing before the City Council on the
application for the revision. The notice shall be mailed not more than sixty (60) days
nor less than thirty (30) days prior to the date of the public hearing, followed by the
filing of a declaration with the City Clerk certifying to the satisfaction of this notice
requirement. The applicant shall make a good faith effort to perfect service of notice in
compliance with this subsection, but the failure of any customers to receive such
notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings taken under this
section.
(iii) In determining whether such changes in rates are reasonable, the City Council may
consider the length of haul, types of solid waste collected, stored or transported, the
number, types and locations of customers served, the frequency of service, the
investment in equipment and facilities, the local wage scales, the cost of disposal, and
any other factor deemed by the Council to be relevant to the cost of doing business to
a fair profit to the contract collector, and to providing a sufficient and proper service to
the public.
(2) Prior to the hearing, the Utilities Director may conduct an investigation of any proposed
rate increase or decrease or change in frequency of service, including an audit of a
contract collector's records. Upon completion of the investigation, the Utilities Director shall
make a report and recommendation to the City Manager regarding the proposed rate
increase or decrease or change in frequency of service.
(3) After the hearing, the City Council shall approve, disapprove or modify a proposed rate
change or change in frequency of service based on the same standards established by this
chapter, and on proposals for additional, better or more comprehensive service to the
service area.
(Ord. 94-05 § 19, 1994)
6-2.20 Registration required.
Any person who must register as a solid waste processor shall furnish the information in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Section 6-2.21 of this chapter, including the compliance with the reporting
requirements.
(Ord. 94-05 § 20, 1994)
6-2.21 Reporting requirements.
All solid waste collectors and processors shall be required to prepare and submit a quarterly "report
of solid waste processed" to the Utilities Director. This report shall be essential in monitoring the amount
of solid waste diverted from landfilling. The report shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
(a) The name of the person or firm conducting the solid waste processing;
(b) The type of solid waste processing conducted;
(c) The total tonnage of solid waste received for processing;
(d) The type(s) of and tonnage(s) of solid waste(s) processed as recyclables; and
(e) The destination of the solid waste processed as recyclables.
(Ord. 94-05 § 21, 1994)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 21
6-2.22 Enforcement.
(a) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the Utilities Director shall be responsible for
the enforcement of this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted by the City Council.
(b) The Utilities Director and the Health Officer shall have authority to enter, at any reasonable hour,
upon the premises of any person regulated by this chapter to determine compliance with this chapter
and the rules and regulations adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 94-05 § 22, 1994)
6-2.23 Written notices—Manner of giving.
With the exception of written notices required in Section 6-2.19(g)(1)(ii) of this chapter, written
notices required by this chapter shall be personally delivered to the person entitled thereto, or sent by
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the person entitled thereto, addressed to a
contract collector or applicant at his principal place of business as listed in his/her application. The
Utilities Director, or other person charged with giving written notices, shall file a declaration with the City
Clerk certifying to the date and the manner in which such notice was given. The person charged with
giving such notice shall make good faith efforts to perfect service of notice, but the failure of any contract
collector, applicant or other person to receive such notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any
proceedings taken thereunder.
(Ord. 94-05 § 23, 1994)
6-2.24 City Council decision final.
The determination of the City Council after conclusion of any hearing pursuant to this chapter shall
be final. A contract collector may not submit a new request for an increase in the same class of rates or
frequency of service determined adversely to him/her for a period of one year after such determination
has been made, unless the Council finds that the public interest requires reconsideration of the matter
within a shorter period of time.
(Ord. 94-05 § 24, 1994)
6-2.25 Penalties.
Unless otherwise specified, any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Code
shall be punishable for a first conviction by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), and for a second conviction
within a period of one year by a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and for a third or any subsequent
conviction within a period of one year by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
(Ord. 94-05 § 25, 1994; Ord. 2000-02, 2000)
6-2.26 Validity of chapter.
In the event any one or more of the provisions contained in this chapter shall, for any reason, be held
to be invalid, illegal, unenforceable or unconstitutional in any respect, such invalidity, illegality,
unenforceability or unconstitutionality shall not affect any other provisions hereof, and this chapter shall
be construed as if the invalid, illegal, unenforceable or unconstitutional provision had never been
contained herein.
(Ord. 94-05 § 26, 1994)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 22
Chapter 3 SEWER SERVICES
Sections:
6-3.01 Definitions.
6-3.02 Connections—Applications.
6-3.03 Connections—Permits—Charges.
6-3.04 Connections—Charges—Sewer fund.
6-3.05 Sewer services—Charges.
6-3.06 Sewer services—Charges—Billing.
6-3.07 Sewer services—Charges—Vacancies.
6-3.08 Exceptions.
6-3.09 Administration and enforcement—Supplemental rules and regulations.
6-3.10 Grease interceptors required for new or newly renovated industrial facilities.
6-3.11 Grease interceptors required on industrial facilities with problem lines.
6-3.12 Grease interceptors for all industrial facilities.
6-3.01 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and
phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
"Business establishment" shall mean and include railroad depots, bus depots, laundries, restaurants,
places of amusement, and any and all other commercial or business establishments or other institutions
equipped with sanitary plumbing facilities.
"Living unit" shall mean a living quarter, whether located in a single house or other permanent place
of abode, where one single family resides.
6-3.02 Connections—Applications.
Any person desiring to use the sanitary sewer system of the City shall make an application for such
service on a form prescribed by the City.
6-3.03 Connections—Permits—Charges.
No person shall connect any lot or parcel of property to the sanitary sewer system of the City without
a permit first being obtained from the City. No such permit shall be issued unless the required fees, where
applicable, have been paid. Fees shall be established by resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 91-06 §§ 7—10, 1991)
6-3.04 Connections—Charges—Sewer fund.
Funds received from sewer connection charges shall be deposited in the Sewer Fund and shall be
used for the benefit of the sanitary and storm sewer systems of the City.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 23
6-3.05 Sewer services—Charges.
All persons using the sanitary sewer system of the City shall pay for such service at the rates
established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 91-06 §§ 11—13, 1991)
6-3.06 Sewer services—Charges—Billing.
All charges for sewer services, as set forth in Section 6-3.05 of this chapter, shall be paid at the
same times as water and gas utility charges are paid to the City, and such charges shall be billed upon
the same statements mailed to customers. In any cases where utility charges are billed to different
persons for the same location, the sewer service charges shall be billed to the person charged for
domestic water service.
6-3.07 Sewer services—Charges—Vacancies.
At the time of the payment of the current bill, any apartment house owner or operator may receive
credit for any apartment in the apartment house which has remained vacant for a period of thirty (30)
days prior thereto by filing an affidavit with the City Clerk so stating. No sewer service charge shall be
collected for living units or places of business which have remained vacant for a period of thirty (30) days
or more. Vacancies shall be deemed to commence from the date of the request for the shut-off of
domestic water service to the particular house or place of business.
6-3.08 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply while contract sewer charges are being paid.
6-3.09 Administration and enforcement—Supplemental rules and regulations.
The City Manager may make such rules and regulations as may be necessary or desirable to aid in
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
6-3.10 Grease interceptors required for new or newly renovated industrial facilities.
The owner of every newly constructed, remodeled, or converted commercial or industrial facility with
one or more grease-generating activities, including food service facilities with new or replacement
kitchens, for which a building permit is issued on or after July 1, 2009, shall install or cause to be installed
a grease interceptor for each grease-generating activity, of a size equal to or greater than the minimum
size meeting the definition of "grease removal device," as set forth in the operative edition (presently the
2007 Edition, section 209) of the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted by the California Building Standards
Commission into the California Code of Regulations.
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 6-3-2009)
6-3.11 Grease interceptors required on industrial facilities with problem lines.
The owner of every commercial or industrial generator of grease, including food service facilities,
serviced by a sewer collection line found to have a grease blockage, a history of grease blockage, or
accelerated line maintenance resulting from grease disposal shall install or cause to be installed, upon
notification by the superintendent of the plant, a grease removal device.
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 6-3-2009)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 24
6-3.12 Grease interceptors for all industrial facilities.
The owner of every commercial or industrial generator of grease, including food service facilities, for
which installation of grease removal devices is not required pursuant to Sections 6-3.10 and 6-3.11, shall
install or cause to be installed a grease removal device for each grease-generating activity, on or before
November 16, 2009.
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, 6-3-2009)
Chapter 4 WATER SERVICES
Sections:
6-4.01 Availability.
6-4.02 Applications—Form.
6-4.03 Establishment of credit—Prerequisite to obtaining water service.
6-4.04 Establishment of credit—Deposits.
6-4.05 Service connections—Installation—Fees.
6-4.06 Service connections—Charges.
6-4.07 Water services—Charges.
6-4.08 Water services—Charges—Billings—Delinquencies.
6-4.09 Industrial users—Excessive demands.
6-4.10 Waste of water—Wilful violations.
6-4.11 Waste of water—Accumulations.
6-4.12 Waste of water—Irrigating faucets, hoses, and nozzles.
6-4.13 Waste of water—Connections.
6-4.14 Evaporative coolers—Feed-in water lines.
6-4.15 Water coolers—Discharge of wasted water.
6-4.16 Mechanical cooling devices—Water heater exchangers.
6-4.17 Interference with employees—Tampering with equipment.
6-4.18 Unlawful removal of meters and illegal hookups—Charges.
6-4.19 Supplemental rules and regulations.
6-4.01 Availability.
The City shall furnish water service pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and in accordance with
other applicable rules and regulations, to any property within the City and to such areas outside the City
as the Council may designate.
6-4.02 Applications—Form.
Each applicant for water service shall be required to sign an application form provided by the Public
Works Department, or make an application by letter, showing the date of the application, the location of
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 25
the premises to be served, the mailing address, the date the applicant desires water service, and such
other information as may be required.
Applications for water service to premises for which a service connection has already been installed
may be made as provided in this chapter. Such application shall signify the customer's willingness and
intention to comply with the provisions of this chapter and to make payments for water service rendered.
If the application is made for service to property where no service connection has been installed but
where a distribution main is adjacent to the property, the applicant, in addition to making an application for
water service, shall comply with the provisions of this chapter governing the installation of service
connections. Where an extension of the distribution main in excess of one hundred (100) feet is
necessary or a substantial investment is required to furnish service, the applicant shall be informed by the
Public Works Department as to whether or not the distribution facilities can be extended pursuant to the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
6-4.03 Establishment of credit—Prerequisite to obtaining water service.
(a) Original establishment. Each applicant, before receiving water service, may be required to establish
credit by either of the following methods:
(1) A cash deposit to secure the payment of the water bills as set forth in Section 6-4.04 of this
chapter; or
(2) The use of service for more than one year during the last twelve (12) months of which the
customer paid all water bills promptly without a disconnection for nonpayment.
(b) Reestablishment. To reestablish credit, a customer shall be required to pay all delinquent bills up to
the time service was disconnected. The customer may be required to pay a reconnection charge and
make a cash deposit as set forth in Section 6-4.04 of this chapter.
6-4.04 Establishment of credit—Deposits.
(a) Original establishment. The amount required to establish credit for water service shall be set by
resolution of the City Council.
(b) Reestablishment. To reestablish credit, a customer may be required to deposit an amount equal to
the amount required by Section 6-4.04(a).
(c) Delinquent accounts. The deposits required by the provisions of this section may be applied to
delinquent bills for water service when such service has been discontinued. The Public Works
Department may require the customer to deposit a specified amount before rendering water service
again.
(d) Refunds. The deposits required by the provisions of this section, less the amount of any unpaid bills,
shall be refunded, without interest, on the discontinuance of service. After the deposit has been held
for twelve (12) consecutive months, the deposit shall be refunded upon an application therefor and
the presentation of the deposit receipt provided service has been continuous and all bills for such
service have been paid promptly.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the occupants of trailer houses located in established
trailer parks in the City and in territory outside and adjacent to the City, as well as to any property within
the City and outside the City.
(Ord. 91-06 §§ 14, 15, 1991)
6-4.05 Service connections—Installation—Fees.
Water service connections shall be installed in the size and at the location desired by the applicant
where such requests are reasonable. Service connections shall be made only to the property abutting on
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 26
public streets or to such distribution mains as may be constructed in alleys or rights-of-way at the
convenience of the Public Works Department. Service connections installed in new subdivisions prior to
the construction of streets or in advance of street improvements shall be accepted by the applicant in the
installed location. A connection fee shall be established by the City Council by resolution. Such fee shall
be paid prior to the issuance of building permits.
(Ord. 91-06 § 16, 1991)
6-4.06 Service connections—Charges.
Charges for new service connections shall be as follows:
(a) Inside the City limits. Charges for new service connections shall be established by the City
Council by resolution.
(b) Outside the City limits. Charges for new service connections shall be established by the City
Council by resolution.
(c) Miscellaneous charges. Miscellaneous charges shall be established by the City Council by
resolution.
(Ord. 91-06 § 17, 1991)
6-4.07 Water services—Charges.
All persons using the potable water system of the City shall pay for such service at the rates
established by the City Council by resolution.
(Ord. 91-06 §§ 18—21, 1991)
6-4.08 Water services—Charges—Billings—Delinquencies.
(a) All bills for water service shall become due and payable on the date of presentation and shall
become delinquent on the first day of the calendar month following the date of presentation.
(b) A customer's water service may be discontinued if a bill is not paid within fifteen (15) days after such
bill becomes delinquent. The service shall not be discontinued, however, until the amount of the
deposit made to establish credit for that service has been fully absorbed.
(c) A customer's water service may be discontinued if water service furnished at a previous location is
not paid for within fifteen (15) days after the presentation of a bill.
(d) If a customer received water service at more than one location and the bill for the service at any one
location is not paid within fifteen (15) days after is presentation, water service at all locations may be
turned off.
(e) All charges for water services, sewer services, refuse collection services, and any other services
rendered by the City may be billed upon the same bill and collected as one item. If all or a part of
such bill is not paid, any or all of the services for which the bill is rendered may be discontinued.
(f) If each case where any bill remains unpaid for sixty (60) days after such bill become delinquent, the
City shall:
(1) Disconnect the premises from the water system for nonpayment of the water bill; and
(2) Cause an action at law to be brought on behalf of the City against the person responsible for the
payment of such bill to recover the amount of such bill and the costs of such action.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 27
6-4.09 Industrial users—Excessive demands.
The Public Works Department may interrupt or limit service to any industrial user where excessive
demands by one customer shall result in inadequate or injurious service to others.
6-4.10 Waste of water—Wilful violations.
The wilful waste of water supplied by the Public Works Department shall be prohibited.
6-4.11 Waste of water—Accumulations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to draw, use, or consume any water furnished by or belonging to
the City in such a manner as to allow such water to flow down gutters or streets, or to cause or allow
pools of water to accumulate on vacant lots, or to in any other way wilfully or negligently waste water.
6-4.12 Waste of water—Irrigating faucets, hoses, and nozzles.
The use of water by means of an unattended open hose or open faucet for irrigation purposes shall
be prohibited. All unattended hoses used for irrigation purposes shall have attached thereto a spray
nozzle or sprinkling device.
6-4.13 Waste of water—Connections.
Each consumer of water shall keep all connections, faucets, hydrants, pipes, outlets, and plumbing
fixtures tight and free from leakage, dripping, or waste of water.
6-4.14 Evaporative coolers—Feed-in water lines.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, or use, or permit to be installed, maintained, or
used, feed-in water lines to domestic evaporative coolers which lines are larger than one-fourth (¼?) inch
in diameter.
6-4.15 Water coolers—Discharge of wasted water.
(a) All evaporative water coolers shall be equipped with recirculating pumps on or before June 1, 1977.
All evaporative water coolers installed after June 1, 1977, shall also be equipped with recirculating
pumps.
(b) No evaporative cooler shall be connected to the City sewer system without the prior permission of
the Public Works Director.
(c) The Public Works Director shall turn off the water connection to any property where any provision of
this section is being violated. Such water connection shall not again be turned on until the violation
has been corrected to the satisfaction of the Public Works Department and the charges for the
reconnection of water services have been paid in full.
6-4.16 Mechanical cooling devices—Water heater exchangers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, or cause to be installed, a water heater exchanger on
any mechanical cooling device within the City.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 28
6-4.17 Interference with employees—Tampering with equipment.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent or interfere with an employee of the Public Works
Department in the lawful discharge of his duties, or tamper with, injure, or destroy the lines, valves,
fire hydrants, machinery, meters, property, or equipment of the Department, or take any water from
the Department without first complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(b) No person shall interfere with or in any manner tamper with any water meter, pipe line, or water
service facility of the department, and in the event that any person shall interfere with or tamper with
any of the same so that repairs or adjustments are necessary, water service to such person shall be
discontinued until the cost of making the necessary repairs or adjustments shall have been paid in
advance. No by-pass or connection between a water meter and a water main shall be made or
maintained without the permission, in writing, of the superintendent.
(Ord. 2000-08, 2000)
6-4.18 Unlawful removal of meters and illegal hookups—Charges.
(a) Unauthorized meter removal. It shall be unlawful for anyone other than an authorized employee of
the Public Works Department to remove a meter without the permission of the City Manager. When a
meter has been unlawfully removed, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the service to which
the meter was attached.
(b) Illegal connection. When an authorized employee of the Public Works Department has shut off water
from any premises upon the application of the owner or for nonpayment of water charge, or for any
other cause, it shall be unlawful for any person except authorized employees of the Public Works
Department to again connect such premises with the water system.
(c) Unmetered service. It shall be illegal for any person or entity to receive water from an unmetered City
water source or from another person's or entity's water supply through use of piping, hoses, or taps
into the water pipes or to knowingly permit an illegal water hookup to his or her system.
(d) Fines and penalties. For purposes of this chapter, each day of unauthorized service shall be deemed
a separate offense. Persons and/or entities violating this section shall, in addition to any criminal
penalties which may apply, be subject to the following fines and penalties:
(1) Service charge. Any owner or resident, or their agents or employees, acting in violation and/or
allowing the violation of this section to exist on the subject property shall be responsible for all
charges for water services rendered by the City as a result of the violation. Such charges shall
be billed and administered in accordance with Section 6-4.08 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
(2) Fine. In addition to those charges provided for above, any owner or resident, or their agents or
employees, acting in violation of and/or allowing the violation of this section to exist on the
subject property shall be subject to a fine, which is due and payable to the City within fifteen
(15) days, or such longer period as may be noted on the Notice of Abatement Citation, after
mailing or posting of a Notice of Abatement Citation issued and served in accordance with the
provisions set forth in Sections 6-5.06 and 6-5.07 of the Code. Unless otherwise amended by
the City Council by resolution the fines assessed for violation of this section shall be in the
following amounts:
Citation Amount of
Fine
First Notice of Abatement Citation $100.00
Second Notice of Abatement Citation within six (6) months of First Notice of Abatement $200.00
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 29
Third and any subsequently issued Notice of Abatement Citation within one year of First
Notice of Abatement Citation
$500.00
(3) Disconnection. The City shall have the right to pursue any remedies allowed by law or equity to
bring any violator into compliance including disconnection of all water services to the property
until correction of the violation, and payment of all fines, fee and penalties assessed by the City
under this section.
(e) Repair damage.
(1) In addition to the penalties and fines listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section, the owner of the
property on which damage has been caused by any owner or resident, or their agents or
employees, to any City water system, meter, meter can, stop clock, box and line caused by any
resident, or agent thereof, for conduct in violation of this section, shall be responsible for
payment of repair costs incurred by the City to repair such damage. The cost of repair shall be
based upon the invoice cost of said meter, fittings, stop clock, box and/or line, together with
reasonable charges for labor and equipment for the repair thereof.
(2) The City and/or its authorized agent shall keep an itemized account of the expenses and costs
incurred by its employees and/or authorized agents in the work and abatement of any violation
of this section. Upon completion of the work and abatement, the Public Works Department
and/or an authorized agent thereof, shall prepare a report specifying the work and abatement
performed, the itemized costs of the work on the property, including direct and indirect costs,
and a description of the property. Such report shall be served upon the owner of the property in
accordance with Section 6-5.07, together with a demand that the amount identified therein be
paid within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the report.
(f) Collection. The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by the First Notice of Abatement Citation
and/or any subsequent served Abatement Citation issued under this section, and/or to pay any
charge assessed pursuant to subsection (e) of this section, constitutes a debt to the City. To enforce
the debt, the City and/or its authorized agent may file a claim with the appropriate court, impose an
assessment lien as set forth in Section 6-5.17, or pursue any other legal remedy to collect such
money. For purposes of this section, the term "violator" in Section 6-5.17 shall mean an owner acting
in violation of this section, an owner who otherwise allowed a violation of this section to exist on
his/her property following receipt of Notice of Abatement and/or an owner who failed to timely pay for
repair damages charged pursuant to subsection (e) of this section.
(g) Emergencies. This section, and the penalties set forth herein shall not apply to situations where
emergencies require the water to be shut off or the water is shut off by a licensed plumber; provided,
however, that the owner or licensed plumber must notify the City of any turning on or off of the City
meter.
(h) Appeal. Any person receiving a First Notice of Abatement Citation and/or any subsequently issued
Abatement Citation, may appeal the issuance of the Citation and the amount of fine charged in
relation thereto, in the manner provided for in Section 6-5.10 of the Code.
(i) Entering property. The City and/or its designated agent or authorized representative of the City may
enter upon private property to abate any violation of this section and/or make repairs to any City
water system, meter, meter can, stop clock, box and line caused by any owner, resident, or agent
thereof, for conduct in violation of this section. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the City whenever such person is
engaged in the abatement, work or repair, as authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter. Any
attempt to obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized
representative of the City in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 30
imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by a fine exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00).
(j) Amendment of fines. The City Council may amend the amount of the fine to be assessed under
subsection (d)(2) of this section by resolution.
(k) Late fee. Fines and damage repair charges assessed under this section pursuant to subsections
(d)(2) and (e) of this section, respectively, shall be made payable to the City and shall not excuse the
failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement by the City. The failure of any
person to pay any fine and/or repair cost assessed pursuant to subsections (d)(2) and (e), may result
in the assessment of an additional late fee against the responsible party. The amount of the late feeif
assessed shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total amount of the fine or repair cost owed.
(Ord. 2005-03, 2005)
6-4.19 Supplemental rules and regulations.
Supplemental rules and regulations shall be adopted by the Council by resolution, and copies of
such rules and regulations shall at all times be maintained in the office of the City Clerk and shall be
available for inspection by the general public.
Article 2. - Control of Backflow and Cross-connections
Article 3. - Conservation
Article 4. - Drought Relief Surcharge Program
Article 2. Control of Backflow and Cross-connections
6-4.20(A) Cross-connection control—General policy.
6-4.20(B) Definitions.
6-4.20(C) Requirements.
6-4.20(D) Installation of water service connection—Maintenance.
6-4.20(E) Inspection of customer's system.
6-4.20(F) Backflow devices.
6-4.20(G) Protective devices—Degree of hazard.
6-4.20(H) Approval of Director.
6-4.20(I) Inspection and tests.
6-4.20(J) Presently installed devices.
6-4.20(A) Cross-connection control—General policy.
(a) The purpose of this article is:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of the City from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within its customers' internal distribution system(s) or its customers' private
water system(s) such contaminates or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into the
public water supply system;
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 31
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between
its customer's in-plant potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures
and industrial piping systems; and
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connections control which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water
systems.
(b) Responsibility. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the protection of the public
potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or backsiphonage
of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of
said Director, an approved backflow prevention device is required, at the City's water service
connection to any customer's premises, for the safety of the water system, the Director or his
designated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install such an approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer shall immediately install
such approved device or devices at his own expense; and failure, refusal or inability on the part of
the customer to install said device or devices immediately shall constitute a ground for discontinuing
water service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(B) Definitions.
(a) Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works, hereafter called Director, in charge of the
Water Department of the City is invested with the authority and responsibility for an implementation
of an effective cross-connection control program and for enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(b) "Approved" means accepted by the Director as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in
this article, or as suitable for the proposal use.
(c) "Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the City's
approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another public
potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or
"used water" or "industrial fluids." These waters may be polluted or contaminated or they may be
objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the City does not have
sanitary control.
(d) "Backflow" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the
distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source or sources other than its
intended source.
(e) "Back-siphonage" means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended sources
caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
(f) "Backflow preventer" means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage.
(g) "Air-gap" means the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest
opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the
flood level rim of said vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply
pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the rim of the vessel; and, in no case less than one inch.
When an air-gap is used at the service connection to prevent the contamination or pollution of the
City's potable water system, an emergency by-pass shall be installed around the air-gap system and
an approved reduced pressure principle device shall be installed in the by-pass system.
(h) "Reduced pressure principle device" means an assembly of two (2) independently operating
approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valves between the two (2)
check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located
test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. The entire assembly shall meet the design
and performance specifications and approval of a recognized and City-approved testing agency for
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 32
backflow prevention assemblies. The device shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone
between the two (2) check valves at a level less than the pressure on the City water supply side of
the device. At cessation of normal flow the pressure between the check valves shall be less than the
supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve shall operate to
maintain this reduced pressure by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two (2)
pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved these
devices must be readily accessible for in-line maintenance and testing and be installed in a location
where no part of the device will be submerged.
(i) "Double check valve assembly" means an assembly of two (2) independently operating approved
check valves with tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly
located test cock for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and
performance specifications and approval of recognized and City-approved testing agency for
backflow prevention devices. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line
maintenance and testing.
(j) "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids
or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
(k) "Cross-connection" means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two
(2) otherwise separate piping systems one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable
water or industrial fluids or questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or
back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system. A water service connection between a
public potable water distribution system and a customer's water distribution system which is crossconnected
to a contaminated fixture, industrial fluid system or with a potentially contaminated supply
or auxiliary water system, constitutes one type of cross-connection. Other types of cross-connections
include connectors such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools,
dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices, sliding multiport tube, solid connections, etc.
(l) Cross-connections—controlled. "Controlled cross-connection" means a connection between a
potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device
properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of
hazard.
(m) "Cross-connection control by containment" means the installation of an approved backflow
prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically
and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential crossconnections
within the customer's water system where there are actual or potential crossconnections
which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of cross-connection.
(n) Hazard, degree of.
(1) Hazard—Health. "Health hazard" means any condition, device or practice in the water supply
system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the Director may create a
danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. An example of a health hazard is a
structural defect, including cross-connections, in a water supply.
(2) Hazard—Plumbing. "Plumbing hazard" means a plumbing-type cross-connection in a
consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker,
air-gap separation or backflow prevention device. Unprotected plumbing-type cross-connections
are considered to be a health hazard.
(3) Hazard—Pollutional. "Pollutional hazard" means an actual or potential threat to the physical
properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water
system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause
damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health.
(4) Hazard—System. "System hazard" means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the
physical properties of the City's potable water system or the consumer's potable water system
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 33
or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the
potable water in the system.
(o) "Industrial fluids system" means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute
a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This
may include, but not limited to: polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and
"used waters" originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in
sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulated cooling waters
connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated
or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural water such as from wells, springs, streams,
rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic
and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting
purposes.
(p) "Pollution" means the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in water
which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of
the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does
adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
(q) Water—Potable. "Potable water" means any water which, according to recognized standards is safe
for human consumption.
(r) Water—Nonpotable. "Nonpotable water" means water which is not safe for human consumption or
which is of questionable potability.
(s) Water—Service connections. "Service connections water" means the terminal end of a service
connection from the City's potable water system; i.e., where the City loses jurisdiction and sanitary
control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at
the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the
meter. There should be not unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or
backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service
connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or
emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.
(t) Water—Used. "Used water" means any water supplied by the City from the potable water system to
a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under
the sanitary control of the City.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(C) Requirements.
(a) Water system.
(1) The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the City system and the
customer system.
(2) The City system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system; and shall
include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the City up to the
point where the customer's system begins.
(3) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment,
storage, and delivery of water to the distribution system.
(4) The distribution systems shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water
from the source to the customer's system.
(5) The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the
City distribution system which are utilized in conveying City delivered domestic water to pointsof
use.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 34
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(D) Installation of water service connection—Maintenance.
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained unless the water supply
is protected as required by State laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises
shall be discontinued if a prevention device required by this chapter is not installed, tested and
maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, by-passed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or
defects are corrected.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(E) Inspection of customer's system.
The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the Public Works Water Division to determine whether cross-connections or other
structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition
becomes known, the Director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing
for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance
with State and City statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(F) Backflow devices.
An approved backflow prevention device shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's
water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but in all cases,
before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist.
(a) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe
bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the
Director, the City water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
(b) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is
handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the City water system,
the City system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow
prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the
handling of process waters and waters originating from the City system which have beensubject
to deterioration in quality.
(c) In the case of premises having (1) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently
corrected and controlled, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all
portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it
impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the
City water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a
backflow prevention device in the service line.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(G) Protective devices—Degree of hazard.
The type of protective device required under subsections 6-4.20(F)(a), (b) and (c) shall depend upon
the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 35
(a) In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection 6-
4.20(F)(a) of this chapter and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the City water system
shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device.
(b) In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but
not hazardous to health, if introduced into the City water system, the City water system shall be
protected by an approved double check valve assembly.
(c) In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in
such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the City water system, the City water
system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist
include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants,
hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
(d) In the case of any premises where there are "uncontrolled" cross-connections, either actual or
potential, the City water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection.
(e) In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or
restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey,
the City water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises
by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum
protection will be required; that is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service to the premises.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(H) Approval of Director.
Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of model and size approved by the Director.
"Approved backflow prevention device" means a device that has been manufactured in full conformance
with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled:
AWWA C506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow
Prevention Devices:
and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications for the Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices — #69-2 dated March 1969 or the most current issue said
AWWA and FCCC&HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the Director. Final approval
shall be evidenced by a "Certificate of Approval" issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full
compliance with said AWWA standards and FCCC&HR Specifications.
The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the Director to test and certify backflow
preventers.
Foundation for Cross-connection Control & Hydraulic Research
University of Southern California
University Park
Los Angeles, CA 90008
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as
they are qualified by the Director.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 36
Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back pressure or back siphonage that have
been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are
listed on the laboratory's current list of "Approved Devices" may be used without further test or
qualifications.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(I) Inspection and tests.
It shall be the duty of the customer-user at any premises where backflow prevention devices are
installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those
instances where the Director deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require certified inspections
at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall
be performed by the device manufacturer's representative, by Public Works Water Division personnel or
by a certified tester approved by the Director. It shall be the duty of the Director to see that these timely
tests are made. The customer-user shall notify the Director in advance when the tests are to be
undertaken so that he or his representative may witness the tests if so desired. Theses devices shall be
repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer-user whenever said devices are found to
be defective. Records of such test, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and made available to theDirector.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
6-4.20(J) Presently installed devices.
All presently installed backflow devices which do not meet the requirements of this section but were
approved devices for the purpose described herein at the time of installation and which have been
properly maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under Section 6-
4.20(I), be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the Director is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the City system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or
requires more than minimum maintenance or when the Director finds that the maintenance constitutes a
hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of
this section.
(Ord. 88-02 § 1 (part), 1988)
Article 3. Conservation
6-4.21 Unlawful acts.
6-4.22 Violations—Notices—Penalties.
6-4.23 Notice.
6-4.24 Hearing.
6-4.25 Exceptions.
6-4.26 City exempt.
6-4.27 The rights of the City.
6-4.28 Authorization to implement further restrictions.
6-4.29 Severability.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 37
6-4.21 Unlawful acts.
The following are hereby declared to be unlawful acts under the terms of this article:
(a) In the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or other water user shall sprinkle,
irrigate or otherwise apply water to any yard, ground, premises or vegetation except on the
following designated days: Those users, whether residential, commercial or industrial, with oddnumbered
addresses may water only on Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Those users,
whether residential, commercial or industrial, with even-numbered addresses may water only on
Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
(b) Notwithstanding Section 6-4.20(a), in the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or
other water user shall sprinkle, irrigate or otherwise apply water to any yard, ground, premises
or vegetation on Sundays.
(c) In the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or other water user shall sprinkle,
irrigate or otherwise apply water to any yard, ground, premises or vegetation except during the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on the appropriate day as
specified above.
(d) In the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or other water user shall use water by
means of unattended open hose or open faucet for irrigation purposes. All unattended hoses
used for irrigation purposes shall have a spray nozzle or sprinkling device attached thereto.
(e) In the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or other water user shall fail to keep,
maintain, operate or use any water connection, hose, faucet, hydrant, pipe, outlet or plumbing
fixture which is not tight and free from leakage, dripping or waste of water.
(f) In the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or other water user shall allow
excessive water to flow down gutters or streets, or to accumulate on adjoining or adjacent
property.
(g) In the use of water supplied by the City, no person, entity or other water user shall wash motor
vehicles, trailers, boats and other types of equipment except with a hand held bucket or hose
equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick rinses.
(h) Residents with private swimming pools shall file a written application with the City Manager for a
permit prior to draining and filling their pools. Water lost through normal use or evaporation may
be replaced as needed.
(Ord. 92-06 § 1, 1993; Ord. 91-05 § 1, 1991: Ord. 91-02 § 1, 1991)
6-4.22 Violations—Notices—Penalties.
The violation of any of the provisions of Sections 6-4.10, 6-4.11, 6-4.12, 6-4.13, 6-4.14, 6-4.15, 6-
4.16, 6-4.17, 6-4.18, and 6-4.20, or any other provision which is enacted by the resolution of City Council
shall result in the following actions by the City except for a violation of 6-4.17 for which there shall result in
the following actions by the City except for a violation of 6-4.17 for which there shall be no warning for the
first violation, second violation shall be treated in accordance with Section 6-4.22(c); a third; a third and
subsections violation shall be treated in accordance with Section 6-4.22(d).
(a) First violation. A written notice of the violation shall be issued by the Public Works Department
personnel to the respective water customer of the City.
(b) Second violation. A written notice of the violation shall be issued by the Public Works
Department personnel to the respective water customer of the City and a charge of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) shall be added to the next water bill of such customer as a one-time charge for
such violation. Said customer shall pay the full amount of such charge within thirty (30) days of
the date of said water bill.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 38
(c) Third violation. A written notice of the violation shall be issued by the Public Works Department
personnel to the respective water customer of the City and a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall
be added to the water bill of such customer as a one-time charge for such violation. Said
customer shall pay the full amount of such charge within thirty (30) days of the date of said
water bill.
(d) Fourth and subsequent violations. A written notice of the violation shall be issued by the Public
Works Department personnel to the respective water customer of the City and a charge of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be added to the water bill of such customer as a one-time
charge for such violation. Said customer shall pay the full amount of such charge within thirty
(30) days of the date of said water bill.
(e) Leaks in customer's system. When a leak is discovered by a customer in a customer's water
system and a customer is charged for water that the customer has not used, as a result of said
leakage, it shall be the policy of the City to aid the customer in locating the leak. If the leak is
repaired by the customer within a period of ten (10) days of the date the leak is discovered and
the customer can establish that a portion of the charges identified in its water bill are in excess
of the amount normally charged to the customer, that excess amount of water use caused by
the leakage shall be charged to the customer at the standard water rate. If the leak is not
repaired by the customer within the ten-day period, the portion of excess water usage which
results from the leakage will be billed at two (2) times the standard water rate until the leak is
repaired by the customer.
(f) Determination of number of offenses. In order to be defined as a violation other than a first
violation, the violation must occur within one year of the date of the first violation.
(Ord. 2000-09, 2000; Ord. 91-02 § 2, 1991)
6-4.23 Notice.
The Public Works Department or its designee shall give notice of each violation to the customer
committing such violation as follows:
(a) For any violation which does not include the installation of a flow restrictor or the discontinuance
of water service to the customer for any time period whatsoever, the Public Works Department
may give written notice of the fact of such violation to the customer personally or by regularmail.
(b) If the penalty assessed is or includes installation of a flow restrictor or the discontinuation of
water service to the customer for any period of time whatsoever, notice of the violation shall be
given in the following manner:
(1) By delivering a written notice to the customer personally; or
(2) If the customer is absent from or unavailable at either his place of residence or his
assumed place of business, by leaving a copy with some competent member of the
household or a person apparently in charge of the office or place of business, at least
eighteen (18) years of age, who was informed of the general nature of the papers, and
sending a copy through the United States Mail addressed to the customer at either his
place of business or residence; or
(3) If such place of residence and/or business cannot be ascertained, or a competent member
of the household or a person apparently in charge of the office or place of business at least
eighteen (18) years of age cannot be found, then by affixing a copy in a conspicuous place
on the property where the failure to comply is occurring and also by delivering a copy to a
person there residing if such person can be found and also sending a copy through the
United States Mail addressed to the customer at the place where the property is situated.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 39
(c) All notices shall contain, in addition to the facts of the violation, a statement of the possible
penalties for each violation and a statement informing the customer of his/her right to a hearing
on the violation.
(d) Notice to the water user shall be given at both the billing and service address on file with the
City.
(Ord. 91-02 § 3, 1991)
6-4.24 Hearing.
(a) Any water user receiving notice of a violation of Section 6-4.20 shall have a right to a hearing by the
City Manager or his/her designee within fifteen (15) days of mailing or other delivery of the notice of
violation.
(b) The water user's written request for a hearing must be received within ten (10) days of the issuance
of the notice of violation. This request shall stay installation of a flow restricting device on the water
user's premises and the imposition of any surcharge until the City Manager or his/her designee
renders a decision. This decision shall be issued within ten (10) days of the hearing and it shall
provide a copy to the water user.
(c) The decision of the City Manager or his/her designee may be appealed to the Avenal City Council or
its designee by the water user's filing with the City Clerk a request for appeal within fifteen (15) days
of service of the decision. Filing of such request stays implementation of any surcharge or installation
of flow restrictor.
(d) The appeal hearing will be scheduled to occur within a reasonable period of time following filing of
the appeal. No formal rules of evidence apply. All evidence customarily relied upon by reasonable
persons in the conduct of serious business affairs will be allowed and the water user may present
any such evidence which shows the alleged wasteful water use has not occurred. The decision of
the City Council or its designee will be given in writing to the water user within fifteen (15) days of the
appeal hearing and that decision shall be final.
(Ord. 91-02 § 4, 1991)
6-4.25 Exceptions.
Written application for an exception or adjustment may be made to:
City Manager
City of Avenal
919 Skyline Boulevard
Avenal, California 93204
The City Manager may (a) grant permits for the uses of water otherwise prohibited or (b) adjust the
established requirements if the City Manager finds that:
To fail to do so would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, fire
protection or safety of the customer or the public or adverse impacts such as loss of production or jobs.
No permit shall be granted unless the customer has adopted all practicable water conservation
measures and/or has demonstrated to the City Manager's satisfaction that there are not alternatives to
the use of water from the City water system and that the water of the City of Avenal will be used efficiently
and without waste.
The City Manager's denial of an application for an exception or adjustment is final.
(Ord. 91-02 § 5, 1991)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 40
6-4.26 City exempt.
The City of Avenal, its officers, employees and agents, when acting in the course and scope of their
employment, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article; provided, however, the City Manager shall
make rules and regulations as may be necessary in order for the City to conserve water resources and
energy to the greatest extent practicable.
(Ord. 91-02 § 6, 1991)
6-4.27 The rights of the City.
The rights of the City of Avenal hereunder shall be in addition to any other rights of the City under
any other applicable laws.
(Ord. 91-02 § 7, 1991)
6-4.28 Authorization to implement further restrictions.
The City Council of the City is hereby authorized from time to time to implement by resolution such
additional measures which are determined by the City Council to be necessary in order to ensure an
adequate supply of water for use by citizens of the City and to ensure the health and safety of the citizens
of the City. Measures may be implemented either City-wide or by specific zones.
(Ord. 91-02 § 8, 1991)
6-4.29 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is for any
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The City Council of the City
hereby declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this article and all provisions hereof
irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the provisions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 91-02 § 9, 1991)
Article 4. Drought Relief Surcharge Program
6-4.30 Intent and findings.
6-4.31 Definitions.
6-4.32 Responsibilities of the Community Development Director.
6-4.33 Non-transferability of water estimate.
6-4.34 Time limit for using water estimate.
6-4.30 Intent and findings.
(a) The intent of this chapter is to ensure that demand for water shall not exceed available supply and
that the procurement of additional water supplies shall occur in a timely fashion.
(b) The City of Avenal finds that due to the fifth consecutive year of drought which resulted in a fifty (50)
percent reduction in water deliveries to the City, that providing water to new construction, expansions
or new occupancies would create an excessive cost to the City.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 41
(c) The City of Avenal also finds that in order to allow for further development, the proposed water user
shall pay a drought relief surcharge fee which will be used exclusively to purchase additional water.
(d) The City of Avenal further finds that the imposition of such a fee, which will be used to secure
additional water, is necessary to insure that the public health, safety and welfare would not be
jeopardized.
(e) Finally, upon adoption of this ordinance the building moratorium declared on March 14, 1991 shall
become null and void.
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991)
6-4.31 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be used for interpreting this chapter:
"Fee table" means a table that indicates the average annual water use of different land uses that is
used in calculating how much water a proposed project needs over the next ten (10) years and how much
it will cost. The table shall be developed and incorporated in this chapter by resolution as Exhibit "A."
"Project" means new construction, additions to existing facilities, changes or intensification of use or
occupancies in an existing facility, or demolition and replacement of existing facilities.
"Water estimate" means the estimated water use of the proposed project over a ten (10) year period.
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991)
6-4.32 Responsibilities of the Community Development Director.
The Community Development Director is charged with:
(a) Developing and periodically updating the fee table in a fair and reasonable manner;
(b) Insuring that no building permits are issued unless the fee is paid.
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991)
6-4.33 Non-transferability of water estimate.
(a) Payment of the surcharge shall entitle the project proponent only to a specific project in a specific
location. Minor amendments to projects which do not change the type or intensity of use may be
approved so long as the amount of water does not increase and the project site and proponent do
not change.
(b) Payment of the surcharge shall entitle the project proponent to its water estimate for a specific
project and cannot be transferred to another project, property, or person, except that a transfer to a
new person may be allowed under the following circumstances, subject to City Council approval:
(1) Death of the project proponent, in which case the water estimate may be transferred to the legal
heirs; or
(2) Bankruptcy of the project proponent, in which case the water estimate may be transferred to the
creditors along with other project entitlement;
(3) In both cases set out in subdivision (1) and (2) of this subsection, the Council may also
authorize the transfer of the water estimate along with other project entitlements to a new
developer.
(c) Additionally, in cases of personal hardship not involving the death of the project proponent or
bankruptcy, the Council may also authorize the transfer of the water estimate and other project
entitlements to a new developer.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 42
(d) Personal hardship shall be defined as follows:
(1) Unforeseeable circumstances beyond the control of the project proponent which place the
proponent so near to bankruptcy that denial of the hardship application would force the
proponent into bankruptcy.
(2) A long-term serious illness or disability which incapacitates the proponent from completing the
project.
(e) A personal hardship may only be approved by the Council, after review by the Planning Commission.
(f) Application for transfer of the water estimate as part of a hardship shall be made in writing by the
project proponent and that following information shall be provided:
(1) Nature of personal hardship;
(2) Cause of hardship;
(3) Circumstances of the personal hardship to justify the request.
(g) A project proponent must be the record owner of a property in order to be eligible to obtain the water
estimate.
(h) The water estimate shall run with the project and the property and except as provided above may be
transferred to a new person after final occupancy has been approved by the City. The project which
has been approved by the City for phased development may be transferred with the project to a new
person after a phase has been approved for final occupancy.
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991)
6-4.34 Time limit for using water estimate.
(a) The water estimate shall be available for the period in which the building permit is valid. Construction
shall proceed with due diligence.
(b) Extensions of this time limit or reissuance of expired water estimate can be granted by the Planning
Commission only if the applicant can prove to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that
application for all necessary permits and construction were delayed due to hardship. In all cases the
water estimate shall expire two (2) years from the date it is issued.
(Ord. 91-07 (part), 1991)
Chapter 5 MAINTENANCE AND ABATEMENT OF PROPERTY NUISANCES [1]
Sections:
Exhibits:
6-5.01 Purpose—Nuisance defined.
6-5.02 Authority to declare nuisance.
6-5.03 Authority to abate nuisance.
6-5.04 Special standards and exceptions.
6-5.05 Recordation of abatement notices and instruments.
6-5.06 Notice of Abatement Citation.
6-5.07 Service of Notice of Abatement Citation.
6-5.08 Abatement work—Extension of time.
6-5.09 Fines assessed.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 43
6-5.10 Appeal of Notice of Abatement Citation.
6-5.11 Performance of abatement—City authority.
6-5.12 Entering property for abatement work.
6-5.13 Summary abatement—Notice and costs.
6-5.14 Administrative and abatement costs.
6-5.15 Costs of abatement—Record keeping.
6-5.16 Appeal of costs of abatement.
6-5.17 Notice of lien.
6-5.18 Confirmed assessment—Collection.
6-5.19 Remedies of private parties.
6-5.20 Alternatives.
6-5.21 Enforcement authority.
6-5.22 Violation—Penalty.
6-5.23 Violation—Abatement.
6-5-24 Effective date.
Exhibit 1
Exhibit 2
Exhibit 3
6-5.01 Purpose—Nuisance defined.
(a) The Council declares that its purpose in adopting this chapter is to establish a procedure to cause
the abatement of Municipal Code violations. The procedures established in this section shall be in
addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to
address violation of this Municipal Code. The chapter is also intended to be used as an alternative to
existing nuisance abatement procedures established in other chapters of this Code, if any exist.
(b) The City Council declares that any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of
any provision of this Code which obstructs, injures, or interferes with the reasonable or free use of
property belonging to a neighborhood, community or any considerable number of persons and poses
a serious threat to the public's safety and welfare, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be
summarily abated consistent with the procedures provided for in this action.
(c) The following acts and conditions, when performed or existing upon any lot, piece, parcel of land, or
structure within the City, are defined as and declared to be public nuisances when of such magnitude
as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or which have a
tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property or which cause
damage to public rights-of-way are as follows (but are not limited to):
(1) Land erosion. Land where erosion, subsidence, or surface water drainage problems exist;
(2) Fire hazards. Dry or dead shrubs, dead trees, combustible refuse or waste, or any material as
determined by the City Fire Department to constitute a fire hazard to a building, improvement,
crop or other property;
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 44
(3) Hazardous obstructions. An obstacle, landscaping or thing installed, or maintained on private
property near a roadway intersection obstructing the line of vision by reaching a height of more
than three feet above the adjoining top of curb at the applicable corner of roadway intersection
or three feet six inches above the nearest pavement surface where there is no curb;
(4) Polluted water. A swimming pool, or other body of water that is abandoned, unattended,
unfiltered or not otherwise maintained, resulting in water becoming polluted. "Polluted water" is
defined as water that includes, but is not limited to bacterial growth, remains of deceased
animals, reptiles, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers or other materials that because of its nature or
location constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe, or unsightly condition;
(5) Uniform codes. The violation of a provision of the following uniform codes:
(i) The Uniform Building Code as amended by the City Council,
(ii) The National Electrical Code as amended by the City Council,
(iii) The Uniform Fire Code as amended by the City Council,
(iv) The Uniform Housing Code as amended by the City Council,
(v) The Uniform Plumbing Code as amended by the City Council,
(vi) The Uniform Mechanical Code as amended by the City Council;
(6) Zoning ordinance. The violation of a provision of the land use regulations of the City as set forth
in Titles 8 and 9 of this Code;
(7) Water and sewer systems. Violation of a provision of the water and sewer system regulation as
set forth in Title 6 of this Code;
(8) Public peace, morals and welfare. Violation of a provision of the regulations of the City as set
forth in Titles 4 and 5 of this Code;
(9) Alleys. It shall be unlawful for any person occupying property fronting on any public alleyway in
the City to fail, refuse or neglect to keep the portion of such alley between the middle of the
alley way and the property line of such property free from accumulation of weeds, garbage,
rubbish, combustible material or any other material of any kind or nature;
(10) Defacement of property. A building or structure that is marked or defaced with spray paint, dye
or like substance in a manner commonly described as graffiti, for a period of time exceeding
fourteen (14) days;
(11) Exterior walls. All exterior walls and surfaces visible from the public right-of-way, including but
not limited to doors, windows and trim, shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials. In addition, all exterior walls and surfaces visible from the public right-of-way, shall be
weatherproofed and properly coated, where required, to prevent deterioration or rust;
(12) Rubbish and garbage. Garbage or trash cans or containers which cause offensive odors to
neighbors and the accumulation of rubbish or garbage in exterior property and premises visible
from the public right-of-way;
(13) Lawns. Lawns or grasses in excess of six (6) inches high and visible on the property;
(14) Storage. Abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative automobiles, trailers, campers, boats,
or similar vehicles, broken or discarded household furnishings, appliances, boxes and cartons,
lawn maintenance equipment, discarded building materials or similar materials, accumulated or
stored in yard areas for a period of time exceeding fourteen (14) days;
(15) Attractive nuisances. Those objects which, by their nature, may attract children or other curious
individuals including, but not limited to, unprotected and/or hazardous pools, ponds, iceboxes,
refrigerators, or excavations;
(16) Vacant buildings. Buildings or structures which are unoccupied and which have been left
unlocked or otherwise open or unsecured from intrusion by persons, animals or the elements;
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 45
(17) Signs. Except where such signs are legally permitted:
(i) Signs, both on-site and off-site which advertise uses no longer conducted or products no
longer on the premises,
(ii) Signs located on any commercial or industrial building or any other building which has
been vacant for more than forty-five (45) days, and
(iii) Temporary signs which advertise or are related to events which have already taken place;
(18) Drying of clothes in the front yard; and
(19) Fences or walls which violate zoning regulations regarding height, or which are in a hazardous
condition, or which are in disrepair, or which hinder free access to public sidewalks.
(Ord. 2002-05 § 1, 2002: Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.02 Authority to declare nuisance.
(a) Code Enforcement Officer(s) of the City of Avenal and all other authorized personnel shall be vested
with the authority to determine whether or not a public nuisance, as defined herein, may exist on any
private property and cause a written notice to be issued to abate such nuisance.
(b) In addition to the authorized personnel listed in subsection (a) of this section, the City Council may
declare the existence of a public nuisance at any time.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.03 Authority to abate nuisance.
(a) Whenever a public nuisance is maintained or exists in the City, either under the general law or
defined to be such under this Code, it shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer(s) of the
City and/or any other specific department charged with enforcement of the conditions as they are
maintained or exist, and they are hereby authorized and empowered to abate the same by removal,
destruction or abatement of the act or thing constituting a nuisance in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(b) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or restrict the ability of the Police and Fire
Departments in the performance of their duties.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.04 Special standards and exceptions.
With the following exceptions, the procedures provided in this chapter may be used in the abatement
of all nuisances.
(a) Summary abatement. All conditions which are determined by the Code Enforcement Officer(s)
of the City to pose an immediate risk to the health and safety of persons or property within the
City may be abated summarily in accordance with those procedures set forth in Section 6-5.13.
(b) Substandard structures. All notices issued to correct violations or to abate nuisances to a
substandard structure shall contain a provision notifying the owner that, in accordance with
Sections 17274 and 24436.5 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, a tax deduction may not be
allowed for interest, taxes, depreciation, or amortization paid or incurred on the property in the
taxable year. The abatement of substandard buildings or structures is addressed in Chapter 8 of
this Code.
(c) Abandoned vehicles. The abatement and removal, as public nuisances, of abandoned,wrecked,
dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private property or public property and
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 46
for the recovery of costs of administration and the removal is not subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.05 Recordation of abatement notices and instruments.
All notices and instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment are entitled
to recordation pursuant to Section 38772.5 of the California Government Code. Any document generated
pursuant to this chapter may, in the discretion of the City and/or its authorized agent, be recorded against
the subject property.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.06 Notice of Abatement Citation.
Where the Code Enforcement Officer(s) of the City and/or other authorized personnel has
determined a violation and/or nuisance to exist on private property, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a first Notice of Abatement Citation, and serve the same in accordance with the provisions of
Section 6-5.07 on the landowner and the person, if other than the landowner, occupying or otherwise in
apparent charge or control of the property. The first Notice of Abatement Citation shall be substantially in
the form as provided in Exhibit 1 at the end of this chapter, and shall contain the following information:
(a) The name and address of the owner of the property, if known;
(b) The street address or assessor's parcel number and location description sufficient for
identification of the property on which the violation and/or public nuisance exists;
(c) A statement of the nuisance and/or Code or ordinance violation;
(d) A statement to require the violator(s) to obtain all appropriate permits and correct the violation
or abate the public nuisance within the time period identified in the citation which time period
shall not exceed ten (10) days from the date of service of the citation, unless the Code
Enforcement Officer(s) identifies a longer period of time on the administrative citation;
(e) A statement advising that the disposal of material removed from the property in order to comply
with the citation shall be disposed of in the manner required by law;
(f) A statement advising that if the required work is not commenced within the time specified, the
Code Enforcement Officer may proceed to cause the work to be done, and bill the persons
named in the citation for all abatement costs and administrative expenses of the City and/or levy
the costs against the property by recordation of a notice of lien in accordance with Section 6-
5.17 of this chapter;
(g) The amount of the fine imposed for the violation(s), if any;
(h) Explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the consequences of failure to pay the fine;
(i) Signature of the Code Enforcement Officer(s) and the signature of the violator if the violator can
be located. If the violator refuses or does not sign the citation, the lack of such signature shall in
no way affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings; and
(j) A statement advising the person or persons identified in the citation that they may appeal the
issuance of the citation in accordance with Section 6-5.09 of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 47
6-5.07 Service of Notice of Abatement Citation.
(a) The first Notice of Abatement Citation, and all subsequently issued Abatement Citations, shall be
served upon each owner by personal service on the owner(s); or by certified mail, addressed to each
owner at the address shown at the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known.
(b) Copies of said notice shall also be posted at the conspicuous places on the property.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.08 Abatement work—Extension of time.
Upon receipt of a written request from any person required to comply with the first Notice of
Abatement Citation, the Code Enforcement Officer(s) may grant an extension of time within which to
complete the work or abatement if the Code Enforcement Officer(s) determines that such an extension of
time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property and if such person
has begun and is diligently accomplishing the work or abatement. The Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall
have the authority to place reasonable conditions on such extensions.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.09 Fines assessed.
(a) The City Council by resolution may establish the amount of the fine to be assessed by theAbatement
Citations issued by Code Enforcement Officer(s). If the violator or property owner fails to correct the
violation and maintain compliance with the first Notice of Abatement Citation for a period of twelve
(12) months, subsequent citations may be issued for the same violation(s), in the same manner as
provided for herein in regards to first Notice of Abatement Citations. The amount of the fine for each
subsequent Abatement Citation issued in regards to the same violation, shall increase at a rate
specified in the City Council resolution.
(b) Fines shall be made payable to the City and shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor
shall it bar further enforcement by the City.
(c) The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by the first Notice of Abatement Citation and/or any
subsequently served Abatement Citation, may result in the assessment of an additional late fee to be
charged. The amount of the late fee, if assessed, shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the total
amount of the fine owed.
(d) The failure of any person to pay a fine assessed by the first Notice of Abatement Citation and/or any
subsequent served Abatement Citation, within the time specified on the citation constitutes a debt to
the City. To enforce the debt, the Code Enforcement Officer may file a claim with the small claims
court; impose an assessment lien as set forth in Section 6-5.17; or pursue any other legal remedy to
collect such money.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.10 Appeal of Notice of Abatement Citation.
(a) Any person receiving a first Notice of Abatement Citation, and/or any subsequently issued
Abatement Citation, may appeal the issuance of the citation to the Avenal Planning Commission.
(b) The Notice of Appeal must be submitted in writing, must specify the basis for the appeal in detail,
and must be filed with the City within ten (10) calendar days after the date on the Abatement Citation.
If the deadline falls on a weekend or City holiday, the deadline shall be extended until the next
regular business day. The City will make available to the public that form set forth in Exhibit 2. A
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 48
Notice of Appeal which substantially complies with the requirements of this section shall beaccepted,
despite it not being submitted on the City-approved form.
(c) If the Notice of Appeal is filed in accordance with the provisions set forth herein in subsection (b) of
this section, the enforcement of the violations identified in the Abatement Citation(s) and the
requirement to pay any fine shall be stayed until the date that the appeal hearing is held by the
Avernal Planning Commission; except that, if the Code Enforcement Officer(s) determines that the
violation(s) identified in the citation(s) constitute an immediate threat to the health or safety of the
occupant of the property or the public in general, the Code Enforcement Officer shall proceed with
enforcement of the violations.
(d) As soon as practicable after receiving the written notice of appeal, the Avenal Planning Commission
and/or its designated agent shall fix a date, time and place for the hearing. Written notice of the date,
time and place for the hearing shall be served at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the date of the
hearing to the party appealing the Abatement Citation(s) by any one of the following means:
(1) Personal service;
(2) First class mail and posting the notice of hearing conspicuously on or in front of the property on
which the violation is located.
(e) The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive such notice shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. Service by normal delivery mail in the manner
described above shall become effective on the date of mailing.
(f) Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall
constitute waiver of that person's rights to administrative determination of the merits of the
Abatement Citation(s) and the amount of the fine.
(g) The Planning Commission shall conduct an orderly proceeding and accept oral and written evidence
regarding the Abatement Citation(s) in the following manner:
(1) The Director or the Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall present testimony and evidence relating
to the violation and the appropriate means of correcting the violation.
(2) The owner, agent or person responsible for the violation may present testimony or evidence
concerning the violation and the means and time for correction.
(h) The Planning Commission may sustain, modify or overrule the Abatement Citation. The decision of
the Planning Commission regarding any appeal is the final administrative order and decision.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.11 Performance of abatement—City authority.
If the violator and/or property owner fails to comply with the requirements of the Abatement
Citation(s) within the time periods set forth therein, the work to be performed and/or the abatement of the
nuisance may, in the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, be performed by the City or by a
contractor retained by the City.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.12 Entering property for abatement work.
The Code Enforcement Officer(s) or any employee, contractor or authorized representative of the
City, may enter upon private property to abate the violation and/or nuisance in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee,
contractor or authorized representative of the City whenever such person is engaged in the work or
abatement, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or abatement, as
authorized or directed pursuant to this chapter.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 49
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.13 Summary abatement—Notice and costs.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer(s) determines that a violation or public nuisance is so
imminently dangerous to life or adjacent property that such condition must be immediately corrected or
isolated, the Code Enforcement Officer(s) may institute the following procedures:
(a) Notice. The Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall attempt to make contact through a personal
interview, or by telephone, with the landowner or the person, if any, occupying or otherwise in
apparent charge or control of the property. In the event contact is made, the Code Enforcement
Officer(s) shall notify such person or persons of the danger involved and require that such
condition be immediately resolved, removed, repaired, or isolated so as to preclude harm to any
person or property.
(b) Abatement. In the event the Code Enforcement Officer(s) is unable to make contact as herein
above noted, or if the appropriate persons, after notification by the Code Enforcement Officer(s),
do not take action as specified by the Code Enforcement Officer(s), within twenty-four (24)
hours or such lesser time as the circumstances may warrant in the discretion of the Code
Enforcement Officer(s), then the Code Enforcement Officer(s) may, with the approval of the
Public Works Director/Chief Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Community Development
Director, take all steps deemed necessary to repair, remove or isolate such dangerous condition
or conditions with the use of City forces or a contractor retained by the City.
(c) Costs. The Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall keep an itemized statement of the work and
abatement costs and administrative expenses incurred by the City in repairing, removing or
isolating such condition or conditions. Administrative expenses may be recovered in the same
manner that work and abatement costs are recovered.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.14 Administrative and abatement costs.
Whenever a violation or public nuisance is found to exist as a result of an inspection, that actual work
and abatement costs and reasonable administrative expenses as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer(s) shall be paid by the property owner.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.15 Costs of abatement—Record keeping.
The Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall keep an itemized account of the expenses and costs incurred
by the City in the work and abatement of any violation or public nuisance. Upon completion of the work
and abatement, the Code Enforcement Officer(s) shall prepare a report specifying the work and
abatement performed, the itemized costs of the work on the property, including direct and indirect costs, a
description of the property, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to service pursuant to
Section 6-5.07 of this Chapter. Any such report may include expenses and costs on any number of
properties, whether or not contiguous to each other. Each person named in the Abatement Citation(s)
shall be jointly and severally liable for such work and abatement costs and administrative expenses, and
the amount of such costs and expenses shall be a debt owed to the City. Such report shall be served
upon the persons identified therein in accordance with Section 6-5.07, together with a demand that the
amount identified therein be paid within thirty (30) days of receipt of the report.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 50
6-5.16 Appeal of costs of abatement.
The written demand for payment identified in Section 6-5.15 shall advise the person or persons
identified in the written demand that they may appeal the demand for payment and the calculation of the
amounts identified in the Code Enforcement Officer's report within ten (10) days from the date of service
of the written demand, which appeal must be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 6-5.10.
The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 6-5.10.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.17 Notice of lien.
(a) Notice of lien. If a violator fails to pay a fine within the time period identified on the administrative
citation or should the violator fail to pay the costs of abatement within the time period identified in
Section 6-5.15 or within ten (10) days after the date of the decision of the Planning Commission
and/or hearing body, should the Planning Commission and/or hearing body affirm the collection of a
fine or the costs of abatement, the Code Enforcement Officer(s) may execute and file in the office of
the County Recorder a notice of lien of substantially that form set forth in Exhibit 3.
(b) Recordation. Immediately upon the recording of the notice of lien, the assessment shall constitute a
lien on the real property assessed. Such lien shall, for all purposes, be upon a parity with the lien of
state and local taxes.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.18 Confirmed assessment—Collection.
(a) Assessment book. The notice of lien, after recording, may be delivered to the tax assessor of Kings
County, who shall enter the amount on the county assessment book opposite the description of the
real property, and the amount shall be collected together will all other taxes levied thereon against
the real property.
(b) Collection. Thereafter, the amount set forth in the notice of lien shall be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same
penalties and interest and to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency
as provided for ordinary county taxes. All laws of county taxes are made applicable to such
assessment. The amount set forth in the notice of lien shall be returned to the City to the fund
designated for code enforcement activities.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.19 Remedies of private parties.
The provisions of this chapter shall not affect the rights of private parties to pursue any and all legal
remedies.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.20 Alternatives.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City Council from requesting the City Attorney to commence
a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a violation and/or public nuisance as an alternative to the
proceedings set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 51
6-5.21 Enforcement authority.
Enforcement of this chapter by the City may be accomplished by the Code Enforcement Officer(s) in
any manner authorized by law. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall
not in any manner limit or restrict the City from enforcing other City ordinances or abating violations
and/or public nuisances in any other manner provided by law.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.22 Violation—Penalty.
(a) Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter without the consent
of the City is guilty of an infraction.
(b) Any person who obstructs, impedes or interferes with any representative or contractor of the City or
with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in real property, buildings or premises
which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished or brought into
compliance with this chapter, when any of the aforementioned individuals are engaged in work
involving the abatement, is guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5.23 Violation—Abatement.
(a) It is unlawful for a person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter. A violation of any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of this chapter shall constitute an infraction which shall be punishable as set forth in
Section 1-2.01 of this Code.
(b) Each such person may be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during any
portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by
such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
6-5-24 Effective date.
(a) This chapter shall be effective March 28, 2002.
(b) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word or phrase of this chapter is held unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the chapter. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter, and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that one or
more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, words, or phrases be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 2002-02 (part), 2002)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 52
Exhibit 1
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 53
Exhibit 2
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 54
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 55
Exhibit 3
NOTE OF LIEN
Pursuant to the authority vested by the provisions of Ordinance No. ;#rule;, the City Manager of the
City of Avenal did, on or about the ;#rule; day of ____________, 200____________, cause the following
work to be performed at the premises hereinafter described in order to abate a public nuisance on said
real property:
_____
_____
The Avenal Planning Commission did on the ____________ day of ____________,
200____________, assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described, and
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 56
the same has not been paid nor any part thereof, and that said City of Avenal does hereby claim a lien on
such costs of abatement in the amount of said assessment (the sum of $;$rule;); and the same shall be a
lien upon said real property until the same has been paid in full and is charged of record.
The real property hereinbefore mentioned, and upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel of
land in the City of Avenal, County of Kings, State of California, and particularly described as follows:
_____
_____
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Prior ordinance history: Ordinances 89-08 (part), 89-01, 91-06, 94-07, 98-04 and 99-04.
(Back)
Chapter 6 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HANDLERS
Sections:
6-6.01 Definitions.
6-6.02 Permit required—Conditions and term.
6-6.03 Suspension of permit.
6-6.04 Notice of violations.
6-6.05 Hearings.
6-6.06 Revocation of permit for repeated violations.
6-6.07 Suspension of permit for refusal of entry.
6-6.08 Summary suspension of permit.
6-6.09 Closing of establishment for violation—Supervision.
6-6.10 Food handler's cards.
6-6.11 Building and vehicle specifications approval.
6-6.12 Sanitation requirements.
6-6.13 Rules and regulations generally.
6-6.14 Fixed outdoor food vending operations—Where permissible.
6-6.15 Mobile outdoor food vending operations—Where permissible.
6-6.16 Outdoor food vending operations—Permit required.
6-6.17 Fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation—Special occasions.
6-6.18 Permit issuance, findings and conclusions.
6-6.19 Denial of permit.
6-6.20 Revocation of permit.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 57
6-6.21 Notification of revocation.
6-6.22 Appeals.
6-6.23 Enforcement.
6-6.24 Trash receptacles and removal.
6-6.25 Insurance provisions.
6-6.26 Noise level.
6-6.27 Prohibited conduct.
6-6.28 Pre-existing businesses.
6-6.29 Nuisance.
6-6.30 Penalty.
6-6.01 Definitions.
The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated in this section:
(a) "Health Department" or "Department" shall mean the Kings County Health Department, which
acts as the health department of the incorporated cities in Kings County pursuant to resolutions
made under the provisions of Sections 476 and 477 of the Health and Safety Code of the State.
(b) "Health Officer" shall mean the County Health Officer or his deputy or assistant duly authorized
to act in his behalf in case of his absence or incapacity.
(c) "Inspector" shall mean a sanitarian, as defined in Section 540 of the Health and Safety Code of
the State, employed by the Health Department, or the Health Officer or any deputy health officer
authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this chapter.
(d) "Premises" shall include land, buildings, and vehicles wherein food is handled, stored,
distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food
establishments or on such premises.
(e) "Outdoor food seller" shall include any individual and/or entity engaged in the handling,
preparation, storage, distribution or service of food products for profit from a mobile outdoor
food vending operation or fixed mobile outdoor vending operation. The term "outdoor food
seller" is intended to include all individuals and/or entities engaged in the conduct described
herein, whether or not the actual owner of the outdoor food vending operation.
(f) "Mobile outdoor food vending operation" shall refer to the handling, preparation, storage,
distribution or service of food products for profit by an outdoor food seller from a non-fixed
location vehicle, hand-cart, or other mobile vending vehicle which is equipped or primarily used
for retail sales of fruits, vegetables or produce, and/or prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared,
unpackaged food of any kind, on any public street, alley or highway or private street or alley
within the City of Avenal. For purposes of this chapter, any ice cream truck, shall be considered
a "mobile outdoor food vending operation."
(g) "Fixed outdoor food vending operation" shall include the handling, preparation, storage,
distribution or service of food products for profit by an outdoor food seller from any fixed-location
vending vehicle which is equipped or primarily used for retail sales of fruits, vegetables or
produce, and/or prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food of any kind on any
public street, alley or highway or any private real property parcel, street or alley within the City of
Avenal. For purposes of this chapter, a barbeque stand, which is capable of being transported
by hitch or trailer, but which at the time of operation does not move from location to location,
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 58
shall be considered a "Fixed outdoor food vending operation." "Fixed outdoor food vending
operation" shall not include the outdoor retail sale of fruits, vegetables, produce, and/or
prepared, pre-packaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food of any kind by a licensed business
establishment operating primarily from an indoor facility or restaurant, so long as; (1) such retail
sale does not involve the use of a vehicle, hand-cart, mobile barbeque stand, and/or other
mobile vehicle, and (2) such retail occurs on the same parcel as the indoor facility or restaurant
to which it is incidental.
(h) "Outdoor dinning permit" shall mean a permit, issued by the City of Avenal in accordance with
the requirements set forth in this chapter, which authorizes an individual and/or entity to conduct
a mobile or fixed outside food vending operation within City limits.
(i) "Permit applicant" shall mean the legal owner of the outdoor food vending operation for which
an outdoor dinning permit is sought and/or issued from the City.
(j) "Amplified sound making devices" shall mean horns, music, whistles or other sounds broadcast
through a loud speaker or other mechanical device aimed at increasing the normal volume of
the broadcast.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984; Ord. No. 2006-01, § 1, 1-26-2006)
6-6.02 Permit required—Conditions and term.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal entity to operate within the incorporated area of the
City, any business in which food is prepared, sold, or served for public consumption upon the
premises or elsewhere, or any food processing or manufacturing plant, or any store, vehicle, facility
for the sale, storage, or retail or wholesale distribution of foods or beverages without first applying for
and receiving a food-vending permit for such operations issued by the Health Department pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
(b) The places of business for which such permits are required shall include, but shall not be limited to,
any restaurant, cafe, lunch counter, cafeteria, soda fountain, ice cream parlor, soft drink stand, fruit
and vegetable stand, grocery, meat market, bakery, popcorn or peanut stand, bottling plant,
wholesale warehouse, food-vending vehicle, and business which service vending machines located
in the City, regardless of the location of the facilities from which such vending machines are serviced.
(c) This chapter shall not apply to cigar stands, or other places of business or vehicles where no food of
any kind is sold, other than candy or soft drinks received and sold in sealed containers, nor to
vehicles engaged in the delivery of food products to wholesale or retail establishments for resale, nor
shall the provisions of this chapter apply to churches, church societies, private clubs, or other
nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic improvement, social, political, or educational
nature which purchase food, food products, or beverages or which receive donations of food, food
products, or beverages for service without charge to their members, or for service or sale at a
reasonable charge to their members, or to the general public at occasional fundraising events, for
consumption on or off the premises at which the food, food products, or beverages are served or
sold, if the service or sale of such food, food products, or beverages does not constitute a primary
purpose or function of the club or association, and if no employee or member is assigned full-time to
care for or operate equipment used in such arrangement.
(d) Every applicant for a food-vending permit shall file with the Health Department a written application
which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location of the food-handling business,
the character of the business which is proposed to be conducted, and such other information as the
Health Department may require.
(e) No permit shall be granted, renewed, or reinstated unless the Health Department determines, upon
making an investigation, that the place of business for which the application is made is equipped,
operated, and maintained in a safe and sanitary, and healthful manner, and that no conditions exist
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 59
on the premises which are, or which may be, unsafe, insanitary, unwholesome, or detrimental to the
health of the patrons, consumers, employees, or the general public.
(f) No permit shall be granted, renewed or reinstated unless the Health Department determines that the
condition of the premises is in accordance with the requirements of all applicable provisions of the
Health and Safety Code of the State, of this chapter, and of all rules and regulations promulgated
under Section 6-6.13 of this chapter, and that such premises are capable of being operated in
accordance with such laws and regulations.
(g) Permits may be granted at any time during the year and shall expire one year after the date of
issuance. Each permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it
is issued.
(h) The fee for the permit required by the provisions of this section shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year
for businesses employing five (5) employees or less, plus one dollar ($1.00) for each employee in
excess of five (5).
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.03 Suspension of permit.
A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or preceding provisions may be suspended
under the procedure set forth in this section through Section 6-6.10 of this chapter for any of the following
reasons:
(a) Violations of State laws;
(b) Violations of the provisions of this chapter;
(c) Violations of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 6-6.13 of this chapter; or
(d) Upon a recommendation for revocation of the permit, pending a hearing thereon.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.04 Notice of violations.
When any of the aforesaid laws, the provisions of this chapter, or rules and regulations have been
violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof, entitled "Notice of Violation," specifying:
(a) The acts and conditions constituting each violation;
(b) The provision violated thereby;
(c) The corrective stops required;
(d) The date by which all such corrections shall be completed allowing a reasonable period therefor;
(e) That the permittee has a right to a hearing, upon request; and
(f) That if no hearing is requested, and if the Health Department does not receive notice that all
such corrections have been made before 9:00 a.m. of the date named under subsection (d) of
this section, the permit will be suspended from that time until such violations are corrected.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.05 Hearings.
The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing on all violations listed in the notice. The permit
shall, however, be suspended unless the Health Department receives from the permit holder, before 9:00
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 60
a.m. of the date specified under subsection (d) of Section 6-6.04 of this chapter, a written or oral request
for a hearing or notice that all violations have been corrected as specified.
The hearing shall be held by the Health Officer or his duly authorized representative who is a
qualified sanitarian as defined in Section 540 of the Health and Safety Code of the State and registered
as provided in Section 542 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or who
inspected any corrective measures taken.
The person conducting the hearing shall make a written order as to each alleged violation listed on
the notice and shall deliver a signed copy thereof to the permittee. As to each violation, the order shall
either:
(a) Suspend the permit until it is corrected; or
(b) Extend the time or modify the measures to be taken for correction before the suspension; or
(c) Declare that the violation has been corrected so as to comply with the applicable law; or
(d) Declare that there was no violation.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.06 Revocation of permit for repeated violations.
If there shall have been three (3) or more notices of violation issued within the twelve-month period
immediately preceding the current violation as to the premises in question as provided in Section 6-6.04of
this chapter, and not overruled upon hearing, the order of the person conducting the hearing or, if no
hearing is held, of the inspector who is responsible for the third such notice, shall recommend to the
Health Officer whether or not the permit shall be revoked as provided in this section. If it is so
recommended, the permit may be ordered suspended forthwith by the Health Officer pending the hearing
on such proposed revocation.
Upon such recommendation for revocation by the person conducting the hearing, the permit in
question may be revoked by the Health Officer after hearing upon his finding that such violations were
serious enough and showed such lack of responsibility toward the public health as to require such
revocation to protect the public health.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.07 Suspension of permit for refusal of entry.
It shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any person to deny or hinder entry by any
inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in Section 6-6.02 of this chapter, or
any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food-vending permit
issued for the premises.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.08 Summary suspension of permit.
Whenever an inspector finds insanitary or other conditions in the operation of any food establishment
which in his judgment constitute an immediate and substantial hazard to the public health, he shall issue
a written notice to the permit holder or person in charge of the premises as provided in Section 6-6.04 of
this chapter, except that instead of the matter specified under subsection (f) of said section, it shall state
that the permit shall be immediately suspended and shall set forth the substance of the following
sentence. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall immediately comply therewith, but, upon
request made to the inspector who orders the suspension, or to the Health Officer or his authorized
representative, either personally or by telephone or in writing, he shall be afforded a hearing as soon as
possible, and notice of its setting may be given in the same manner as the request.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 61
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.09 Closing of establishment for violation—Supervision.
When any permit is first suspended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or when any premises
governed hereby as defined in Section 6-6.02 of this chapter shall have been closed for business and left
in an insanitary condition, the Health Department shall have the power to insure that the premises are
closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his employee in
charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy to condition of the premises, the owner of the
premises shall be notified of the insanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action
as may be necessary to obviate such condition.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.10 Food handler's cards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the handling, serving, preparation, or storage of food
or drink in any bakery, butcher shop, restaurant, hotel, fountain, tavern, or other eating or drinking place
in the City, or in the sanitizing of utensils in any of the foregoing establishments, for a period of time
longer than fifteen (15) working days, or for any food establishment operator to employ or permit any
person to engage in such activities therein for longer than said period of time unless such person holds a
food handler's card issued by the Health Officer. All food handler's cards shall expire one year from date
of issuance. A fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged for each card issued. As a prerequisite to the
issuance of a food handler's card, every person engaged in the aforesaid activities shall obtain and have
in his possession a current and negative x-ray card which may be obtained without charge from the
Health Department. In addition to the x-ray examination, the Health Officer may, as a prerequisite to the
issuance of a food handler's card, impose any other requirement, including physical or other tests and
examinations, which may be necessary for the protection of the public health. The Health Officer shall not
give any treatment required for any condition revealed by such examination or such tests, and the Health
Department shall not be responsible in any manner for the cost of such treatment.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.11 Building and vehicle specifications approval.
Prior to the construction, conversion, or alteration of a building for use as a food establishment or the
construction or purchase of a model of vehicle not previously under permit to any person in the City, two
(2) copies of the plans and specifications therefor shall be submitted to the Health Department. The
Health Officer or his authorized deputy shall thereafter issue his certificate stating what modifications, if
any, he deems are required for compliance with applicable laws.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.12 Sanitation requirements.
All businesses and premises for which a permit is required by this chapter shall be constructed,
equipped, operated, and maintained so as to comply with the provisions of Articles 2 through 6, inclusive,
of Chapter 11 of Division 21 of the Health and Safety Code of the State.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 62
6-6.13 Rules and regulations generally.
The Health Officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer the
provisions of this chapter, including regulations pertaining to:
(a) Forms for applications, permits, and notices;
(b) Forms and procedures for hearings upon the granting; and
(c) Inspections of premises and reporting thereon.
(Ord. 84-07 (part), 1984)
6-6.14 Fixed outdoor food vending operations—Where permissible.
(a) Traffic. Fixed outdoor food vending operations are not permitted where the speed, volume or
proximity of vehicular traffic is not compatible with the safe operation of a fixed outside food vending
operation.
(b) Adjacent to Established Business. All fixed outdoor food vending operations must be adjacent to,
and incidental to, the operation of an indoor restaurant, mini-mart, grocery store and/or other
licensed business establishment within the City. No fixed outdoor food vending operation may be
located on a vacant parcel within the City.
(c) Pedestrian Traffic. Fixed outdoor food vending operations are permitted only where the sidewalk is
wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the
operation of the proposed activity. The outdoor food vending operation shall be located in a manner
to leave not less than five (5) consecutive feet of sidewalk width at every point which is clear and
unimpeded for pedestrian traffic.
(d) Hours. Hours of operation for any fixed outdoor food vending operation are to coincide with those of
the adjoining indoor licensed business establishment.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.15 Mobile outdoor food vending operations—Where permissible.
(a) Traffic. Mobile outdoor food vending operations are not permitted where the speed, volume or
proximity of vehicular traffic is not compatible with the safe operation of a mobile outside food
vending operation.
(b) Public Rights-of Way. Mobile outdoor food vending operations are permitted on public rights-of-way.
Except as otherwise provided within this chapter, mobile outdoor food vending operations may not
be operated from private property.
(c) Hours. No mobile outside food vending operation shall conduct business before 10:30 a.m. and after
6:00 p.m., November through February. In the months of March through October, mobile outside
food vending operations may be operated between the hours of 10:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.16 Outdoor food vending operations—Permit required.
(a) Any permit applicant desiring to engage in the operation of a fixed or mobile outdoor food vending
operation within the City, must submit an application for an outdoor food vending permit prior to the
operation of such fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation. Such application shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in such amount established by resolution of the
City Council. The permit shall be subject to renewal on a semi-annual basis, unless otherwise
provided herein.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 63
(b) An application for a permit under this section shall furnish the following information and
documentation as part of or in conjunction with such application:
(1) The present or proposed address or area from which the outdoor food vending operation is
going to be conducted.
(2) The location where restocking and overnight parking of any vending unit whether operated as a
fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation is going to take place.
(3) The full and true name under which the fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation will be
conducted.
(4) Copies of all licenses and permits issued by the City, County, or State of California in relation to
the fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation.
(5) The full and true name and any other names used by the permit applicant during the last ten
(10) years.
(6) The full and true name and any other names used by any individual expected to act as an
outdoor food seller for the business.
(7) The present residence address and telephone number of the permit applicant and any outdoor
food seller associated with the business.
(8) California Driver's License number of the permit applicant and all outdoor food sellers
associated with the business.
(9) Acceptable written proof that the permit applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(10) The height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth of the permit applicant and any
outdoor food seller associated with the business.
(11) The business, occupation or employment history of the permit applicant for the three (3) year
period immediately preceding the date of the application.
(12) The permit history of the permit applicant, for the three (3) year period immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application, including whether such permit applicant, in previously
operating in this or any other City, County, State or territory, has ever had any similar license or
permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of such suspension or
revocation.
(13) Written proof of insurance.
(14) When any change occurs regarding the written information required in this chapter, prior to, or
following, issuance of a permit, the permit applicant shall give written notification of such change
to the City within two (2) weeks after such change.
(c) In addition to the above, where a permit applicant intends to conduct the outdoor food vending
operation from a fixed location within the City of Avenal, the permit applicant must submit with his/her
application, a written authorization form fully completed by the individual and/or entity which owns
the location from which the outdoor food vending operation will be operated. Written authorization
forms shall be made available to any permit applicant at City Hall.
(d) Every vehicle, hand-cart and/or other mobile vehicle from which a permit applicant wishes to operate
a fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation, shall be inspected by the City as part of the
application process. The purpose of such inspection is to confirm whether or not the vehicle, handcart
and/or other mobile vehicle meets with all applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code of
this State, of this chapter, and of all rules and regulations promulgated under the Avenal Municipal
Code. It is also the purpose of such inspection that the City determine whether or not a proposed
fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation is capable of being operated in accordance with
State, County and City laws and regulations.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 64
6-6.17 Fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation—Special occasions.
(a) Discretion to Suspend. For purposes of a City sanctioned event (i.e., Old Timer's Day), the City may
in its discretion suspend the requirement herein that all fixed or mobile outdoor food vending
operations obtain a Permit prior to operation within the City. The City may also in its sole discretion
suspend any other requirement set forth in this chapter which the City believes is unnecessary for
purposes of the City sanctioned event. Notice of such suspension shall be posted by the City at City
Hall. Such notice shall clearly delineate any requirements for operation of a fixed or mobile outdoor
food vending operation during the suspension period. Any operator of a fixed or mobile outdoor food
vending operation during a City sanctioned event for which a suspension has been issued, is
deemed to have notice of, and consented to be bound by, all posted requirements.
(b) Application for Waiver. Upon request, the City may also waive the requirements herein for obtaining
a Permit for the operation of a fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation within the City. Such
waiver may occur where the fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation shall be conducted only
during a City sanctioned event and/or during a private special event for which City approval has been
obtained. [Hereinafter "event waiver".] Individuals wishing to obtain an event waiver must submit to
the City, at least forty-five (45) days prior to the scheduled event, a written request for waiver of
those requirements set forth in Section 6-6.16 and/or any other Section contained within this chapter
from which the individual and/or operation wishes to be exempt.
(c) Response to Application. Within fifteen (15) days after receipt of a request for an event waiver, the
City shall issue to the applicant either; (1) an event waiver for operation of a fixed or mobile outdoor
food vending operation, specifying any conditions and/or requirements of the same, or (2) a written
rejection of the request for an event waiver. Any rejection of a request for an event waiver shall not
preclude the applicant from thereafter submitting an application which satisfies the requirements of
this chapter for the operation of a fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation within City limits.
(d) Term of Suspension and/or Waiver. Any suspension and/or event waiver granted by the City under
this Section shall not extend beyond the date and time of the event for which it was granted. All event
waivers and suspensions provided for under this Section shall be issued at the sole discretion of the
City and/or its designated agent. Determinations by the City regarding the issuance and scope of
such suspensions and/or event waivers are final.
(e) Number of Event Waivers: Nothing contained in this section shall require that the City issue event
waivers in any form and/or number.
(f) Failure to Comply: Any fixed or mobile outdoor food vending operation operating within the City
pursuant to a City suspension and/or event waiver which fails to operate within the restrictions and/or
requirements imposed by the City in regards thereto, shall be subject to immediate closure by the
City and/or its designated agents for the duration of the subject event for which the suspension
and/or event waiver was granted.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.18 Permit issuance, findings and conclusions.
The City of Avenal shall issue the outdoor dinning permit within twenty (20) days after receiving a
completed permit application, providing all of the following requirements have been met:
(a) The required fees have been paid;
(b) The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter;
(c) The permit applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application;
(d) The permit applicant has not had a similar permit denied or revoked by the City within a period
of one year prior to the date of such application;
(e) The permit applicant does not have any outstanding debt owed to the City;
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 65
(f) The permit applicant has obtained all necessary food-vending permits and other licenses
required for such operations, as issued by the Health Department and/or the State of California;
and
(g) The proposed vehicle, hand-cart and/or other mobile vending vehicle from which the permit
applicant intends to operate his/her outdoor vending operation, has been found by the City to
meet all applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code of this State, of this chapter, and of
all rules and regulations promulgated under Section 6-6.13 of the Avenal Municipal Code, and
that such premises are capable of being operated in accordance with such laws andregulations.
(h) The proposed vehicle, hand-cart and/or other mobile vending vehicle from which the permit
application intends to operate his/her outdoor vending operation, including all equipment utilized
within the proposed vehicle, is in working order, and in good physical condition.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.19 Denial of permit.
(a) All conditions of Section 6-6.16 must be met before the outside dinning permit is issued. Written
notice of denial will be provided by the City of Avenal and will indicate grounds for denial. Notice of
denial shall be deemed served on the date of personal service or when the notice is deposited in the
United States mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the permit applicant at his or her address as
set forth in the permit application.
(b) Any applicant whose application for an outside dinning permit been denied by the City may appeal
such denial to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager's office no
later than ten (10) days following service of this notice of the decision. Notice of appeal must be
accompanied by the appeal fee and is deemed filed with the City on the date of receipt by the City.
The appeal fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.
(c) No person or entity whose permit request is denied on appeal shall be eligible to re-apply for a
period of six (6) months from the date of the denial of his/her permit request.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.20 Revocation of permit.
Any outdoor dinning permit may be revoked by the City upon a showing of good cause. Good cause
may be found, but is not limited to, any of the following:
(a) Providing false information as a basis for permit issuance.
(b) Failure of the permit applicant, or any employees or subcontractors of the permit applicant, to
comply with the regulations set forth in this chapter, the Avenal Municipal Count, County
regulations and/or State law.
(c) Conviction of a violation, or plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by the permit applicant, or any
employee, subcontractor or independent contractor of the permit applicant, of any state law or
municipal ordinance while in the course of conducting vending operations from a vehicle
pursuant to the permit.
(d) Conviction of a violation, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, by the permit applicant of any
applicable provision or requirement of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 66
6-6.21 Notification of revocation.
Notification of the permit applicant shall be made either by personal delivery or by regular mail,
addressed to the permit holder at such permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application
for a permit. Service shall be deemed made on the permit applicant on the date personally delivered or on
the date of mailing. A permit applicant may appeal such revocation to the City Manager by filing a written
notice of appeal with the City Manager within ten (10) days following the date of service of such decision
and payment of the appeal fee as prescribed by resolution of the City Council. The date of filing of said
notice of appeal shall be the date said notice and appeal fee are received by the City. If a timely appeal is
filed, the revocation shall be stayed pending the decision of the City Manager. Otherwise the suspension
or revocation shall become effective immediately upon expiration of said appeal period.
No person or entity whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for a new permit for a period of
six (6) months following such revocation.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.22 Appeals.
Revocation shall not be effective until expiration of the appeal period. Upon receipt of a timely
request for a hearing on appeal, the City Manager or his designated representative shall hear such appeal
within twenty (20) days of the request and shall provide the appellant not less than five (5) days advance
notice of the hearing. The decision of the City Manager shall be based upon those criteria as set forth in
this chapter, which is applicable to the issuance or revocation of such permit. The appellant shall be
notified of the decision of the City Manager by mailed, written notice. The decision of the City Manager
shall be final. No revocation of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed effective during the
pendency of a timely filed appeal until the date of mailing of the City Manager's decision; provided,
however, no permit holder shall operate during any period of time in which the insurance coverage
required by this chapter is not in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.23 Enforcement.
The City Manager, Police Officers, the Planning and Building Director, the Finance Director, City
Code Enforcement Officers, the Fire Chief, and their designees, have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006; Res. No. 2010-64, 10-28-2010)
6-6.24 Trash receptacles and removal.
(a) All outdoor food vending operations shall be equipped with refuse receptacles large enough to
contain all refuse generated by the operation of such vehicle;
(b) All outdoor food sellers engaged in the operation of an outdoor food vending operation shall pick up
all refuse generated by such operation within a fifty (50) foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle
is moved and/or closed for the night. All refuse collected by an outdoor food seller shall be disposed
of at an approved solid waste facility.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.25 Insurance provisions.
All outdoor food vending operations shall have liability insurance as required by City.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 67
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.26 Noise level.
(a) Any use of amplified sound making devices, including vehicle horns, to advertise, draw attention to,
or announce the presence of any such vehicle shall be prohibited within the residential areas of the
City.
(b) Non-amplified sound making devices shall not be used while the vehicle is stopped, parked, or
otherwise in a stationary position, on any public street in an area zoned for residential use within the
City. When used in a residential area, non-amplified sound shall not be audible to a person of normal
sensitivity for a distance of more than five hundred (500) feet.
(c) All sound equipment and/or devices utilized by any outdoor food vending operation shall be kept and
maintained in good working condition.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.27 Prohibited conduct.
(a) No person shall vend from a fixed or mobile outdoor vending operation which is stopped, parked or
standing on any public street, alley or highway, or any private property location, in any of the
following situations:
(1) No mobile outdoor vending operation shall be allowed to operate within five hundred (500) feet
of any active public school property, park, playground or recreational facility;
(2) No mobile outdoor vending operation shall be allowed to operate within three hundred (300) feet
of any other mobile outdoor vending operation which is engaged in the operation of vending;
(3) No mobile outdoor vending operation shall be allowed to operate within one hundred (100) feet
of an intersection (including public alleys);
(4) No mobile outdoor vending operation shall be allowed to operate when the posted speed limit
on the public street, alley or highway is greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour.
(5) When the mobile outdoor vending operation vehicle or fixed outdoor vending operation is
parked or located in violation of any other provision of this Code or the California Vehicle Code.
(6) When the mobile outdoor vending operation vehicle is duly registered and licensed by the State
of California with an unladen weight exceeding six thousand (6,000) pounds.
(7) When the mobile outdoor vending operation is not legally stopped or parked adjacent to theright
side of the roadway;
(8) When the prospective customer is standing or sitting in another vehicle;
(9) When the prospective customer is located in that portion of the street, alley or highway, which is
open to vehicular traffic; or
(10) When the outdoor vending operation is located within any parkway, alley, sidewalk or within a
no parking area, or other public property.
(b) Re-stocking of a mobile outdoor vending operation vehicle is prohibited on a public street or alley.
(c) No outdoor vending operation shall attach to or receive any utilities from private or public property.
(d) No additional lighting other than that required by the California Vehicle Code may be installed or
operated on a mobile outdoor vending operation vehicle.
(e) Mobile outdoor vending operation vehicles may, with the approval of the landowner, operate on
private property (such as construction sites) for a period of not more than thirty (30) minutes in order
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 68
to provide meals/snacks for employees. Mobile vending units are not permitted on private property
for any other purpose.
(f) No outdoor vending operation shall be parked, stopped, left standing, or located, in any manner,
which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free movement of other
vehicles upon the public street.
(g) Operators of a outdoor vending operation may not provide tables and/or seating for their customers.
(h) No vehicle shall be parked or stored when not in use in any manner other than as defined in the
California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, Section 114287.
(i) All outdoor vending operations shall be clearly identified as to business name, address and City of
the person owing or operating the such. Such identification shall be easily legible, of professional
quality, in letters which contrast with their background and are at least three (3) inches high with a
minimum 3/8 inch wide stroke. Stick-on letters and paint which is peeling and/or otherwise illegible
shall not be sufficient to satisfy the requirements of this subsection.
(j) All mobile outdoor vending operation vehicles operated within the City of Avenal shall be constructed
or modified in a manner which allows the sale of products to occur only from the right-side of the
vehicle. Any motorized vehicle constructed in a manner which allows the sale of products to occur
from both the right- and left-sides of the vehicle, shall, within ninety (90) days after the passage of
this ordinance, be modified in a safe and sanitary manner to meet the requirements of this section.
(k) Mobile outdoor vending operation vehicles shall include the following warning on the left-side of the
vehicle:
"Do Not Cross Street—Food Will Be Sold on Both Sides of Street." or
"Do Not Cross Street—Ice Cream Will Be Sold on Both Sides of Street."
(l) In no case should any mobile outdoor vending operation remain immobile for more than five (5)
minutes.
(m) In no case should any mobile outdoor vending operation be operated without a valid permit from the
City, and full compliance with all City, County and State requirements for such operation.
(n) In addition to those requirements set forth above, all motorized ice cream trucks shall comply with
the requirements set forth in the Destiny Nicole Stout Memorial Act as it is currently written and/or
may be amended in the future (California Vehicle Code Section 22456).
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.28 Pre-existing businesses.
This section applies to all businesses or activities regardless of when the business or activity was
established. Businesses existing prior to enactment of this section shall file a completed application for a
vendor or operator permit or tax certificate within thirty (30) days of enactment of the chapter. Any permit
issued under this chapter shall be non-transferable.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.29 Nuisance.
Operation of a mobile or fixed outdoor food vending operation in any manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to or in lieu of
prosecuting a criminal action the City Attorney may commence an action or proceeding for the abatement,
or removal of the nuisance as provided in Title 6 of the Avenal Municipal Code. The City Attorney may
also apply to a court of jurisdiction for abatement or removal of the nuisance, or to restrain or enjoin
operation of an outdoor vending operation in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 69
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
6-6.30 Penalty.
Every violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or
by both fine and imprisonment. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this chapter as a
misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the trial court,
upon recommendation of the City Attorney, may reduce the charged offense from misdemeanor to an
infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under this chapter shall be punished by:
(a) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.
(b) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of this chapter
within one year.
(c) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this chapter
within one year.
Each day a violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
The City Council of Avenal, California, ordains that this chapter shall go into effect and be in full force
and effect at 12:01 a.m. on the 31st day after its passage.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid for any reason, such decision shall not effect the validity of the
remainder of this chapter. The City Council of the City of Avenal hereby declares that it would have
passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase thereof, irrespective
of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, words, or phrases be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. No. 2006-01, § 2, 1-26-2006)
Chapter 7 TRASH ENCLOSURES
Sections:
6-7.01 Intent of provisions.
6-7.02 Definitions.
6-7.03 Implementation—Installation and construction.
6-7.04 Exceptions to requirements.
6-7.05 Screening and accessibility of trash enclosures.
6-7.01 Intent of provisions.
The intent of this chapter is to ensure the construction of durable, permanent trash enclosure
facilities, in locations that are inconspicuous but easily accessible to collection vehicles, for any project
that will or could use garbage cans, mobile trash bins, or other similar facilities, as a means of storing
garbage.
(Ord. 94-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 70
6-7.02 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
"Addition" or "remodel" means any work done on a piece of property that requires a building permit.
"Current assessed value" means the value listed under the improvements column in the most current
edition of the County Tax Assessor's roll on file in the City Clerk's office.
"Garbage can" means a container that is designed to be used for the storage of garbage.
"Mobile trash bin" means a metal trash container, equipped with wheels, having a capacity of one or
more cubic yards, that is designed to be hydraulically lifted from the front or rear of a trash collection
vehicle.
"Trash enclosure" means a permanent, immobile structure, designed for the screening and storage
of garbage cans, a mobile trash bill, or other trash receptacles.
"Valuation" means the total price of improvements for a specific building permit, as determined by
the City.
(Ord. 94-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
6-7.03 Implementation—Installation and construction.
(a) Title 6, Chapter 2 of this Code requires that all trash and garbage be placed in an appropriate
receptacle. All garbage cans, mobile trash bins, receptacles as defined and regulated in Title 6,
Chapter 2, and all recycling materials and containers for such recycling material shall be maintained
and stored within a trash enclosure as defined and regulated in this chapter.
(b) A trash enclosure shall be installed or constructed for each of the following types of projects:
(1) The construction of any new commercial or office structure or any addition or remodel to any
existing commercial or office structure, when the valuation of such addition or remodel, or the
aggregate valuation of more than one remodel in any twelve (12) month period, exceeds ten
(10) percent of the then-current assessed value of the improvements for the subject parcel;
(2) The construction of any new industrial, manufacturing, or warehousing structure, or any addition
or remodel to an existing industrial, manufacturing, or warehousing structure, when the
valuation of such addition or remodel, or the aggregate valuation of more than one addition or
remodel in any twelve (12) month period, exceeds ten (10) percent of the then-current assessed
value of the improvements for the subject parcel; and
(3) The construction of any new residential structure(s) for any apartment complex, condominium
project, or planned unit development, when such project or planned unit development consists
of five (5) or more units.
(c) A trash enclosure shall be installed or constructed for each occupied premises where receptacles,
recycling containers, or recycled materials are required or maintained as follows:
(1) In addition to any other requirements of this Code, including Title 6, Chapter 2, every person or
entity who owns or occupies a building on any property within a commercially zoned districtshall
comply with the provisions of this chapter and construct or install a trash enclosure on or before
November 30, 1995. The Planning Director is authorized to grant an extension, not to exceed
ninety (90) days, in the case of extreme hardship.
(2) In addition to any other requirements of this chapter, every person or entity who owns or
occupies a building on property in industrial or manufacturing zoning districts shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter and construct or install a trash enclosure on or before November
30, 1995. The Planning Director is authorized to grant an extension, not to exceed ninety days,
in the case of extreme hardship.
Title 6 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 71
(Ord. 95-09, 1995; Ord. 94-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
6-7.04 Exceptions to requirements.
(a) In addition, the requirements of this chapter may be applied by the City Council or Planning
Commission as a condition to the granting of a use permit, variance, or ordinance amendment in any
commercial, manufacturing, industrial, retail, planned community or multifamily zoning district.
(b) The Planning Director has the power to grant an exception to the requirement for a trash enclosure if
it is determined that any use in the proposed structure will not generate enough trash to necessitate
the use of a garbage can, trash bin, or number of trash receptacles to require screening and
enclosure or if such cans, bins, or receptacles are maintained inside of a building.
(c) The Planning Director has the power to work with property and business owners to identify options
which result in implementation of the spirit and intent of this chapter, where unique or unusual
circumstances exist such as buildings constructed without setbacks or access to rear portions of the
property.
(Ord. 94-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
6-7.05 Screening and accessibility of trash enclosures.
Trash enclosures shall be sited and constructed to provide adequate screening from public view of
refuse, as follows:
(a) Trash enclosures shall not be located nearer than twenty (20) feet to streets or sidewalks, and
shall be located to the rear of a building where possible.
(b) Trash enclosures should be easily accessible to collection vehicles and collection personnel.
The area directly in front of any trash enclosure should be less than a two (2) percent slope to
make manipulation of the trash bin as easy as possible. Trash enclosures shall be of sufficient
size to store trash receptacles, or trash bins, as specified by the local solid waste disposal
company.
(c) Trash enclosures shall be constructed to be as inconspicuous as possible. The contents of the
enclosures shall be screened from public view.
(d) Trash enclosures shall be constructed of galvanized chain-link fence material equipped with
redwood or vinyl slats, or a solid material such as wood or masonry matching the main structure
may be used. Architectural review shall be required for all trash enclosures. A building permit is
not required for trash enclosures which do not exceed six (6) feet in height and do not have a
roof.
(e) Trash enclosures shall be located more than fifteen (15) feet from any front entrance to a
structure.
(f) Trash enclosures shall be maintained in good condition on a continual basis.
(Ord. 94-08 § 1 (part), 1995)
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Chapter 2 - SIDEWALKS, CROSSWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS, AND DRIVEWAYS
Chapter 3 - TREES
Chapter 4 - UNDERGROUNDING UTILITIES
Chapter 5 - STREET NAMES
Chapter 1 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES [1]
Sections:
7-1.01 Purpose and application.
7-1.02 State video franchise and PEG fees.
7-1.03 Audit authority.
7-1.04 Customer service penalties under state franchises.
7-1.01 Purpose and application.
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and
operating within the City of Avenal.
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 10-28-2010)
7-1.02 State video franchise and PEG fees.
(a) Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall pay a fee to the
City equal to five (5) percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.
(b) Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall also pay the City a
fee equal to one (1) percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, which fee shall
be used by the City for any Public, Educational, and/or Government (PEG) purposes consistent with
state and federal law.
(c) Any state franchisee that has held a locally issued franchise agreement shall, consistent with Public
Utilities Code Section 5870, continue to fully provide and support PEG channel facilities and
institutional networks and to provide cable services to community buildings to the maximum extent
permitted by law.
(d) Gross revenue, for the purposes of (a) and (b) above, shall have the definition set forth in California
Public Utilities Code Section 5860.
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 10-28-2010)
7-1.03 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee may examine and
perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with
Section 4.2.
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 10-28-2010)
7-1.04 Customer service penalties under state franchises.
(a) The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer
service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.
(b) The City shall have the right to monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect
to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager or the City
Manager's designee will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material
breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material
breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period shall be subject to the following penalties to be
imposed by the City Manager or designee:
(1) For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be
imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred
dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.
(2) For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to
exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.
(3) For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in
effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation.
(c) A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager or the City
Manager's designee to the City Council within sixty (60) days of the initial assessment. The City
Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty.
The City Council's decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final.
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, 10-28-2010)
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-04, § 1, adopted Oct. 28, 2010, repealed the former title 7, chapter 1, §§
7-1.01—7-1.04, and enacted a new chapter 1 as set out herein. The former chapter 1 pertained to similar
subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2010. (Back)
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
Chapter 2 SIDEWALKS, CROSSWALKS, CURBS, GUTTERS, AND
DRIVEWAYS
Sections:
7-2.01 Permits—Required.
7-2.02 Permits—Applications.
7-2.03 Permits—Fees.
7-2.04 Violations—Penalties.
7-2.05 Private improvements.
7-2.06 Safety hazards.
7-2.01 Permits—Required.
It is unlawful for any person to construct or install, or cause to be constructed or installed, any
sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, gutter, or driveway, where such structure is constructed of concrete or other
permanent substance on or in any public street, alley, or other public way or easement dedicated to the
public use in the City, without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided in this chapter or as otherwise
provided in Section 7-2.05. No work on the construction or installation of any project as provided in this
chapter shall be started, continued, or completed until an application has been made therefor and apermit
issued therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 91-13 (part), 1991)
7-2.02 Permits—Applications.
The permits required by Section 7-2.01 of this chapter shall be issued by the Public Works Director
or such other person as may be designated from time to time by resolution of the Council. Such
applications shall be in writing and shall be signed by the person or his authorized agent, or by the
authorized representative of the firm or corporation desiring or intending to construct or install, or cause to
be constructed or installed, the particular improvement set forth in Section 7-2.01 of this chapter. Such
applications shall set forth the nature of the project to be constructed or installed, its exact location and
dimensions, and other pertinent facts. Such applications shall also show, by plot plan, profile, dimensions,
and description, as the circumstances may require, the exact manner in which the construction or
installation conforms to the official standards of location, grade, and specifications of construction and
materials as are now, or may hereafter be, established by the City.
It shall be the duty of the issuing officer, before issuing a permit, to inspect the application, and he
shall ascertain that the project described in such application conforms in every respect to the standards
and specifications of the City then in force and effect. A permit shall be issued only if the project, as set
forth in the application, conforms to such standards and specifications.
Applications shall be consecutively numbered, and each permit issued shall pertain solely to the
application identified by number, date, and signatory for which the permit is issued.
7-2.03 Permits—Fees.
To cover the costs of setting grades, inspections, and the maintenance of appropriate records, the
issuing officer shall collect a fee for each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The fee
shall be established by the City Council by resolution.
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
(Ord. 91-06 § 23, 1991)
7-2.04 Violations—Penalties.
Any sidewalks, crosswalks, curbs, gutters, or driveways which have been installed by any person
without obtaining written permission, or which are installed in a manner which does not conform to the
provisions of the written permit, shall be subject to removal on the order of the Public Works Director.
Any person installing sidewalks, crosswalks, curbs, gutters, or driveways without first obtaining
written permission from the Public Works Director shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
7-2.05 Private improvements.
(a) No encroachment permit is required for the following private improvements within that portion of the
right-of-way between the property line and the back of the sidewalk: grass, ground cover, sprinklers,
decorative rock/gravel, borders, mailboxes, private walkways, private driveways, (the noncircular
type) fences no higher than three (3') feet, and street trees per City ordinance.
(b) All other improvements, including private circular driveways, brick or concrete structures, brick or
concrete fences, any fence or wall over three (3') feet in height, low voltage decorative lighting, or
any other structures of a permanent nature, shall require an encroachment permit.
(Ord. 91-13 (part), 1991)
7-2.06 Safety hazards.
If any private improvement installed or constructed in the public right-of-way is, in the opinion of the
City Manager or his designee, deemed to be a public safety hazard, the Manager or his designee may
declare the improvement to be a public nuisance and the public nuisance shall be abated as such per
Title 6, Chapter 5 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
(Ord. 91-13 (part), 1991)
Chapter 3 TREES
Sections:
7-3.01 Planting certain kinds prohibited.
7-3.02 Public nuisances—Abatement.
7-3.03 Public nuisances—Abatement—Orders—Appeals—Hearings.
7-3.01 Planting certain kinds prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any cottonwood, tamarack, or umbrella tree anywhere in
the City.
(Ord. No. 2011-06, § 1, 6-9-2011)
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
7-3.02 Public nuisances—Abatement.
Any tree or shrub growing on private property, which tree or shrub is endangering, or which in any
way may endanger, the security or usefulness of any public street, sewer, or sidewalk, is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance, and the City may remove or trim such tree or may require the property owner to
remove or trim any such tree. Failure of the property owner to remove or trim such tree after ten (10) days'
written notice by the Public Works Director shall be deemed a violation of the provisions of this chapter,
and the City may then remove or trim such tree and assess the costs thereof against the property.
7-3.03 Public nuisances—Abatement—Orders—Appeals—Hearings.
Appeals from orders made pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-3.02 of this chapter may be made
by filing written notice thereof with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after such order is received, stating
in substance that an appeal is being made from such order to the Council. The City Clerk shall thereupon
call such appeal to the attention of the Council at the next regular meeting, at which time the appellant
and the Public Works Director may present evidence. The action taken by the Council after such hearing
shall be conclusive.
Chapter 4 UNDERGROUNDING UTILITIES
Sections:
7-4.01 Definitions.
7-4.02 Hearings—Notices—Determinations.
7-4.03 Designation of Underground Utility Districts.
7-4.04 Unlawful acts.
7-4.05 Exceptions—Emergencies or unusual circumstances.
7-4.06 Other exceptions.
7-4.07 Notices to property owners and utility companies.
7-4.08 Responsibility of utility companies.
7-4.09 Responsibility of property owners.
7-4.10 Responsibility of the City.
7-4.11 Extensions of time.
7-4.12 Violations—Penalties.
7-4.01 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and
phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Commission" shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State.
(b) "District" or "Underground Utility District" shall mean that area in the City within which poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in
a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-4.03 of this chapter.
(c) "Person" shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents
and employees.
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
(d) "Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures" shall mean poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators,
cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located
aboveground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar
or associated services.
(e) "Utility" shall mean and include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or
similar or associated services by means of electrical materials or devices.
7-4.02 Hearings—Notices—Determinations.
The Council may from time to time set public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity,
health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for
supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated services. The City Clerk shall notify by mail all
affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned of the
time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall
be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearings all persons interested
shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.
7-4.03 Designation of Underground Utility Districts.
If, after any such public hearing, as set forth in Section 7-4.02 of this chapter, the Council finds that
the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation
within a designated area, the Council, by resolution, shall declare such designated area an Underground
Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising such District and shall fix the time within which such removal and
underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready
to receive underground services. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such
removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
7-4.04 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein, as provided in Section 7-4.03 of this chapter,
it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or
operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in such District after the date when
such overhead facilities are required by resolution to be removed, except such overhead facilities may be
required to furnish services to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner
or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility
services as set forth in Section 7-4.09 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove
such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
7-4.05 Exceptions—Emergencies or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained
for a period, not to exceed ten (10) days, without authority of the Public Works Director, in order to
provide emergency services. The Public Works Director may grant special permission on such terms as
he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or
utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated
overhead structures.
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
7-4.06 Other exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-
4.03 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of
facilities:
(a) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of
the City Engineer;
(b) Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
(c) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within
which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a
District, where such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and
associated overhead structures are not prohibited;
(d) Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric
energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
(e) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other
fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building
or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;
(f) Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing
communication services;
(g) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; and
(h) Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in
conjunction with construction projects.
7-4.07 Notices to property owners and utility companies.
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Section 7-4.03 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real
property within the District thereby created of the adoption of such resolution. The City Clerk shall further
notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they, or any person occupying such property,
desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they, or such
occupant, shall provide all the necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such services
from the lines of the supplying utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations, and
tariffs of the respective utilities on file with the Commission.
Such notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-4.03 of this chapter to affected property owners as they are shown
on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
7-4.08 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility services within a District created by any
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-4.03 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall
furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Commission.
7-4.09 Responsibility of property owners.
(a) Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a District
shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
facilities referred to in Section 7-4.08 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within such
building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs
of the respective utilities on file with the Commission.
(b) In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting such property does not
comply with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section within the time provided for in the
resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-4.03 of this chapter, the City Engineer
shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter shall have the
authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and
associated facilities supplying utility service to such property.
7-4.10 Responsibility of the City.
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required by the
provisions of this chapter to be removed in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to
remove the poles within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section
7-4.03 of this chapter.
7-4.11 Extensions of time.
In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or the resolution adopted pursuant to
the provisions of Section 7-4.03 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided because of
shortages of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience,
or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, the time within which such act shall be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
7-4.12 Violations—Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply
with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
Chapter 5 STREET NAMES
Sections:
7-5.01 Regulations concerning street names.
7-5.02 Proposed street names.
7-5.03 Preliminary approval.
7-5.04 Approval of street designation.
7-5.05 Final approval.
7-5.06 Street name changes.
7-5.01 Regulations concerning street names.
The following regulations shall apply to street names:
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
(a) There shall be no duplication of or similarity to existing names of streets located within the City
of Avenal.
(b) The length of the name shall not exceed the capacity of a three (3') foot street sign plate.
(c) In cases of subdivisions, a theme of names shall be encouraged to provide identity to the area
and assist with emergency response.
(d) Streets may be named for public officials only when the public official no longer holds office.
(e) Streets named for persons shall utilize only the person's surname, not a first name or middle
initial. An exception may be made if approved by the Council for a person who has made a
significant historical contribution to the City or the area; however, the restrictions set forth in
subsection (d) of this section still apply.
(Ord. 96-03 § 1 (part), 1996)
7-5.02 Proposed street names.
Requests or suggestions concerning street names shall be made in writing to the City Clerk of the
City of Avenal, 919 Skyline Boulevard, Avenal, California 93204.
(Ord. 96-03 § 1 (part), 1996)
7-5.03 Preliminary approval.
Street name proposals shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works for preliminary
consideration and approval. The Director of Public Works shall consider and determine the compatibilityof
the proposed name with the provisions of this section. The Director of Public Works shall then refer
approved names to the Planning Commission for further consideration and approval.
(Ord. 96-03 § 1 (part), 1996)
7-5.04 Approval of street designation.
Once the Director of Public Works has given preliminary approval to a street name, the Planning
Commission shall determine whether the designation following the name, such as "street," "road," "drive,"
"lane," "avenue," "court," or "place," is appropriate for the type of street being named. In making its
determination, the Planning Commission shall take into consideration the appropriate designations
generally utilized for different types of roadways, such as arterials, collectors, local streets and cul-desacs.
The Planning Commission shall then make a recommendation and refer the matter to the City
Council for final approval.
(Ord. 96-03 § 1 (part), 1996)
7-5.05 Final approval.
Once a proposed street name has been considered and approved by both the Director of Public
Works and the Planning Commission, the proposed street name shall be submitted to the City Council.
The proposed street name shall be placed on the City Council's consent calendar for final approval.
(Ord. 96-03 § 1 (part), 1996)
7-5.06 Street name changes.
Street name changes shall be accomplished in the following manner:
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
(a) Prior to any street name change, the City Planning Commission shall give notice and conduct a
public hearing. The Planning Commission shall then submit a report and recommendation to the
City Council.
(b) Once the recommendation of the Planning Commission has been considered, the City Council
may change the street name. Street name changes shall be accomplished by resolution,
following the procedure for such changes set forth in Section 5026 of the Streets and Highways
Code of the State of California, as it presently exists or may be hereafter amended or
superseded.
(c) The Council City shall not be bound by the Planning Commission's recommendations or actions.
(Ord. 96-03 § 1 (part), 1996)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 1
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapters:
Chapter 1 - UNIFORM CODES FOR BUILDING AND INDUSTRY
Chapter 2 - RADIO AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS
Chapter 3 - UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Chapter 4 - SIGN CODE
Chapter 5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Chapter 6 - INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES
Chapter 7 - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 8 - STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS ON RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
Chapter 9 - CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
Chapter 1 UNIFORM CODES FOR BUILDING AND INDUSTRY
Sections:
8-1.01 General provisions.
8-1.02 Board of Appeals.
8-1.03 Relocation permits.
8-1.04 Building Standards Code.
8-1.05 Deletion or revision of certain provisions.
8-1.06 Fees.
8-1.07 Appeal Board.
8-1.08 Copy of code.
8-1.09 No liability.
8-1.10 Violation—Penalty.
8-1.01 General provisions.
(a) Definitions. When not defined in the codes adopted in Section 8-1.04, "person" shall mean any
individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock
company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 2
Unless the context suggests otherwise, whenever any of the following terms are used in the codes
adopted in Section 8-1.04, such terms shall have the following meanings:
(1) "Building Official" means the City Manager or her/his authorized designee.
(2) "Chief appointing authority" means the City Council of the City of Avenal.
(3) "City" means the City of Avenal.
(4) "Governing body" means the City Council of the City of Avenal.
(5) "Chief electrical inspector" means the Building Official or her/his designee.
(6) "Administrative Authority" means the City Manager or her/his designee.
(7) "Appeal Board" and "Board of Appeals" means the City Council of the City of Avenal.
(8) "Authority having jurisdiction" and "local agency with jurisdiction" means the City of Avenal.
(b) Enforcement agency and administrative official—Designated. The provisions of this chapter shall be
administered by the Building Official who, pursuant to Section 17964 of the Health and Safety Code
of the State of California, is hereby designated and charged with the responsibility for enforcement of
the state housing law and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder in the City of Avenal.
The Building Official is authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter including the
codes hereby adopted and for such purpose he shall have the powers of a Police Officer.
(c) Liability. The Building Official or any employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter, acting
in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall thereby render
himself liable personally and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages that
may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act required or by reason of any act or omission
in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the Building Official or employee, because of
such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of this chapter, shall be defended by the
City until the final termination of the proceedings.
(d) Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, violate, or cause to be violated any
provisions of this chapter or codes herein adopted.
Each person guilty of any violation of this chapter and the adopted codes is guilty of a
separate offense for each day the violation is allowed to exist.
A violation of the chapter and adopted codes shall be deemed to be an infraction for each
separate offense and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
The penalty provisions of this chapter shall supersede similar or conflicting provisions of all
codes hereby adopted.
(e) Exemptions. In addition to exemptions specified in the Uniform Codes adopted by this Code, this
chapter shall not be applicable to any work located primarily in a public way, public utility towers and
poles, mechanical equipment not specifically regulated in this chapter, flood control or irrigation
structures, irrigation pipes, or irrigation wells. Nor shall this chapter be applicable to buildings,
structures, power plants, facilities, equipment or installations owned or to be constructed by or for a
public utility corporation or a gas and oil industry subject to the jurisdiction of the State Public Utilities
Commission, Federal Power Commission or the State Department of Natural Resources where said
buildings, structures, powers plants, facilities, equipment or installations are specifically subject to
regulation as to design, construction, and operation by said commission or department.
This chapter shall not be applicable to structures designed and constructed for the
following farm uses: Buildings or structures to house birds, poultry or livestock, animal shade
structures, hay sheds, granaries, silos, fences, buildings designed and intended to be used for
the sale of seasonal agricultural products grown upon the farms upon which they are located
and which sales buildings are of a size less than four hundred (400) square feet in area. The
agricultural exemption provided for in this subsection shall be applicable only in the following
zone districts: General Agricultural, Exclusive Agricultural, and Light Agricultural. Such farm
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 3
buildings or structures are not to be for human habitation or places of employment where
agricultural products are processed, treated, or packaged nor shall they be used by the public or
attached to a dwelling. Said agricultural exemption shall not apply to any electrical, plumbing or
mechanical activities which involve connection to electrical energy, combustible fuel, or
domestic water systems. All persons claiming an agricultural exemption pursuant to this
subsection shall, before commencing construction, make application with the Building Official
and secure from said official a determination in writing that such construction is exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
The owner or person proposing to construct a building or structure or perform any work
exempt from the provisions hereof may obtain the inspection service as provided in this chapter
by applying for and obtaining the appropriate permit or permits and paying the regularly
established fees therefor in the same manner as though said building, structure or work were
not exempt pursuant to this section.
(f) Copies of codes on file. Not less than one copy of each code hereby adopted by reference, all
certified by the City Clerk to be true copies, shall be filed in the office of said Clerk, and shall be left
there for public inspection while this chapter is in force, provided that the copies, after certification
thereof, may be kept in the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 85-08 §§ 1, 2, 1987; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 3-24-2011)
8-1.02 Board of Appeals.
(a) The City Council shall be the Board of Appeals provided for in each of the codes hereby adopted.
(b) The Building Official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to the Board.
(c) The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for carrying out its duties.
(d) The findings and decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be in writing. Notice of any such decision
shall be given to the appellant or applicant, and, unless otherwise provided, shall be given within five
(5) days and may be given by depositing a copy thereof in the United States mail, postage prepaid
within said five (5) days addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. The failure
of any person to receive such notice after such mailing shall not in any manner affect the validity of
any proceeding.
(e) The decision of the Board of Appeals shall be final unless action is brought in a court of competent
jurisdiction within thirty (30) days thereafter.
8-1.03 Relocation permits.
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall move any building or structure within or into the City without first
obtaining from the Building Official a relocation permit and a building permit.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, there shall not be issued a relocation permit for any
building or structure which is included within any one or more of the following categories:
(1) Is so constructed or is in such condition as to constitute a danger of injury or death through
collapse of the building, fire, defects in electrical wiring or any other substantial hazard, to the
persons who will occupy or enter said building after relocation;
(2) Is infested with rats or other vermin or the wood members of the building are infested with rot,
decay, or termites;
(3) Is so unsanitary or filthy that it would constitute a hazard to the health of the persons who will
occupy said building after relocation or, if not intended for occupancy by human beings, would
make it unsuitable for its intended use;
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 4
(4) Is in such condition or is of a type, character, size, or value and is so inharmonious with other
buildings in the neighborhood of the relocation site, that placing the building at the proposed
relocation site would substantially diminish the value of other property or improvements within a
radius of five hundred (500) feet from the proposed relocation site;
(5) If the proposed use of the building is prohibited at the proposed relocation site under any zoning
ordinance or other land use ordinance of the City;
(6) If the building or structure does not conform to all applicable provisions of law.
(c) Correction of defects before issuance; hearing.
(1) If the building or structure to be moved fails to meet any of the standards set forth in subsection
(a) of this section, but it appears to the Building Official that the deficiencies can be corrected,
the permit shall be issued only on condition that all deficiencies be corrected.
(2) In order to determine any matter regarding relocation of a building or structure, the Building
Official may cause any investigation to be made which he believes necessary.
(d) Terms and conditions to issuance. In granting a relocation permit, there may be imposed such terms
and conditions as are reasonable including but not limited to, changes, alterations, additions or
repairs to the building or structure so that its relocation will not be materially detrimental or injurious
to the public safety or welfare or to the property or improvements in the district to which it is to be
moved. The terms and conditions upon which each permit is granted shall be in writing upon
application and permit or appended thereto.
(e) Fees. The fee for relocation investigation service shall be established by the City Council by
resolution and shall be a separate fee from any building, plumbing, electrical, or mechanical permit
fee. In the event a building permit is issued, the fees for building or structure at its relocation site as
estimated by the Building Official or his/her designee.
(f) Expiration and renewal of permits.
(1) A relocation permit shall expire and become null and void if the moving of the building or
structure is not completed, and all terms and conditions of the relocation permit complied within
six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit.
(2) An application for extension of the six (6) months time limitation set forth in subsection (a) of this
section may be submitted to the Board of Appeals within six (6) months from the date of
issuance of the permit. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing upon such application
for extension of time. No such application shall be approved by the Board of Appeals except
where it appears that the failure of applicant to comply with the terms and conditions of the
permit was due to fire, legal acts of the public authorities, acts of God, or any other delay
unavoidable or beyond the reasonable control of the applicant. An application for extension of
time shall be denied by the Board of Appeals if the applicant fails to appear in person at the time
and place set for the public hearing on such application, unless there is presented at such
hearing a certificate of a licensed physician that such applicant is physically unable to appear at
such hearing due to illness or other physical incapacity, or the applicant is represented at such
hearing by an attorney.
(3) An extension of time granted by the Board of Appeals after due hearing thereon shall be for any
period of time deemed reasonable by the Board of Appeals, in view of all of the facts and
circumstances of the particular case, but in no event shall such extension of time exceed six (6)
months from date of the expiration of the original permit.
(4) A second extension of time shall not be issued to any applicant by the Board of Appeals. The
Board of Appeals may, in its discretion, accept an application for extension of time from a
person who has succeeded to the ownership of property which was the subject of an extension
of time granted to a former owner-applicant.
(g) Surety bond required. The Building Official shall not issue a relocation permit unless the applicant
therefor shall first post with the Building Official a bond executed by the owner of the premises where
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 5
the building or structure is to be located, as principal, and by a surety company authorized to do
business in the state, as surety, or makes a deposit of cash or cashier's check or money order
payable to the City of Avenal, as hereafter provided.
(h) Form and amount. The surety bond required by subsection (g) of this section shall:
(1) Be in form joint and several;
(2) Name the City as obligee;
(3) Be in an amount equal to the estimated cost plus ten (10) percent of the work required to be
done in order to comply with all of the conditions of the moving permit, such estimate to be
estimated by the Building Official. A deposit, if made in place of a surety bond, shall also be
equal to the cost plus ten (10) percent of such work.
(i) Condition. Every bond posted and every deposit made pursuant to this article shall be conditioned as
follows:
(1) That each and all of the terms and conditions of the moving permit shall be complied with to the
satisfaction of the Building Official;
(2) That all of the work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the moving permit shall be
fully performed and completed within six (6) months from the date of the issuance of the permit,
or within the period of any extension of time hereafter granted by the Building Official;
(3) The term of each bond posted pursuant to this article shall begin upon the date of the posting
thereof and shall end upon the completion to the satisfaction of the Building Official of the
performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation permit.
(j) Procedure on default. Whenever the Building Official finds that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of any relocation permit he shall give written notice thereof to
the principal and to the surety on the bond.
(k) Contents of notice of default. In a notice of default the Building Official shall state the work to be
done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by him to be reasonably necessary
for the completion of such work.
(l) When work to be done by City. If after written notice the required work is not performed within the
time specified in such notice, then the City at its option may, through its authorized officers or agents,
cause such work to be done, or cause such building or structure to be demolished and the premises
cleared, and the surety shall pay over to the county or to the Building Official the actual cost of such
work or demolition, plus an additional sum of ten (10) percent; provided, however, that in no case
shall the liability of the surety exceed the amount of the surety bond; or the City may, at its option,
through its Building Official or other authorized agent, require the surety to cause the required work
to be performed or require the surety to demolish the structure or building or clear, clean and restore
the site; provided, that in neither case shall the liability of the surety exceed the amount of the surety
bond.
(m) Use of cash deposit. If a cash bond has been posted the Building Official shall give notice of default,
as provided above to the principal, and if compliance is not had within the time specified the Building
Official shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding whatever, to use the
cash deposit or any portion of such deposit to cause the required work to be done by contract or
otherwise in his discretion. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit, upon the completion of the
work, shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of
the work plus ten (10) percent thereof.
(n) Return of deposit. When a cash bond has been posted, the Building Official shall return the cash to
the depositor or to his successors or assigns upon the termination of the bond, except any portion
thereof that may have been used or deducted as elsewhere in this article provided.
(o) Inspections. The Building Official, the surety and the duly authorized representatives of either shall
have access to the premises described in the relocation permit for the purpose of inspecting the
progress of the work.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 6
(p) Interference with work. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition of the
relocation permit, the surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, or the Building
Official, or any person employed or engaged on his behalf, may go upon the premises to complete
the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure. The owner, his representative,
successor or assign, or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress or egress to or
from any such premises, or any authorized representative or agent of any surety or of the City
engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a
relocation permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or
conditions thereof, is guilty of an infraction.
(Ord. 91-06 § 24, 1991; Ord. 87-04 § 2, 1987)
8-1.04 Building Standards Code.
The following publications are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated into this chapter in their
entirety, except as expressly amended or superseded by the provisions of this chapter, with the same
effect as if fully set forth herein verbatim:
(a) California Building Standards Administrative Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 1 of Title 24 of
the California Code of Regulations;
(b) California Building Code, including the Appendix Chapters thereto, 2010 edition, found in Part 2
of the California Code of Regulations;
(c) California Residential Building Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California
Code of Regulations;
(d) California Electrical Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 3 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations;
(e) California Mechanical Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 4 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations;
(f) California Plumbing Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 5 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations;
(g) California Energy Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 6 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations;
(h) California Historical Building Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 8 of Title 24 of the California
Code of Regulations;
(i) California Fire Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 9 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations;
(j) California Existing Building Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 10 of Title 24 of the California
Code of Regulations;
(k) California Green Building Standards Code, 2010 edition, found in Part 11 of Title 24 of the
California Code of Regulations;
(l) California Reference Standards Code, 2010 edition, 2010 edition, found in Part 12 of Title 24 of
the California Code of Regulations; and
(m) Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 edition, as published by the
International Conference of Building Officials.
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
Editor's note—
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 7
Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, adopted March 24, 2011, repealed the former § 8-1.04. Section 4 of said
ordinance enacted a new § 8-1.04 as set out herein. The former § 8-1.04 pertained to
Uniform Building Code and derived from Ord. No. 85-08, §§ 3, 4, adopted 1985; Ord. No.
87-04, §§ 3, 4, adopted 1987; Ord. No. 89-13, §§ 2, 3, adopted 1989; Ord. No. 93-01, § 2,
adopted 1993; Ord. No. 2008-01, §§ 1,2, adopted April 10, 2008.
8-1.05 Deletion or revision of certain provisions.
(a) The following sections of the codes adopted in Section 8-1.04 are deleted:
(1) [Reserved.]
(b) The following sections of the relevant codes adopted in Section 8-1.04 are revised to read in their
entirety as follows:
(1) [Reserved.]
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, adopted March 24, 2011, repealed the former § 8-1.05. Section 4 of said
ordinance enacted a new § 8-1.05 as set out herein. The former § 8-1.05 pertained to
Uniform Electrical Code and derived from Ord. No. 85-08, § 5, adopted 1985; Ord. No. 87-
04, § 5, adopted 1987; Ord. No. 89-13, § 4, adopted 1989; Ord. No. 93-01, § 3, adopted
1993.
8-1.06 Fees.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or any code adopted in Section 8-1.04, any
person desiring a permit required by any code adopted in Section 8-1.04 shall, at the time of filing an
application therefor, pay a fee as set by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, adopted March 24, 2011, repealed the former § 8-1.06. Section 4 of said
ordinance enacted a new § 8-1.06 as set out herein. The former § 8-1.06 pertained to
Plumbing Code and derived from Ord. No. 85-08, § 6, adopted 1985; Ord. No. 87-04, § 6,
adopted 1987; Ord. No. 89-13, §§ 5, 6, adopted 1989; Ord. No. 93-01, § 4, adopted 1993.
8-1.07 Appeal Board.
Whenever any code adopted in Section 8-1.04 specifies a Board of Appeals or Advisory Board, or in
the absence of such specifications, the City Council or its designee(s) shall serve as such board, and may
determine the suitability of alternative materials and/or methods of construction and may provide a
reasonable interpretation of the applicable provisions.
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
Editor's note—
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 8
Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, adopted March 24, 2011, repealed the former § 8-1.07. Section 4 of said
ordinance enacted a new § 8-1.07 as set out herein. The former § 8-1.07 pertained to
Uniform Mechanical Code and derived from Ord. No. 85-08, §§ 7, 8, adopted 1985; Ord.
No. 87-04, §§ 7, 8, adopted 1987; Ord. No. 89-13, § 7, adopted 1989; Ord. No. 93-01, § 5,
adopted 1993.
8-1.08 Copy of code.
At least one copy of the codes adopted in Section 8-1.04 may be inspected during normal business
hours by any member of the public in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
Editor's note—
Ord. No. 2011-02, § 3, adopted March 24, 2011, repealed the former § 8-1.08. Section 4 of said
ordinance enacted a new § 8-1.08 as set out herein. The former § 8-1.08 pertained to
Uniform Administrative Code and derived from Ord. No. 87-04, § 9, adopted 1987; Ord. No.
89-13, § 8, adopted 1989; Ord. No. 93-01, § 6, adopted 1993.
8-1.09 No liability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the City of Avenal any liability
or responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting from defective work, nor shall the City of
Avenal, or any official, employee or agent thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility
by reason of the review or inspection authorized by the provisions of this chapter, or issuance of any
permits or certificates under this chapter or the codes adopted by in Section 8-1.04.
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
8-1.10 Violation—Penalty.
Unless otherwise required by applicable law, any violation of any provision of this Chapter, including
the codes adopted in Section 8-1.04, shall be punishable as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 2 of the Avenal
Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 2011-02, § 4, 3-24-2011)
Chapter 2 RADIO AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS
Sections:
8-2.01 Licenses—Required—Fees—Terms—Exceptions.
8-2.02 Permits—Required—Exceptions.
8-2.03 Permits—Applications—Fees.
8-2.04 Permits—Issuance.
8-2.05 Bonds.
8-2.06 Erection requirements.
8-2.07 Erection qualifications.
8-2.08 Inspections.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 9
8-2.09 Maintenance inspections—Notices of dangerous conditions.
8-2.10 Exemptions.
8-2.01 Licenses—Required—Fees—Terms—Exceptions.
(a) Required. Before any person shall engage in the business of erecting outdoor antennas in the City,
such person shall first procure from the City a license so to do and, except as otherwise provided in
subsection (d) of this section, shall pay the license tax imposed on such business. Such person shall
register his name in a book provided for that purpose at the office of the City Clerk, giving his full
name, residence, and place of business. In the event he moves his business from one place to
another in the City, he shall make the corresponding change in the register accordingly and file
therewith his affidavit that such name and place of business as registered are correctly stated.
For the purposes of this section, any person who, for a pecuniary or other remuneration,
erects or installs two (2) or more outdoor antennas in any one calendar year shall be deemed to
be engaged in the business of the erection and installation of outdoor antennas.
(b) Fees. Antenna erection licenses shall be issued by the City on the payment of an annual fee of
Twenty and no/100ths ($20.00) Dollars or a semiannual fee of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars.
The fee of a license for a fraction of a year shall be Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars.
(c) Terms. Such license fees shall be for the calendar year or one-half (½) year, or any fraction thereof,
and shall be payable in advance to the Finance Director.
(d) Exceptions. Persons already paying a business license tax to the City shall not be required to pay an
antenna erection license tax in addition thereto; provided, however, such persons shall otherwise
comply with the provisions of this chapter, including those requiring registration, the filing ofaffidavits,
and the furnishing of bonds.
8-2.02 Permits—Required—Exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent, servant, or employee of the owner, or as
an independent contractor for the owner, or otherwise, to install any outdoor antenna system for radio or
television receiving apparatus or equipment, or any additions to or substitutions for such system, unless
and until a permit for such installation, or for such additions to or substitutions therefor, shall have been
first obtained from the Public Works Director; provided, however, no permit shall be required when both of
the following conditions exist:
(a) The antenna is so located that if it swings or falls, such antenna will not come in contact with
electric power lines carrying in excess of seven hundred fifty (750) volts; and
(b) The antenna is so located that if pivoted about its base to a horizontal position, no portion of the
antenna will extend beyond the property lines of the real property on which such antenna is
erected.
8-2.03 Permits—Applications—Fees.
Any person desiring to erect, construct, or maintain any outdoor antenna system for radio or
television receiving apparatus or equipment, or any additions to or substitutions for such system, shall,
unless exempted by the provisions of Section 8-2.02 of this chapter, make a written application for such
permit to the Public Works Director upon such forms as may be prescribed by the Public Works Director
and pay the fee, as established by the City Council by resolution, for each installation. Such permit fee
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 10
shall entitle the applicant to one inspection without further charge. For each reinspection required, a
reinspection fee, as established by the City Council by resolution, shall be paid.
(Ord. 91-06 § 26, 1991)
8-2.04 Permits—Issuance.
If the Public Works Director finds that the proposed installation or work complies in every respect
with the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue the permit required by the provisions of Section 8-2.02 of
this chapter to the applicant thereof.
8-2.05 Bonds.
It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of the erection and installation of outdoor
antennas to erect or install any such outdoor antenna in the City without first furnishing a bond in the sum
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which shall be signed by two (2) good and sufficient sureties who
shall justify for such amount over and above all their just debts and liabilities and all property owned by
such sureties exempt from execution, or which bond shall be executed by a surety company authorized to
transact business in the State. Such bond shall be approved by the City Attorney and filed with the City
Clerk.
The condition of each bond shall be that, in the event the principal named in the bond shall faithfully
perform his duty in the installation or erection of an outdoor antenna in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, such obligation shall be void, but in the event the principal shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter in the erection of any outdoor antenna or shall install an unsafe antenna and
refuse or neglect to correct or remove the antenna after notice from the Public Works Director, he may
direct such work to be removed or corrected, and the cost and expense of such removal or correction, not
exceeding the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be collectible from the principal and the
sureties on such bonds. Each such bond shall be for a period of time which shall expire on June 30 of
each year. It shall be the duty of the licensee to renew such bond upon the expiration of the term for
which it is given, and failure on the part of any such person to renew such bond immediately upon the
expiration of such term shall have the same effect as if no bond had been given.
For the purposes of this section, any person who, for a pecuniary or other remuneration, erects or
installs two (2) or more outdoor antennas in any one calendar year shall be deemed to be engaged in the
business of the erection and installation of outdoor antennas.
8-2.06 Erection requirements.
Whether or not a permit is required by the provisions of this chapter, outdoor radio and television
antennas erected in the City shall be erected in compliance with the applicable regulations of the Civil
Aeronautics Authority and the following requirements:
(a) The antenna mast or tower shall be secured to a structure strong enough to carry the weight of
the installation with necessary allowances for wind and vibration.
(b) The mast shall be securely anchored to the structure.
(c) Antennas shall not be attached to, or supported by, vent pipes. Mast supports and guy wire
anchors shall be secured in such a way that the supporting structure is not damaged or
weakened.
(d) Radio and television masts, except those of a telescoping type, which extend more than ten
(10') feet above the top of their bases, shall be strengthened with three (3) or more substantial
guy wires at intervals of not more than each twenty (20') feet of height, or fraction thereof.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 11
(e) The Public Works Director shall require guy attachments at closer intervals than twenty (20')feet
if, in his opinion, such closer spacing is necessary to provide proper support and rigidity for the
mast.
(f) Telescoping type masts shall have at least three (3) substantial guy wires attached to the top of
each section.
(g) A lightning arrester, suitable for the frequency for which the television apparatus is designed
and approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., for television leads shall, if available, be
provided for each lead-in conductor and shall be located outside the building and as near as
practicable to the entrance of the conductor into the building. The arrester shall not be located
near combustible material or in a hazardous location.
(h) Every metal mast or tower shall be grounded by a conductor of suitable size. The conductor
should be bonded to a water pipe if possible.
8-2.07 Erection qualifications.
An antenna may be erected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter by anyone, and no
requirements as to qualifications are imposed by the provisions of this section.
8-2.08 Inspections.
When any installation for which a permit is required by the provisions of this chapter has been
completed, the person in whose name such permit has been granted, within seventy-two (72) hours, shall
notify the Public Works Director that the work is ready for final inspection. Thereupon, the work shall be
promptly inspected by the Public Works Director, and if the work complies in all respects with the
provisions of this chapter and with the permit, a certificate of approval shall be given by the Public Works
Director to the permittee. In the event the work does not comply in all respects with the provisions of this
chapter and with the permit, a certificate of approval shall be withheld until and unless a subsequent
inspection discloses compliance. In the further event the antenna, as erected, does not comply with the
provisions of this chapter or in other respects does not appear to be erected, supported, and guyed in a
reasonably safe manner, the Public Works Director shall instruct the person who erected such antenna to
either make corrections so the antenna, as erected, will comply with the provisions of this chapter and
reasonable safety, or to remove the antenna.
A request for a reinspection shall be accompanied by the payment of the reinspection fee set forth in
Section 8-2.03 of this chapter.
Except for test purposes, and except for cases not requiring the issuance of a permit, no television or
radio antenna shall be placed in use until a certificate of approval is obtained.
8-2.09 Maintenance inspections—Notices of dangerous conditions.
Nothing set forth in this chapter, nor the fact that any person has theretofore obtained a certificate of
approval, shall be construed to prevent the City, through its duly authorized inspectors under the direction
of the Public Works Director, from inspecting any antenna system in use in the City in order to ascertain
whether or not such antenna system continues to remain in a safe condition and in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. In the event any condition is found which might result in danger to life or
property, the Public Works Director shall give written notice to the owner or operator of such antenna at
his last known address, setting forth such condition and requiring the condition of such antenna to be
corrected within fifteen (15) days after such notice. If such condition is not corrected within such time, the
maintenance thereafter of any such defective installation by the owner or user thereof shall be unlawful.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 12
8-2.10 Exemptions.
(a) Amateur radio operators. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or control any person who
holds a valid Amateur Radio Operator and Station License issued by the Federal Communications
Commission while such person is engaged in an activity under the authority of such license. If such
person engages in the installation of antennas other than those which pertain to his hobby under
such license, the provisions of this chapter shall apply insofar as such installation is concerned.
(b) Demonstrators. The provisions of this chapter requiring a permit and certificate of approval shall not
be applicable to television antennas installed for demonstration purposes where the duration of their
existence shall not exceed three (3) days; provided, however, before any such demonstration
antennas are installed, oral approval therefor shall be obtained from the Public Works Director. No
fee shall be charged for such oral approval.
Chapter 3 UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Sections:
8-3.01 Building defined.
8-3.02 Adoption of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
8-3.01 Building defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, "building" means structures of any kind.
8-3.02 Adoption of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, that certain code known and designated as the
"Uniform Code for Building Conservation" together with appendices thereto as adopted by the
International Conference of Building Officials is hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this
chapter with the same effect as if fully set forth herein and is declared to be the Building Conservation
Code of the City.
(Ord. 89-08 § 11, 1989)
Chapter 4 SIGN CODE
Sections:
8-4.01 Adoption of the Uniform Sign Code.
8-4.01 Adoption of the Uniform Sign Code.
That certain code, known and designated as the "Uniform Sign Code," 1991 Edition, published by
the International Conference of Building Officials is hereby adopted by reference and made a part of this
chapter as though set forth in this chapter in full, subject, however, to any amendments, additions, and
deletions set forth in this chapter, and the code shall be known as the Sign Code of the City.
(Ord. 89-13 § 13, 1989; Ord. 93-01 § 7, 1993)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 13
Chapter 5 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION [1]
Sections:
Article 1. - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
Article 2. - Definitions
Article 3. - General Provisions
Article 4. - Administration
Article 5. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Article 6. - Variance Procedure
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) ---
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-01, §§ 1.0—6.0, adopted March 12, 2009, amended title 8, chapter 5, in
its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 5, §§ 8-5.101—8-5.104, 8-5.201, 8-5.301—8-5.307,
8-5.401—8-5.404, 8-5.501—8-5.506, 8-5.601—8-5.603, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived
from Ord. No. 95-07, §§ 1—6, adopted 1995. (Back)
Article 1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Methods
8-5.101 Statutory authorization.
8-5.102 Findings of fact.
8-5.103 Statement of purpose.
8-5.104 Methods of reducing flood losses.
8-5.101 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of California has, pursuant to Government Code sections 65302, 65560,
and 65800, conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Avenal
hereby adopts the following floodplain management regulations and hereby repeals Ordinance No. 95-07.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1.1, 3-12-2009)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 14
8-5.102 Findings of fact.
(a) The flood hazard areas of City of Avenal are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of
which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected
from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which
increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1.2, 3-12-2009)
8-5.103 Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable
regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within
flood prone, mudslide [i.e. mudflow] or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:
(a) Protect human life and health;
(b) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric,
telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(f) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;
(g) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
(h) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1.3, 3-12-2009)
8-5.104 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:
(a) Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or
erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
(b) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(c) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
(d) Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;
(e) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or
which may increase flood hazards in other areas.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1.4, 3-12-2009)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 15
Article 2. Definitions
8-5.201 Definitions.
8-5.201 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
"A zone." See "Special flood hazard area."
"Accessory structure" means a structure that is either:
(1) Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
(2) A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value.
"Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of
land on which it is located.
"Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of
boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood
flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
"Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major
stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
"Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any
provision of this chapter.
"Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three (3) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist;
the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
"Area of special flood hazard." See "Special flood hazard area."
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.
"Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones
AE, AH, A1—30, VE and V1—V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that
has a one (1) percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
"Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all
sides.
"Building." See "Structure."
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
"Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings,
permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a
floodplain.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 16
"Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of Ordinance No. 95-07
(adopted on May 25, 1995).
"Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of
additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
"FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the United States.
"Flood," "flooding," or "flood water" means:
(1) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
(2) The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
"Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the floodway.
"Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
"Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration
that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source. See "Flooding."
"Floodplain Administrator" is the local official designated by the City of Avenal to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in
the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion
control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for
preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
"Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved realproperty,
water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing,
see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
"Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must
be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory floodway."
"Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "Regulatory floodway" where
encroachment may be permitted.
"Fraud and victimization" as related to Article 6 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must
not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City of Avenal will
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 17
consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a
part of the community for fifty (50) to one-hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage
from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs,
inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future
owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be
insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
"Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
"Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt
and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
"Hardship" as related to Article 6 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result
from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City of Avenal requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is
not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or
the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of
these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative
is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use
than originally intended.
"Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
"Historic structure" means any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting
the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
"Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
"Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and
associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in
accord with sound engineering practices.
"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see
"Basement" definition).
(1) An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered
a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
a. The flood openings standard in Section 8-5.501(c)(3);
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 18
b. The anchoring standards in Section 8-5.501(a);
c. The construction materials and methods standards in Section 8-5.501(b); and
d. The standards for utilities in Section 8-5.502.
(2) For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to
be basements (see "Basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and
storage areas.
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
"Market value" is defined in the City of Avenal Substantial Damage/Improvement Procedures. See
Section 8-5.402(b)(1).
"Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
"New construction", for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 95-07 (adopted on May 25,
1995), and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
"New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of Ordinance No. 95-
07 (adopted on May 25, 1995).
"Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water,
or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood
of being carried downstream.
"One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood." See "Base flood."
"Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or
administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management
regulations.
"Public safety and nuisance" as related to Article 6 of this chapter, means that the granting of a
variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in
the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 19
"Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the
water surface elevation more than one foot.
"Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with State
or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing State or Federal financial exposure with regard to
the structure or other development.
"Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook,
etc.
"Sheet flow area." See "Area of shallow flooding."
"Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1—A30,
AE, A99, or, AH.
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas
or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement
of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in
a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
"Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this
chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 20
"Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
"Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic
feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated
areas in which substantial flood damage may occur.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 2.0, 3-12-2009)
Article 3. General Provisions
8-5.301 Lands to which this chapter applies.
8-5.302 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
8-5.303 Compliance.
8-5.304 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
8-5.305 Interpretation.
8-5.306 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
8-5.307 Severability.
8-5.301 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of
Avenal.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.1, 3-12-2009)
8-5.302 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for City of Avenal dated June 16, 2009, with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated June 16, 2009,
and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter
and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and
which are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and
FBFMs are on file at:
Avenal Planning Department
919 Skyline Boulevard
Avenal, California 93204
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.2, 3-12-2009)
8-5.303 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without
full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 21
herein shall prevent the City of Avenal from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.3, 3-12-2009)
8-5.304 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.4, 3-12-2009)
8-5.305 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
(a) Considered as minimum requirements;
(b) Liberally construed in favor of the City of Avenal; and
(c) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.5, 3-12-2009)
8-5.306 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on
rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Avenal, any
officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
hereunder.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.6, 3-12-2009)
8-5.307 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section
of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 3.7, 3-12-2009)
Article 4. Administration
8-5.401 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
8-5.402 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
8-5.403 Development permit.
8-5.404 Appeals.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 22
8-5.401 Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
The Community Development Director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce
this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 4.1, 3-12-2009)
8-5.402 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
(a) Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine:
(1) Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of
substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;
(2) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
(3) The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
(4) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where
base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This
means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the City of Avenal; and
(5) All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional
letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed
flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction"
definition.
(b) Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures.
(1) Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged
Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for
substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "Market Value."
(2) Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by
City of Avenal staff.
(c) Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with Section 8-5.302, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article 5.
NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA
publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas—A
Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995.
(d) Notification of Other Agencies.
(1) Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
a. Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior
to alteration or relocation;
b. Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
and
c. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse is maintained.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 23
(2) Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:
a. Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion,
whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the
permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map
revision (LOMR).
b. All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building
permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map
revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood
control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction"definition.
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes
affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management
requirements are based on current data.
(3) Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate
boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map
of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
(e) Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make
available as needed the following:
(1) Certification required by Section 8-5.501(c)(1) and Section 8-5.504 (lowest floor
elevations);
(2) Certification required by Section 8-5.501(c)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential
structures);
(3) Certification required by Section 8-5.501(c)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);
(4) Certification of elevation required by Section 8-5.503(a)(3) (subdivisions and other
proposed development standards);
(5) Certification required by Section 8-5.506(b) (floodway encroachments); and
(6) Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report
such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(f) Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
Section 8-5.404.
(g) Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 8-
5.303.
(h) Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.
(i) Planning. Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives
herein.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 4.2, 3-12-2009)
8-5.403 Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including
manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 8-5.302. Application
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 24
for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City of Avenal. The applicant shall
provide the following minimum information:
(a) Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
1. Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed
structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;
2. Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;
3. Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and
drainage facilities;
4. Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
5. Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 8-5.302 or Section 8-5.402(c);
6. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of
all structures; and
7. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will
be floodproofed, as required in Section 8-5.501(c)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA
Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.
(b) Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 8-5.501(c)(2).
(c) For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in
Section 8-5.501(c)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
(d) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
(e) All appropriate certifications listed in Section 8-5.402(e) of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 4.3, 3-12-2009)
8-5.404 Appeals.
The City Council of the City of Avenal shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 4.4, 3-12-2009)
Article 5. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
8-5.501 Standards of construction.
8-5.502 Standards for utilities.
8-5.503 Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
8-5.504 Standards for manufactured homes.
8-5.505 Standards for recreational vehicles.
8-5.506 Floodways.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 25
8-5.501 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(a) Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including
manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy.
(b) Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:
(1) With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas
below the base flood elevation;
(2) Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and
(4) Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
(c) Elevation and Floodproofing.
(1) Residential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:
a. In AE, AH, A1—30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
b. In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or
exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two (2)
feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
c. In an A zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to
or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 8-5.402(c).
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement,
shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by
the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
(2) Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of
nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 8-5.501(c)(1) or:
a. Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the
elevation recommended under Section 8-5.501(c)(1), so that the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads
and effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 8-
5.501(c)(2)a. and b. are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(3) Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the
following minimum criteria:
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 26
a. For non-engineering openings:
(i) Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding;
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and
(iv) Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior
walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or
b. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
(4) Manufactured homes.
a. See Section 8-5.504.
(5) Garages and low cost accessory structures.
a. Attached garages.
(i) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor
slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood
waters. See Section 8-5.501(c)(3). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be
constructed with flood resistant materials. See Section 8-5.501(b).
(ii) A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above
requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas,
see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
b. Detached garages and accessory structures.
(i) "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (two (2) car detached garages or
smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Article 2, may be
constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided
the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;
2. The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built
using flood-resistant materials;
3. The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse and lateral movement;
4. Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
5. The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment
provisions in Section 8-5.506; and
6. The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of
flood waters in accordance with Section 8-5.501(c)(3).
(ii) Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards
must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 8-
5.501.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 5.1, 3-12-2009)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 27
8-5.502 Standards for utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate:
(1) Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
(2) Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(b) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from
them during flooding.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 5.2, 3-12-2009)
8-5.503 Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
(a) All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for
manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is
the lesser, shall:
(1) Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE).
(2) Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.
(3) If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each
structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided
as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMRF) to the Floodplain
Administrator:
a. Lowest floor elevation.
b. Pad elevation.
c. Lowest adjacent grade.
(b) All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(c) All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(d) All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce
exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 5.3, 3-12-2009)
8-5.504 Standards for manufactured homes.
(a) All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a
manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in
an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial
damage" as the result of a flood, shall:
(1) Within Zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated
on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to
or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(b) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision within Zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 28
map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 8-5.504(a) will be securely fastened to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be
elevated so that either the:
(1) Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(2) Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be
certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building
inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 5.4, 3-12-2009)
8-5.505 Standards for recreational vehicles.
(a) All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1—30, AH, and AE will either:
(1) Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it
is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
(3) Meet the permit requirements of Section 8-5.403 of this chapter and the elevation and
anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 8-5.501(a).
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 5.5, 3-12-2009)
8-5.506 Floodways.
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(a) Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other
development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1—30 and AE, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one (1) foot at any point within the City of Avenal.
(b) Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City of Avenal shall prohibit encroachments,
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless
certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
(c) If Sections 8-5.506(a) and (b) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and
other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of Article 5.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 5.6, 3-12-2009)
Article 6. Variance Procedure
8-5.601 Nature of variances.
8-5.602 Conditions for variances.
8-5.603 Appeal Board.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 29
8-5.601 Nature of variances.
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates
are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of
zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be
granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding
property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent
parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the
property owners.
It is the duty of the City of Avenal to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling
and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances
form the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term
goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited.
Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to
screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 6.1, 3-12-2009)
8-5.602 Conditions for variances.
(a) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other
proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that
the procedures of Articles 4 and 5 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(b) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Article 2
of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary
to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(c) Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary"
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a
minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the City of Avenal need not grant permission for the applicant
to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation
which the City of Avenal believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local
ordinance.
(e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a
community official that:
(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 30
(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is
recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the
Office of the Recorder of the County of Kings and shall be recorded in a manner so that it
appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.
(f) The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
(g) Variances shall only be issued upon a:
(1) Showing of good and sufficient cause;
(2) Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the
applicant; and
(3) Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see "Public safety
and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local laws
or ordinances.
(h) Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions
of Sections 8-5.602(a) through (d) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in
additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
(i) Upon consideration of the factors of Section 8-5.602(a) and the purposes of this chapter, the City
Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 6.2, 3-12-2009)
8-5.603 Appeal Board.
(a) In passing upon requests for variances, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:
(1) Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(2) Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(3) Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;
(4) Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(5) Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(6) Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or
erosion damage;
(7) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(8) Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
(9) Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(10) Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters
expected at the site; and
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 31
(11) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
system, and streets and bridges.
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 6.3, 3-12-2009)
Chapter 6 INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES
Sections:
8-6.01 Title of provisions.
8-6.02 Purpose of provisions.
8-6.03 Authority.
8-6.04 Definitions.
8-6.05 Findings—Notice.
8-6.06 Findings—Hearing.
8-6.07 Determinations of applicability.
8-6.08 Dedication of land or payment of fees—Procedures.
8-6.09 Collection of fees.
8-6.10 In-lieu fees.
8-6.11 Dedication of land.
8-6.12 Amendment of fee schedule.
8-6.13 Use of fees—Account keeping.
8-6.14 Further levying of fees or dedications restricted.
8-6.15 Failure to complete development—Effect.
8-6.16 Termination of requirements.
8-6.01 Title of provisions.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Interim School Facilities Fees Ordinance."
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.02 Purpose of provisions.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for financing interim school facilities necessitated
by conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential developments.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.03 Authority.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7, commencing with Section 65970
of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 32
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.04 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and
phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
(a) "Conditions of overcrowding" shall mean that the total enrollment of a school, including
enrollment from the proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined
by the governing body of the school district.
(b) "Dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof, or a mobile home, designed for residential
occupation by one person or a group of two (2) or more persons living together as a domestic
unit. "Dwelling unit" shall not mean remodels or room additions to existing residential structures,
hotel or motel units, or the rebuilding of a legally established dwelling unit destroyed or
damaged by accident, catastrophe, or act of God.
(c) "Interim school facilities" shall mean temporary classrooms not constructed with a permanent
foundation and defined as a structure containing one or more rooms, each of which is designed,
intended and equipped for use as a place for formal instruction of pupils by a teacher in a
school, temporary classroom toilet facilities not constructed with a permanent foundation; and
reasonable site preparation and installation of temporary classrooms and toilet facilities.
(d) "Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" shall include but is not limited
to the following concepts:
(1) Agreements between a developer and the affected school district whereby temporary-use
buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district or temporary-use buildings
owned by the developer or school district will be used;
(2) The use of all available revenues, including general fund, to the full extent authorized by
law;
(3) The use of school district property for temporary-use buildings;
(4) The use of classroom double-sessions and the use of year-round school programs;
(5) The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real
property and the use of funds available from any other source.
(e) "Residential development" shall mean a project containing residential dwellings, including
mobile homes, of one or more units or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one
or more residential dwelling units.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.05 Findings—Notice.
If the governing body of the Reef-Sunset Unified School District makes a finding supported by clear
and convincing evidence that:
(a) Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which
conditions will impair the normal functioning of educational programs, including the reason for
such conditions existing; and
(b) All reasonable methods of mitigating the conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated and
no feasible method for reducing such conditions exists, the governing body of the school district
shall notify the Council. The notice of findings sent to the Council shall specify the mitigation
measures considered by the school district and shall include a discussion of at least the
following possible mitigation devices:
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 33
(1) The lease of temporary use buildings from developers;
(2) Classroom double-sessions;
(3) The year-round use of school facilities;
(4) The use of school district property for temporary use buildings;
(5) Utilization of existing school space;
(6) The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real
property and the use of funds available from any other source.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.06 Findings—Hearing.
(a) Within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice of the findings of the governing board, complete with
supporting documentation, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the findings and the
requested fees and land dedications.
(b) Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given at least ten (10) days before the
hearing in the manner following:
(1) Such notice shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation, published
in the City and circulated in the school district, or if there is none, then in a newspaper ofgeneral
circulation published and circulated in the City;
(2) By mailing a copy of such notice to the governing board of the school district;
(3) By mailing a copy of such notice to any person who may file a request in writing therefor with
the City Clerk and who shall furnish therewith an envelope addressed for such purpose with
postage prepaid.
(c) Such notice shall also identify the school district, and generally describe the boundaries of the
attendance area or areas in question, and shall refer to the notice of findings of the governing board
of the school district and state when and where the same may be examined by any interested
person.
(d) After public hearing and receipt of findings complying with the requirements of this chapter, the City
Council shall, by resolution, either concur in or reject such findings. Such findings may be rejected
only if the Council determines that such findings are not supported by the weight of the evidence.
(e) If the City Council does not concur with the amount of fees to be paid, it shall, by resolution, adopt
such amount of fees or as it may deem proper in lieu of that requested by the governing board.
(f) After conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall declare its decision and any findings in such
matter. The City Clerk shall mail a copy of the resolution of order to the City Council and findings to
each person to whom notice of the hearing was required to be mailed under this section.
(g) If the Council, by resolution, concurs with the school district findings, then within the attendance area
where it has been determined that conditions of overcrowding exist, the Council shall not approve an
ordinance rezoning property to a residential use, grant a discretionary permit for residential use, or
approve a tentative subdivision map for residential purposes within such area unless the Council
makes one of the following findings:
(1) That the powers authorized by this chapter will be exercised in such area; or
(2) That there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social, or environmental factors which, in the
judgment of the Council, would benefit the City, thereby justifying the approval of a residential
development otherwise subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 34
8-6.07 Determinations of applicability.
If the Council concurs with the school district's findings, and if the Council determines that there are
no overriding factors which excuse the exercise of this chapter, the Council shall adopt a resolution
designating the area to which this chapter shall apply. Within such areas, this chapter shall apply to any
residential development which results in one or more dwelling units, including a residential subdivision of
one or more lots, multiple residential projects of one or more units, and mobile home parks with one or
more spaces. This chapter shall not apply to the conversion of existing residential units to another form of
ownership or operation, nor to a development which limits residency to persons fifty (50) years of age or
older. If such a development subsequently allows residence by younger persons, this chapter shall be
applicable at that time.
(85-09 (part), 1985; Ord. 86-01 (part), 1986)
8-6.08 Dedication of land or payment of fees—Procedures.
Upon the adoption of the resolution referred to in Section 8-6.07 of this chapter, developments
subject to this chapter shall dedicate land, pay fees in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for classroom
and related facilities for elementary or high schools as a condition of the approval of such residential
developments provided that:
(a) The land or fees, or both, transferred to the school district shall be used only for the purpose of
providing interim elementary or high school classrooms and related facilities; and
(b) The location and amount of land to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall
bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim
elementary or high school facilities and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for
schools caused by the development; provided, however, the fees shall not exceed the amount
necessary to pay five (5) annual lease payments for the interim facilities. In lieu of the fees, the
builder of a residential development, at his or her option and at his or her expense, may provide
interim facilities, owned or controlled by such builder, at the place designated by the school
district, and, at the conclusion of the fifth school year, the builder, at the builder's expense, shall
remove the interim facilities from such place; and
(c) A finding is made by the Council that the facilities to be constructed from such fees or the land
to be dedicated, or both, is consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.09 Collection of fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall be imposed at the time the building permit is issued,
irrespective of whether a tentative map has been approved prior to the adopting of this chapter. In cases
where a building permit is not required, the payment or dedication of land shall be a condition precedent
to the provision of water to the project by the City. Such fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing trust
account, to be used for no other purpose. The City Manager and Superintendent of Schools shall
administratively adopt procedures for the transfer of the funds from the City to the school district. Such
fees shall not be considered City "proceeds of taxes" under Article XIIIB of the Constitution of the State.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.10 In-lieu fees.
No fees shall be imposed on a development covered by this chapter where at the time of the
issuance of a building permit, the Building Official of the City shall have on file a letter from the
superintendent of the Reef-Sunset School District, stating that an agreement or arrangement between the
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 35
developer and the school district has been reached offsetting any impacts from that specific development.
(Ord. 86-01, 1986)
8-6.11 Dedication of land.
If the school district requests dedication rather than the payment of the fee, the value of the land
dedicated shall be substantially identical to the amount of fees which would have been collected. Such
value shall be based on the market value of the land at the time of filing the tentative map. The school
district may not require dedication rather than the payment of fees if the subdivision consists of fifty (50)
parcels or less.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.12 Amendment of fee schedule.
The Council, by resolution, may amend the fee schedule adopted by this chapter upon its own
initiative or upon a request by the school district to do so.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.13 Use of fees—Account keeping.
The school district receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for the
fees paid and shall file a report with the Council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous
fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition,
the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins
and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by August 1 of each
year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the Council.
If overcrowding conditions no longer exist, the City shall cease levying any fee or requiring the
dedication of any land pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.14 Further levying of fees or dedications restricted.
One year after the receipt of an apportionment pursuant to the Leroy F. Greene State School
Building Lease-Purchase Law of 1976 (Chapter 22, commencing with Section 17700 of Part 10 of the
Education Code of the State) for the construction of a school, the City shall not be permitted thereafter to
levy any fee or to require the dedication of any land within the attendance area of the district. However,
any time after the receipt of the apportionment there may be a determination of overcrowding if there is
the further finding:
(a) That during the period of construction additional overcrowding would occur from continued
residential development; and
(b) That any fee levied and any required dedication of land levied after the receipt of the
construction apportionment can be used to avoid the additional overcrowding prior to the school
being available for use by the school district.
Any amount of fees collected or land dedicated after the receipt of the construction apportionment
and not used to avoid overcrowding shall be returned to the person who paid the fee or made the land
dedication.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 36
8-6.15 Failure to complete development—Effect.
(a) If a final subdivision map, parcel map, conditional use permit, development plan, or building permit is
cancelled, voided, or lapses, and if the City still retains the land and/or fees collected for it, and if the
applicant so requests, the Council shall order that such land and/or fees be returned to the applicant.
(b) If a final subdivision map, parcel map, conditional use permit, development plan, or building permit is
cancelled or voided, and if the school district still retains the land or fees transferred to it by the City,
and if the applicant so requests, the school district shall return to the applicant such land and/or fees.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
8-6.16 Termination of requirements.
(a) If overcrowding conditions cease to exist in any attendance area of a school district as to which fee
or land dedication requirements have been imposed pursuant to this chapter, the governing board of
the district shall promptly adopt a resolution so finding and send a certified copy of it to the City
Council.
(b) When it is determined by the City Council that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in an
attendance area, whether or not such determination follows a resolution by the governing board as
provided in subsection (a) of this section, the requirements of this chapter shall cease to apply
therein.
(Ord. 85-09 (part), 1985)
Chapter 7 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
8-7.01 Scope.
8-7.02 Purpose.
8-7.03 Definitions.
8-7.04 General requirements.
8-7.05 Requirements for Zone Districts RRE and R.
8-7.06 Requirements for Zone Districts RM, PO, T, CC, CS, CH, CN and IG.
8-7.07 Paved parking lot requirements.
8-7.08 Penalties.
8-7.09 Public nuisance.
8-7.01 Scope.
All new residential, commercial and industrial construction shall comply with the landscaping
requirements set out in this chapter.
(Ord. 91-04 § 2, 1991)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 37
8-7.02 Purpose.
The City desires to regulate land use in order to stabilize economic and social aspects of the City's
neighborhoods and business districts, to promote aesthetic considerations, to promote family
environments, and to maintain consistent standards for basic residential, business and industrial sites.
(Ord. 91-04 § 3, 1991)
8-7.03 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application:
(a) "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Building Official's interpretation of any provision of
this chapter or a request for a variance.
(b) "Building Official" means the City Manager or any assistant or regular employee designated by
him to act in his stead.
(c) "Climate Zone 9" is defined in the most current edition of Sunset New Western Garden Book.
(d) "Corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets which have an
angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
(e) "Enforcement agency" means the City Building Department or its designee.
(f) "Landscape" means trees, shrubs, ground cover, mail boxes, lights, trellises, or any similar
growth or structure.
(g) "Landscape architect" is as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 5536(a).
(h) "Landscape contractor" means a person, firm or corporation which holds a valid C-27
contractor's license issued by the State of California.
(i) "New construction" means structures not presently in existence and shall not include additions
or alterations to existing structures.
(j) "Paved parking lot" shall include parking stalls, driveways and maneuvering areas.
(k) "Zone districts" is as defined in Title 9 of this Code.
(Ord. 91-04 § 4, 1991)
8-7.04 General requirements.
(a) Every property owner or occupant shall be responsible for the maintenance and care of all trees,
shrubs and vegetation required by this chapter and in the street right-of-way abutting such property.
(b) Landscaping shall be kept free from weeds and undesirable grasses.
(c) All vegetation shall be maintained free of physical damage or injury from lack of water, excess
chemical fertilizer or other toxic chemical, blight, or disease, and any such vegetation which shows
signs of such damage or injury at any time shall be replaced by the same, similar, or substitute
vegetation of a size, form, and character which will be comparable at full growth.
(d) Landscaped mounds shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than 2:1 or where the toe of
the mound is within twelve (12) feet horizontally of the top of existing or planned cut slope. The
slopes of the mound shall be no steeper than 2.5:1. The toe of the mound shall be set back from
property boundaries as far as necessary for safety of the adjacent properties and to prevent damage
resulting from water runoff or erosion of the slope. The toe of the mound shall be set back from any
buildings as far as is necessary to prevent damage as a result of water runoff or erosion of the
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 38
slopes. In no case shall the toe of the mound be closer than five (5) feet of (from) any buildings. The
toe of the mound abutting the street shall be set back from the sidewalk or street curb as far as
necessary for safety of the sidewalk and street area, and to prevent damage resulting from water
runoff or erosion of the slopes, but in no case shall the toe of the mound be closer than one foot of
[from] the street right-of-way unless approved by the Building Official. All mounds shall be irrigated
by an on-site sprinkler system and planted with vegetative material.
(e) All new construction shall have an underground irrigation system. The irrigation system shall be
designed to irrigate all plant material. The system shall be designed to supply adequate on-site water
to grow healthy plants under Avenal's climatic conditions. The irrigation plan shall indicate the type of
heads, pipe size, backflow valve, water supply size and flow rate in gallons per minute.
(f) Where a landscaped area is required pursuant to this chapter, the owner or developer shall submit to
the Building Official, for his review and approval, a plan of the landscaped area prepared by a
licensed landscape architect or contractor. The plan shall include the names (scientific and common)
of all plant material to be used. Such plan shall be approved by the Building Official prior to the
issuance of building permits.
(g) Root barriers shall be installed whenever trees are planted within ten (10) feet of any sidewalks,
paved areas or structures.
(h) Landscaped areas shall be sloped to drain away from all structures.
(i) All planting materials shall be capable of growing in Climate Zone 9.
(j) The use of drought tolerant planting material shall be encouraged.
(k) In Zone Districts RRE, R, RM, PO, T, CC, CS, CH, CN and IG, no solid fence, wall, hedge, or foliage
exceeding three (3) feet in height shall be erected, planted or maintained within the area of a corner
lot, or a lot backing onto a street, described as follows: that area on the street side of a diagonal line
connecting points measured from the intersection corner, twenty (20) feet on a minor street side of
the lot and seventy (70) feet on the major street side of the lot.
(l) The Building Official shall maintain a list of recommended trees for public review.
(Ord. 91-04 § 5, 1991)
8-7.05 Requirements for Zone Districts RRE and R.
(a) Corner lot. The front yard and side yard (facing a street) shall be landscaped. The front yard and side
yard shall have a minimum of three (3) fifteen-gallon trees. Tree varieties shall be approved by the
Building Official. One tree shall be within ten (10) feet of the back of the sidewalk in the front yard
and within five (5) feet of the back of the sidewalk in the side yard. The third tree may be located
elsewhere in the yard.
(b) Interior lot. The front yard shall be landscaped. The front yard shall have a minimum of two (2)
fifteen-gallon trees. The tree varieties shall be approved by the Building Official. One tree shall be
located within ten (10) feet of the back of the sidewalk. The other tree may be located elsewhere in
the front yard.
(Ord. 91-04 § 6, 1991)
8-7.06 Requirements for Zone Districts RM, PO, T, CC, CS, CH, CN and IG.
Each parcel or lot in these Zone Districts shall have a minimum of one fifteen-gallon tree for every
two (2) parking spaces.
(Ord. 91-04 § 7, 1991)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 39
8-7.07 Paved parking lot requirements.
(a) General.
(1) Fifty (50) percent of paved parking lot's surface shall be shaded by tree canopies within fifteen
(15) years of planting.
(2) Trees planted to satisfy the requirements of these guidelines are landscaping as defined by this
Code and are subject to established landscaping requirements.
(b) Site plan required. A landscaping plan which details the degree of compliance with the Landscape
Ordinance is required. The plan shall show:
(1) All landscaped areas.
(2) Tree canopies drawn to scale representing the estimated canopy at a fifteen-year growth period.
(3) The total area in square feet of the paved parking lot, driveways, and maneuver areas; and the
area shaded by tree canopies. A schedule listing total parking area, shaded area, and the
percentage of parking area shaded should be included.
(4) A schedule of the specific names of proposed trees and their sizes.
(5) Such plan shall be approved by the Building Department prior to issuance of building permits.
However, the plan is encouraged to be submitted at the time of site plan review.
(c) Methodology.
(1) To simplify the process of determining compliance, the true angle of deflection of natural
sunlight shall not be considered. Shaded areas shall be assumed to be only those portions of a
paved parking lot directly beneath the shading canopy or drip line.
(2) Shading shall be provided by tree canopies except that any portion of a paved parking lot
directly beneath and shaded by a man-made structure (overhangs and covered parking for
instance) shall be deleted from the requirements of these performance standards and shall be
subtracted from the area of the parking lot to be shaded.
(3) Credit shall be given only for surface area shaded. Multiple canopies shading the same surface
area will not be counted as multiple credit.
(4) Landscape planters beneath the canopy may be considered as shaded paved parking areas for
the purpose of determining compliance.
(5) Where more than five (5) trees are to be planted in the entire parking area, tree species shall be
mixed.
(6) Trees planted along the perimeter of a lot may be counted as providing shade for the full area of
their canopy.
(7) If the degree of overlap between trees is less than fifteen (15) percent all trees may be counted
as shading one hundred (100) percent of their canopy. If the degree of overlap is fifteen (15)
percent or greater then it will be necessary to perform individual calculation to determine the
area of shading.
(8) A community service area, free from tree planting, may be allowed if a facility first demonstrates
that it has met the minimum shading requirements on the overall site.
(9) A ten (10) percent minor deviation of the shading standard may be approved by the Building
Official in accordance with established procedures in this Code if it is found that the normal
standards would impose an undue hardship.
(d) Minimum tree requirements.
(1) Provide one fifteen-gallon tree for every two (2) required parking spaces.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 40
(2) Disperse trees over the parking lot area to provide fifty (50) percent shading of the parking area
surface within fifteen (15) years. Trees shall also be planted in the required landscaped areas
along the periphery of the development in order to shade and enhance adjacent property and
public rights-of-way.
(3) Trees shall be maintained in good health. Trees shall not be topped to reduce the natural height
or headed to reduce the overall crown of the tree. Thinning cuts are preferred to remove dead,
diseased or dying growth and to establish well spaced and strong scaffold structure for public
safety and shade value.
(e) Minimum sight triangle.
(1) Ten (10) feet in traffic areas.
(2) Thirty (30) to thirty-five (35) feet at street intersections.
(3) One hundred (100) feet at major street intersections.
(4) Trees within triangle shall be trimmed up to eight (8) feet minimum above the surface of the
parking lot.
(5) Other landscaping (groundcover and shrubs) shall not exceed two and one-half (2½) feet above
the parking surface.
(Ord. 91-04 § 8, 1991)
8-7.08 Penalties.
Any person, entity or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of an infraction.
(Ord. 91-04 § 9, 1991)
8-7.09 Public nuisance.
Any work in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any land use contrary to the provisions of
this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Manager shall
initiate all necessary legal proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment necessary to
accomplish these ends, and may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will
abate the use and restrain and enjoin the person, firm or corporation or organization from maintaining or
using the site contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The remedies prescribed by this section are
cumulative and not exclusive.
(Ord. 91-04 § 10, 1991)
Chapter 8 STREET ADDRESS NUMBERS ON RESIDENTIAL AND
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
Sections:
8-8.01 Display requirement.
8-8.02 New structures.
8-8.03 Change of address.
8-8.04 Type, color, size and numbers.
8-8.05 Lighting of numbers.
8-8.06 Specification of numbers.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 41
8-8.07 Enforcement.
8-8.08 Penalty for violation.
8-8.01 Display requirement.
All residential and commercial structures that have a separate address must display their address
number.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
8-8.02 New structures.
The owner and builder of a new residential and/or commercial structure must display the assigned
address number before the start of flammable construction.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
8-8.03 Change of address.
Within thirty (30) days after receiving written notification of an address change, all owners or persons
in charge of an existing residential and/or commercial structure must display the new number and remove
all obsolete numbers.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
8-8.04 Type, color, size and numbers.
Address numbers on residential and commercial structures shall be posted in a manner as to be
visible from the street on which the property is located. Such numerals shall not be less than three (3)
inches high, shall have a minimum width stroke of one-fourth (¼) inch, shall be of contrasting color from
the background, and shall not be obscured from the street by shrubs, trees, buildings or other objects.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
8-8.05 Lighting of numbers.
All new residential and commercial buildings shall have self internally lighted address numbers.
(a) For purposes of this section, "new residential and commercial buildings" shall refer to all
residential and commercial structures erected in the City and metropolitan area after the
passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
8-8.06 Specification of numbers.
All owners or persons in charge of residential and/or commercial structures shall cause the proper
numbers to be placed upon the same in accordance herewith and in conformity with the numbers
assigned by the Building Inspector.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 42
8-8.07 Enforcement.
It is hereby made the duty of the Compliance Official to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
8-8.08 Penalty for violation.
Any person and owner failing to so number any residential house, building, or other structure owned
or occupied by him in accordance with this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, and if convicted of such
infraction, shall be punishable by: (1) a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first offense; (2) a
fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second offense within one year; and (3) a fine not
to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for any additional violation within one year.
(a) For purposes of this chapter, each day that a violation of the provisions of this chapter continues
shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) For purposes of this section, "within one year" shall refer to the date of the latest conviction to
the date of the earliest offense.
(Ord. 97-03 § 1 (part), 1997)
Chapter 9 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
Sections:
8-9.01 Findings and statement of intent.
8-9.02 Definitions.
8-9.03 Requirements for newly constructed structures.
8-9.04 Diversion requirement.
8-9.05 Diversion requirement exemption.
8-9.06 Exempt covered projects.
8-9.07 Waste management plan.
8-9.08 Deposit required.
8-9.09 On-site practices.
8-9.10 Reporting.
8-9.11 Violations; fines/penalties.
8-9.12 Appeals.
8-9.13 Option to revise.
8-9.01 Findings and statement of intent.
(a) WHEREAS, under California law as embodied in the California Waste Management Act of 1989
(California Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq.), the City of Avenal ("City") is required to
prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling plans to reach landfill diversion goals,
and is required to make substantial reductions in the volume of waste materials going to the landfills,
or face fines up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 43
(b) WHEREAS, in order to meet these goals it is necessary that the City promote the reduction of solid
waste, and reduces the solid waste going into landfills.
(c) WHEREAS, waste from construction, demolition, and renovation of buildings represents a significant
portion of the volume of waste presently coming from the City and much of this waste is particularly
suitable for recycling and reuse.
(d) WHEREAS, the City's commitment to the reduction of waste requires the establishment of programs
for recycling and salvaging of construction and demolition (C&D) waste.
(e) WHEREAS, certain types of projects shall be exempt from these requirements.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.02 Definitions.
(a) "Applicant" means the person applying for a construction, repair or demolition permit from the City of
Avenal.
(b) "Building Official" means the City Manager or his/her designee.
(c) "City" means the City of Avenal or the Avenal Redevelopment Agency.
(d) "Covered project" includes any project which consists of one or more of the following:
(1) Demolition work only where the work is equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square
feet;
(2) The renovation, remodel or addition to an existing structure, or the construction of a new
structure where the cost of the work equals or exceeds one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), as determined by the Building Official;
(3) Commercial, residential or multi-family residential development or any new structure that is
equal to or greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet;
(4) Any project, regardless of size, funded by the City, including public works and capital
improvement projects.
(e) "This chapter" means Chapter 9 of Title 8 of the Avenal Municipal Code. This Chapter shall be
known as the "Construction and Demolition Debris Ordinance".
(f) "Construction and demolition debris" and "C&D debris" shall have the definition prescribed in Title 14,
Division 7 of the California Code of Regulations, section 17381(e).
(g) "Disposal" and "disposed" mean to discard in a landfill.
(h) "Diversion requirement" means the requirement prescribed in Section 8-9.04 of this chapter.
(i) "Existing construction" means building, adding, altering, or repairing of any structure or any portion
thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing structure.
(j) "Inert debris" shall have the definition prescribed in Title 14, Division 7 of the California Code of
Regulations, Section 17381(k).
(k) "Permitee" means an applicant who has been granted a construction, repair or demolition permit
from the City of Avenal.
(l) "WMP Compliance Official" means the City Manager or his/her designee.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 44
8-9.03 Requirements for newly constructed structures.
(a) Diversion Requirement: It is required that at least fifty (50) percent of waste material, consisting of
any combined proportion of construction and demolition debris and inert debris, generated from
newly constructed low-rise residential and non-residential commercial construction shall be diverted
from disposal.
(b) Waste Management Plan: Prior to starting the project, every applicant shall submit a properly
completed "Waste Management Plan" (WMP) as required under Section 8-9.06 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.04 Diversion requirement.
Unless otherwise exempted, each covered project must divert from disposal at least fifty (50) percent
of waste material, consisting of any combined proportion of construction and demolition debris and inert
debris, generated from said project.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.05 Diversion requirement exemption.
(a) Application: If an applicant for a covered project experiences circumstances that the applicant
believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for a
diversion exemption at the time the applicant submits a Waste Management Plan required under
Section 8-9.07 of this chapter.
(b) Meeting with WMP Compliance Official: The WMP Compliance Official shall review the information
supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss feasible ways of satisfying the
diversion requirement. Upon request by the applicant, the WMP Compliance Official may requestthat
City staff attend this meeting or may require the applicant to request a separate meeting with the City
staff. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, City staff (if applicable), and the WMP
Compliance Official shall determine whether it is feasible for the applicant to satisfy the diversion
requirement.
(c) Granting of Exemption: If the WMP Compliance Official determines that it is infeasible for the
applicant to meet the diversion requirements, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible
diversion rate for waste generated by the covered project and shall indicate the new diversion
requirement the applicant shall be required to meet, and will inform the applicant in writing of the new
requirement. The applicant shall then have fourteen (14) days to resubmit another WMP, which is in
compliance with the new diversion requirement. If the applicant fails to resubmit, or if the resubmitted
WMP does not comply with Section 8-9.07, the WMP Compliance Official shall disapprove the WMP
in accordance with Section 8-9.07.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.06 Exempt covered projects.
(a) A diversion deposit and a Waste Management Plan shall not be required for the following:
(1) Work for which a building or demolition permit is not required.
(2) Residential and non-residential alterations of less than one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) in value.
(3) Roofing projects that do not include tear-off of existing roof.
(4) Work for which only a plumbing, only an electrical, or only a mechanical permit is required.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 45
(5) Seismic tie-down projects.
(6) Emergency demolition required to protect the public health and safety.
(b) While not required, it shall be encouraged, that at least twenty-five (25) percent of all existing
construction and demolition waste from exempt projects be diverted.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.07 Waste management plan.
(a) Prior to starting the project, every applicant must submit a properly completed "Waste Management
Plan" (WMP) to the WMP Compliance Official, in a form prescribed by that official, as a portion of the
building or demolition permit process. The completed WMP must contain all of the following:
(1) The estimated volume or weight of project waste to be generated by material type;
(2) A determination of whether or not materials will be sorted on-site or mixed;
(3) The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse,
recycling or salvage for future use or sale by material type;
(4) The vendor(s) that the applicant proposes to use to haul the materials;
(5) Facility(s) the materials will be hauled to, and their expected diversion rates (by volume or
weight) for each material type; and
(6) Estimated volume or weight of construction and demolition waste that will be disposed.
(b) Because actual material weights are not available in this stage, estimates are used. In estimating the
volume or weight of materials as identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized
conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose. Approval of the WMP as complete and
accurate shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of any building or demolition permit. If the
applicant calculates the projected feasible diversion rate as described above, and concludes that the
projected diversion rate does not satisfy the applicable diversion requirement, the applicant must
then submit information supporting the lower diversion rate. If this documentation is not included, the
WMP shall be deemed incomplete.
(c) Approval: No building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until
the WMP Compliance Official has approved the WMP. Approval shall not be required, however,
where emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety. The WMP Compliance
Official shall only approve a WMP if he or she determines that all of the following conditions are
satisfied:
(1) The WMP provides all of the information set forth in this section.
(2) The WMP indicates that at least fifty (50) percent of all construction and demolition waste
generated by the project (or the new diversion goal set in accordance with the applicant's
approved diversion exemption request) shall be diverted from disposal; and
(3) The applicant has submitted all required fees, deposits and/or bonds for the project.
(d) Non-Approval: If the WMP Compliance Official determines that the WMP is incomplete or fails to
indicate that at least fifty (50) percent, or the new diversion goal set in accordance with the
applicant's approved diversion exemption request (if applicable) of all construction and demolition
waste generated by the project will be diverted from disposal, he or she shall either:
(1) Return the WMP to the applicant marked "Disapproved", including a statement of reasons, and
will notify the building department, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or
demolition permit application; or
(2) Return the WMP to the applicant marked "Further Explanation Required."
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 46
8-9.08 Deposit required.
(a) As a condition precedent to the issuance of any permit for construction or demolition for a covered
project, the applicant shall post a deposit (cash, letter of credit, performance or surety bond, money
order) in an amount to be determined by the Public Works Director and approved by the City
Manager.
(b) The deposit shall be returned, without interest, in total or pro-rated, upon proof of satisfaction by the
WMP Compliance Official that no less than the required percentage of construction and demolition
waste tonnage generated by the covered project was diverted from disposal and has been recycled
or reused or stored for later reuse or recycling. If a lesser percentage of construction and demolition
waste tonnage than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the deposit shall be returned. The
deposit shall be forfeited entirely or to the pro-rated extent that there was a failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter. The City may, by formal resolution, modify the amount of the required
deposit.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.09 On-site practices.
(a) During the term of the covered project, the applicant shall recycle and reuse the required percentage
of waste, and keep records of the tonnage or other measurements approved by the City that can be
converted to tonnage amounts. The WMP Compliance Official will evaluate and may monitor each
covered project to determine the percentage of waste salvaged and recycled or reused from the
covered project.
(b) For covered projects including both construction and demolition, diversion of materials shall be
tracked and measured separately.
(c) To the maximum extent feasible, project waste shall be separated on-site if this practice increases
diversion. For construction and/or demolition projects, on-site separation shall include salvageable
materials (e.g., appliances, fixtures, plumbing, metals, etc.,) and dimensional lumber, wallboard,
concrete and corrugated cardboard.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.10 Reporting.
(a) Within fourteen (14) days after completion of the demolition phase of a covered project, and again
within fourteen (14) days following the completion of the construction phase of a covered project, the
applicant/permitee shall, as a condition precedent to final inspection and to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy or final approval of project, submit documentation to the WMP Compliance
Official that proves compliance with the requirements of Section 8-9.07 (Waste Management Plan)
and Section 8-9.04 (diversion requirement). The documentation shall consist of a final completed
WMP showing actual waste tonnage data, supported by original or certified photocopies of receipts
and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction
contractors, and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify
whether waste generated from the covered project has been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged
or disposed. The applicant/permitee shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all designated
recyclable and reusable waste salvaged or disposed are measured and recorded using the most
accurate method of measurement available.
(b) To the extent practical, all construction and demolition waste shall be weighed in compliance with all
regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition waste for
which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement
shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the
standardized conversion rates approved by the City for this purpose.
Title 8 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Avenal, California, Code of Ordinances Page 47
(c) If a covered project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the
demolition project must be submitted and approved by the WMP Compliance Official before issuance
of a building permit for the construction phase of a covered project. Alternatively, the applicant may
submit a letter stating that no waste or recyclable materials were generated from the covered project,
in which case this statement shall be subject to verification by the WMP Compliance Official. Any
deposit posted pursuant to Section 8-9.08 (deposit required) shall be forfeited if the applicant does
not meet the timely reporting requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.11 Violations; fines/penalties.
Any permitee, applicant, contractor and owner whose covered project violates any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Title 1, Chapter 2 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.12 Appeals.
(a) Any person aggrieved by the decision or determination of the WMP Compliance Officer may appeal
the same pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 4 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
(b) Decisions and determinations subject to appeal under this section include decisions and
determinations pertaining to the requirements under this chapter, including but not necessarily be
limited to:
(1) The granting or denial of an exemption;
(2) Rejection of a Waste Management Plan;
(3) The amount or type of deposit required or released; and
(4) Whether the applicant has acted in good faith.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)
8-9.13 Option to revise.
(a) Beginning on July 1, 2012, the City will evaluate the requirements of this Chapter to determine its
effectiveness in reducing the amount of construction and demolition waste disposed. In this
determination, the City will consider issues such as the amount of construction and demolition waste
disposed, volume of construction and demolition activity, markets for construction and demolition
waste, and other barriers encountered by applicants.
(b) If the City determines the construction and demolition waste disposed had the potential for diversion,
then the City may amend these provisions and implement the necessary measures to divert more
construction and demolition waste.
(Ord. No. 2011-04, § 2, 4-14-2011)



1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Page
Authority, Purpose and Effect of the Zoning Ordinance
9.01 Authority, Purpose and Effect of the Zoning Ordinance.............................................9.01-1
9.01.01 Citation...................................................................................................... 9.01-1
9.01.02 Adoption.................................................................................................... 9.01-1
9.01.03 Purposes of the Zoning Ordinance............................................................ 9.01-1
9.01.04 Applicability.............................................................................................. 9.01-2
9.01.05 Compliance with the Ordinance................................................................ 9.01-2
9.01.06 Relationship to Other Regulations and Requirements...............................9.01-3
9.01.07 Buildings under Construction....................................................................9.01-3
9.01.08 Validity...................................................................................................... 9.01-3
9.01.09 Repeals.......................................................................................................9.01-3
9.02 Establishment of Zoning Districts............................................................................... 9.02-1
9.02.01 Establishment of Base Zoning Districts.................................................... 9.02-1
9.02.02 Establishment of Combining Zone Districts............................................. 9.02-2
9.02.03 Zoning Maps..............................................................................................9.02-2
9.02.04 Rules Applying to Uncertain Boundaries on Zoning Map........................ 9.02-2
9.02.05 Pre-Zoning.................................................................................................9.02-3
9.02.06 General Requirements............................................................................... 9.02-3
9.03 Definitions................................................................................................................... 9.03-1
9.03.01 Construction...............................................................................................9.03-1
9.03.02 Definitions................................................................................................. 9.03-1
Agriculture
9.04 Intensive Agriculture (A-I) Zone.................................................................................9.04-1
9.04.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.04-1
9.04.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.04-1
9.04.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.04-1
9.04.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.04-1
9.04.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.04-1
9.04.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.04-2
9.04.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.04-2
9.04.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.04-2
9.04.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures.................................................... 9.04-2
9.04.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.04-2
9.04.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.04-2
9.04.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.04-2
9.04.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.04-2
9.05 Extensive Agriculture (A-E) Zone.............................................................................. 9.05-1
9.05.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.05-1
9.05.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.05-1
2
9.05.03 Uses Permitted With a Conditional Use Permit........................................ 9.05-1
9.05.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.05-1
9.05.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.05-1
9.05.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.05-1
9.05.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.05-2
9.05.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.05-2
9.05.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures.................................................... 9.05-2
9.05.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.05-2
9.05.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.05-2
9.05.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.05-2
9.05.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.05-2
Residential
9.06 Residential Estate District (R-E)................................................................................. 9.06-1
9.06.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.06-1
9.06.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.06-1
9.06.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.06-1
9.06.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.06-1
9.06.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.06-1
9.06.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.06-1
9.06.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.06-1
9.06.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.06-2
9.06.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures.................................................... 9.06-2
9.06.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.06-2
9.06.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.06-2
9.06.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.06-2
9.06.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.06-2
9.07 Reserved...................................................................................................................... 9.07-1
9.10 Single-Family Residential District (R-1).....................................................................9.10-1
9.10.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.10-1
9.10.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.10-1
9.10.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.10-1
9.10.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.10-1
9.10.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.10-1
9.10.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.10-3
9.10.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.10-3
9.10.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.10-3
9.10.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures.................................................... 9.10-3
9.10.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.10-3
9.10.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.10-3
9.10.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.10-3
9.10.13 Fences (Including Walls and Hedges)....................................................... 9.10-3
9.10.14 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.10-5
9.11 Medium Density Multi-Family Residential (7,000 Square Foot Minimum Lot)
Zone (R-2)....................................................................................................... 9.11-1
3
9.11.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.11-1
9.11.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.11-1
9.11.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.11-1
9.11.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.11-1
9.11.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.11-1
9.11.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.11-3
9.11.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.11-3
9.11.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.11-3
9.11.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures.................................................... 9.11-3
9.11.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.11-3
9.11.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.11-3
9.11.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.11-3
9.11.13 Fences (Including Walls and Hedges)....................................................... 9.11-3
9.11.14 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.11-3
9.12 High Density Multi-Family Residential District (R-3)................................................9.12-1
9.12.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.12-1
9.12.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.12-1
9.12.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.12-1
9.12.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.12-1
9.12.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.12-2
9.12.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.12-2
9.12.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.12-2
9.12.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.12-2
9.12.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures.................................................... 9.12-2
9.12.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.12-2
9.12.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.12-2
9.12.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.12-2
9.12.13 Fences (Including Walls and Hedges)....................................................... 9.12-2
9.12.14 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.12-2
9.15 Mobilehome Park District (MHP)............................................................................... 9.15-1
9.15.01 Purpose...................................................................................................... 9.15-1
9.15.02 Uses Permitted...........................................................................................9.15-1
9.15.03 Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit...................................9.15-1
9.15.04 Uses Expressly Prohibited.........................................................................9.15-1
9.15.05 Property Development Standards.............................................................. 9.15-1
9.15.06 General Provisions and Exceptions........................................................... 9.15-1
9.15.07 Site Plan Review........................................................................................9.15-1
9.16 Reasonable Accommodation……………………………………………………...…9.16-1
9.16.01 Purpose…………………………………………………………………..9.16-1
9.16.02 Application………………………………………………………………9.16-1
9.16.03 Required Information……………………………………………………9.16-1
9.16.04 Notice of Request For Accommodation……………….………………..9.16-2
9.16.05 Procedure……………………………………….……………………….9.16-2
9.16.06 Grounds for Accommodation……………………………………………9.16-3
9.16.07 Director’s Hearing……………………………………………………….9.16-4
9.16.08 Notice of Director’s Decision Following a Hearing…………………….9.16-4
4
9.16.09 Expiration of Grants of Reasonable Accommodation…………………..9.16-4
9.16.10 Appeal……………………………………………………………….…..9.16-4
9.16.11 Fee…………………………………………………………………….…9.16-4
9.19 Residential District Specific Standards....................................................................... 9.19-1
9.19.01 Land Use District Specific Standards........................................................9.19-1
A. Accessory Structures..................................................................... 9.19-1
B. Livestock....................................................................................... 9.19-1
C. Day Care Standards....................................................................... 9.19-2
D. Density Bonus................................................................................9.19-4
E. Front/Rear Yard Averaging Standards.......................................... 9.19-8
F. Guest House, Granny Flat, (Secondary Dwelling Units).............. 9.19-9
G. Home Occupation Standards....................................................... 9.19-10
H. Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing
on Individual Lots..................................................................9.19-14
I. Mobile Home Park Development Standards............................... 9.19-15
J. Multi-Family Development Standards........................................ 9.19-17
K. Recreational Vehicle Storage Facilities.......................................9.19-23
L. Planned Unit Development/Small Lot Subdivisions...................9.19-24
M. Senior Citizen/Congregate Care/Group Quarter Housing
Design Standards......................................................................... 9.19-26
N. Residential Architectural Design Criteria....................................9.19-27
O. Residential Unit Standards.......................................................... 9.19-29
P. The determination of the Community Director .......................... 9.19-29
Commercial
9.21 Service Commercial (S-C) District..............................................................................9.21-1
9.21.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.21-1
9.21.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.21-1
9.21.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.21-1
9.21.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.21-1
9.21.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.21-1
9.21.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.21-1
9.21.07 Yards & Setbacks...................................................................................... 9.21-1
9.21.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.21-1
9.21.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.21-2
9.21.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.21-2
9.21.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.21-2
9.21.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.21-2
9.21.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.21-2
9.22 Downtown Commercial (D-C) District....................................................................... 9.22-1
9.22.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.22-1
9.22.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.22-1
9.22.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.22-1
9.22.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.22-1
9.22.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.22-1
5
9.22.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.22-2
9.22.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.22-2
9.22.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.22-2
9.22.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.22-2
9.22.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.22-2
9.22.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.22-2
9.22.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.22-2
9.22.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.22-2
9.24 Highway Commercial (H-C) District.......................................................................... 9.24-1
9.24.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.24-1
9.24.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.24-1
9.24.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.24-1
9.24.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.24-1
9.24.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.24-1
9.24.06 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.24-1
9.24.07 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.24-1
9.24.08 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.24-2
9.24.09 Parking.......................................................................................................9.24-2
9.24.10 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.24-2
9.24.11 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.24-2
9.24.12 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.24-2
9.25 Community Commercial (C-C) District......................................................................9.25-1
9.25.01 Purpose & Application.............................................................................. 9.25-1
9.25.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.25-1
9.25.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.25-1
9.25.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.25-1
9.25.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.25-1
9.25.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.25-1
9.25.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.25-1
9.25.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.25-1
9.25.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.25-1
9.25.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.25-2
9.25.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.25-2
9.25.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.25-2
9.25.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.25-2
9.29 Commercial Development Provisions.........................................................................9.29-1
9.29.01 Design and Development Standards..........................................................9.29-1
A. Adult Entertainment Facility.........................................................9-29-1
B. Alcohol Sales.................................................................................9.29-1
C. Automobile and Automobile Accessory Sales,
Parts and Service........................................................................... 9.29-2
D. Convenience Stores....................................................................... 9.29-3
E. Day Care Facilities........................................................................ 9.29-4
F. Drive-through Restaurants.............................................................9.29-5
G. Medical Marijuana Dispensaries................................................... 9.29-6
H.. Mini-Malls..................................................................................... 9.29-6
6
I. Mini-Storage..................................................................................9.29-7
J. Recycling Facilities for Reusable Domestic Containers............... 9.29-8
K. Service Station (Gasoline) Standards.......................................... 9.29-14
L. Service Station Conversions........................................................9.29-16
M. Office Conversions...................................................................... 9.29-16
N. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Facilities.................................. 9.29-17
O. Sign Program............................................................................... 9.29-18
Industrial
9.30 Light Industrial (M-1) Zone........................................................................................ 9.30-1
9.30.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.30-1
9.30.02 Permitted Uses........................................................................................... 9.30.1
9.30.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit..........................................9.30.1
9.30.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.30-2
9.30.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.30-2
9.30.06 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.30-2
9.30.07 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.30-2
9.30.08 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.30-2
9.30.09 Parking.......................................................................................................9.30-2
9.30.10 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.30-2
9.30.11 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.30-2
9.30.12 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.30-3
9.31 Heavy Manufacturing (M-2) Zone.............................................................................. 9.31-1
9.31.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.31-1
9.31.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.31-1
9.31.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.31-1
9.31.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.31-1
9.31.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.31-1
9.31.06 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.31-1
9.31.07 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.31-1
9.31.08 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.31-1
9.31.09 Parking.......................................................................................................9.31-2
9.31.10 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.31-2
9.31.11 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.31-2
9.31.12 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.31-3
Special Purpose Districts
9.41 Public Facilities (P-F) Zone.........................................................................................9.41-1
9.41.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.41-1
9.41.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.41-1
9.41.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.41-1
9.41.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.41-1
9.41.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.41-1
9.41.06 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.41-1
7
9.41.07 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.41-1
9.41.08 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.41-1
9.41.09 Parking.......................................................................................................9.41-1
9.41.10 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.41-2
9.41.11 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.41-2
9.41.12 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.41-2
9.42 Open Space, Parks and Recreation (O) Zone.............................................................. 9.42-1
9.42.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.42-1
9.42.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.42-1
9.42.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.42-1
9.42.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.42-1
9.42.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.42-1
9.42.06 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.42-1
9.42.07 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.42-2
9.42.08 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.42-2
9.42.09 Parking.......................................................................................................9.42-2
9.42.10 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.42-2
9.42.11 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.42-2
9.42.12 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.42-2
Combining Zoning Districts
9.51 Reserved...................................................................................................................... 9.51-1
9.52 Cluster (C-L) Combining District................................................................................9.52-1
9.52.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.52-1
9.52.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.52-1
9.52.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.52-1
9.52.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.52-1
9.52.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.52-1
9.52.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.52-1
9.52.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.52-1
9.52.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.52-2
9.52.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.52-2
9.52.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.52-2
9.52.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.52-2
9.52.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.52-2
9.52.13 Fences (Including Walls and Hedges).......................................................9.52-2
9.52.14 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.52-2
9.53 Precise Development (P-D) Combining District/Permit Review Guidelines..............9.53-1
9.53.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.53-1
9.53.02 Permitted Uses...........................................................................................9.53-1
9.53.03 Uses Permitted with a Conditional Use Permit......................................... 9.53-1
9.53.04 Prohibited Uses..........................................................................................9.53-1
9.53.05 Minimum Lot Size.....................................................................................9.53-1
9.53.06 Minimum Lot Area per Dwelling Unit......................................................9.53-1
9.53.07 Yards and Setbacks....................................................................................9.53-2
8
9.53.08 Height Limits.............................................................................................9.53-2
9.53.09 Minimum Distance Between Structures....................................................9.53-2
9.53.10 Parking.......................................................................................................9.53-2
9.53.11 Signs.......................................................................................................... 9.53-2
9.53.12 Landscaping...............................................................................................9.53-2
9.53.13 Special Review Procedures and Development Standards......................... 9.53-2
Special Use and Development Standards
9.60 Off Street Parking Standards....................................................................................... 9.60-1
9.60.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.60-1
9.60.02 Required Parking Spaces...........................................................................9.60-1
9.60.03 Parking Space Dimensions........................................................................ 9.60-1
9.60.04 Handicapped Parking.................................................................................9.60-2
9.60.05 Off-Street Loading Spaces.........................................................................9.60-3
9.60.06 Location of Parking................................................................................... 9.60-5
9.60.07 Joint Use of Parking Areas........................................................................ 9.60-5
9.60.08 Parking Area Design and Development Standards....................................9.60-6
9.60.09 Off-Street Parking Plot Plan Review and Approval..................................9.60-9
9.61 Signs............................................................................................................................ 9.61-1
9.61.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.61-1
9.61.02 Definitions................................................................................................. 9.61-1
9.61.03 Procedures................................................................................................. 9.61-6
9.61.04 General Provisions.....................................................................................9.61-8
9.61.05 Exempt Signs...........................................................................................9.61-11
9.61.06 Prohibited Signs.......................................................................................9.61-13
9.61.07 Temporary Signs......................................................................................9.61-15
9.61.08 Political Signs..........................................................................................9.61-16
9.61.09 Nonconforming Signs..............................................................................9.61-17
9.61.10 Off-Site Signs.......................................................................................... 9.61-18
9.61.11 Sign Regulations by Land Use Category.................................................9.61-19
9.62 Antenna and Telecommunications Facilities...............................................................9.62-1
9.62.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.62-1
9.62.02 Definitions................................................................................................. 9.62-1
9.62.03 General Requirements............................................................................... 9.62-2
9.62.04 Satellite Dish Requirements...................................................................... 9.62-8
9.62.05 Satellite and Antenna Development Standards......................................... 9.62-8
9.62.06 Limitation.................................................................................................. 9.62-9
9.62.07 Permit Revocation and Modification.........................................................9.62-9
9.63 Landscaping Requirements..........................................................................................9.63-1
9.63.01 General Landscaping Requirements..........................................................9.63-1
9.63.02 Trees.......................................................................................................... 9.63-2
9.63.03 Shrubs........................................................................................................ 9.63-3
9.63.04 Mounding...................................................................................................9.63-3
9.63.05 Parking Lots...............................................................................................9.63-3
9.63.06 Turf............................................................................................................ 9.63-4
9
9.63-07 Irrigation Plans.......................................................................................... 9.63-4
9.64 Water Efficient Landscape Design and Installation………….….…..………………9.64-1
9.64.01 Statement of Purpose and Application……..…..……..…………………9.64-1
9.64.02 Applicability…………………………………..……………..…………..9.64-2
9.64.03 Permits and Fees……………………………………..…………..………9.64-2
9.64.04 Authorization to Design a Landscape……………………………………9.64-2
9.64.05 Definitions…………………………………………………………...…..9.64-4
9.64.06 Implementation…………………………………………………………9.64-10
9.64.07 Landscape Documentation Package Submittal Requirements…………9.64-11
9.64.08 Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet…………………….……..…….9.64-12
9.64.09 Soil Management Report………………………………………...……..9.64-15
9.64.10 Grading Plan……………………………………………………………9.64-15
9.64.11 Landscape Design Plan………………………………………..………..9.64-15
9.64.12 Irrigation Design Plan……………………………….………….………9.64-18
9.64.13 Certificate of Completion………………………………………………9.64-21
9.64.14 Irrigation Scheduling…………………………………………...………9.64-22
9.64.15 Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule………………………9.64-22
9.64.16 Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey and Irrigation Water Analysis…..…9.64-23
9.64.17 Irrigation Efficiency………………………………………………..…..9.64-23
9.64.18 Recycled Water……………………………………….……….………..9.64-23
9.64.19 Stormwater Management……………………………………………….9.64-24
9.64.20 Public Education…………………………………………………..……9.64-24
9.64.21 Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey and Irrigation Water Analysis..........9.64-24
9.64.22 Water Waste Prevention…………………………………………….….9.64-25
9.69 Mobile Marijuana Dispensaries………………………………………….………….9.69-1
9.69.01 Definitions……………………………………………………….………9.69-1
9.69.02 Mobile Marijuana Dispensaries Prohibited…………………………..….9.69-1
9.69.03 Marijuana Delivery Prohibited…………………………………………..9.69-1
9.69.04 Public Nuisance Declared……………………………………………..…9.69-2
9.69.05 Violations. …………………………………………………………...…..9.69-2
General Provisions
9.70 Conditional Use Permits..............................................................................................9.70-1
9.70.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.70-1
9.70.02 Application Contents................................................................................. 9.70-1
9.70.03 Review and Approval Procedures............................................................. 9.70-2
9.70.04 Basis for Approval.....................................................................................9.70-2
9.70.05 Terms and Conditions................................................................................9.70-3
9.70.06 Permit Revocation and Modification.........................................................9.70-4
9.70.07 Conditional Use Permit to Run with the Land.......................................... 9.70-4
9.70.08 Performance Guarantee............................................................................. 9.70-5
9.70.09 Mapping.....................................................................................................9.70-5
9.71 Variances ................................................................................................................... 9.71-1
9.71.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.71-1
9.71.02 Application Contents................................................................................. 9.71-1
10
9.71.03 Review and Approval Procedures............................................................. 9.71-2
9.71.04 Basis for Approval.....................................................................................9.71-2
9.71.05 Terms and Conditions................................................................................9.71-2
9.71.06 Variance Revocation and Modification.....................................................9.71-3
9.71.07 Reasonable Accommodation Under the Fair Housing
Amendments Act................................................................................. 9.71-3
9.72 Zone Modifications......................................................................................................9.72-1
9.72.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.72-1
9.72.02 Application Contents................................................................................. 9.72-1
9.72.03 Review and Approval Procedures............................................................. 9.72-2
9.72.04 Development Standards Subject to Modification......................................9.72-2
9.72.05 Basis for Approval.....................................................................................9.72-2
9.72.06 Terms and Conditions................................................................................9.72-3
9.72.07 Zone Modification Revocation and Modification..................................... 9.72-3
9.73 Interpretations and Miscellaneous Provisions............................................................. 9.73-1
9.73.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.73-1
9.73.02 Boundaries of Zoning Districts..................................................................9.73-1
9.73.03 Determination of Similar Use....................................................................9.73-2
9.73.04 City Review of Public Utility Uses........................................................... 9.73-4
9.73.05 Interpretations of Minimum Lot Sizes.......................................................9.73-4
9.73.06 Determination of Accessory Uses and Structures..................................... 9.73-4
9.73.07 Front-Yard Setback Exception.................................................................. 9.73-4
9.73.08 Less Restrictive Uses Prohibited............................................................... 9.73-4
9.73.09 Location of Dwellings............................................................................... 9.73-4
9.73.10 Height of Buildings................................................................................... 9.73-5
9.73.11 Height of Structures...................................................................................9.73-5
9.73.12 Accessory Buildings..................................................................................9.73-5
9.73.13 Through Lots............................................................................................. 9.73-5
9.73.14 Yard Encroachments..................................................................................9.73-5
9.73.15 Fences, Walls, and Hedges........................................................................9.73-6
9.73.16 Building Across Property Lines................................................................ 9.73-6
9.73.17 Residential Garage Capacity..................................................................... 9.73-6
9.73.18 Street Dedications and Improvements Required....................................... 9.73-6
9.74 Nonconforming Structures, Uses, Lots, and Signs......................................................9.74-1
9.74.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.74-1
9.74.02 Nonconforming Structures........................................................................ 9.74-1
9.74.03 Nonconforming Uses of Structures........................................................... 9.74-1
9.74.04 Nonconforming Uses of Land................................................................... 9.74-2
9.74.05 Nonconforming Lots..................................................................................9.74-4
9.74.06 Determination of Nonconforming Status.................................................. 9.74-4
9.74.07 Existing Conditional Uses......................................................................... 9.74-4
9.75 Permit Procedures........................................................................................................9.75-1
9.75.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.75-1
9.75.02 Ministerial Permits Issued by the Community Development Director..... 9.75-1
9.75.03 Discretionary Permit Decisions by the Planning Commission..................9.75-2
9.75.04 Discretionary Permit Decisions by the City Council.................................9.75-5
11
9.75.05 Permit Revocation and Modification.........................................................9.75-6
9.75.06 Time Limitations on Challenges................................................................9.75-6
9.75.07 Building Permits........................................................................................ 9.75-7
9.75.07.01 Issuance-Certificate Required...............................................9.75-7
9.75.07.02 Filing Fees............................................................................ 9.75-7
9.75.07.03 Form of Applications............................................................9.75-7
9.75.07.04 Public Hearings.....................................................................9.75-8
9.75.07.05 Legal Procedure....................................................................9.75-8
9.75.07.06 Violation-Penalty..................................................................9.75-8
9.75.08 Medical Marijuana Dispensaries Prohibited……………………………..9.75-8
9.76 Amendments to this Ordinance................................................................................... 9.76-1
9.76.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.76-1
9.76.02 Initiation of Amendments by the City....................................................... 9.76-1
9.76.03 Initiation of Amendments by an Interested Person................................... 9.76-1
9.76.04 Notice of Public Hearing........................................................................... 9.76-2
9.76.05 Public Hearing........................................................................................... 9.76-3
9.76.06 Decision.....................................................................................................9.76-3
9.76.07 Time Limitations Challenges.....................................................................9.76-3
9.77 Administration.............................................................................................................9.77-1
9.77.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.77-1
9.77.02 Community Development Director Delegation.........................................9.77-1
9.77.03 Fees............................................................................................................9.77-1
9.78 Enforcement and Penalties.......................................................................................... 9.78-1
9.78.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.78-1
9.78.02 Complaints Regarding Violation...............................................................9.78-1
9.78.03 Apparent Violations...................................................................................9.78-1
9.78.04 Requirements to Investigate...................................................................... 9.78-1
9.78.05 Inspection...................................................................................................9.78-1
9.78.06 Notice of Violation.................................................................................... 9.78-2
9.78.07 Misdemeanor............................................................................................. 9.78-2
9.78.08 Injunctive Relief........................................................................................ 9.78-2
9.78.09 Abatement Proceeding...............................................................................9.78-2
9.78.10 Noncompliance with Permit Conditions....................................................9.78-2
9.78.11 Validity and Issuance of Permits...............................................................9.78-3
9.79 Property Maintenance, Code Enforcement and Abatement Procedures......................9.79.1
9.79.01 Purpose and Application............................................................................9.79-1
9.79.02 Definitions................................................................................................. 9.79-1
9.79.03 Prohibited Conduct....................................................................................9.79-3
9.79.04 Violations...................................................................................................9.79-5
9.79.05 Exemptions................................................................................................ 9.79-5
9.79.06 Property Maintenance Standards for Developed Properties......................9.79-6
9.79.07 Property Maintenance Standards for Undeveloped or
Vacant Properties................................................................................9.79-9
9.79.08 Compliance Responsibility......................................................................9.79-11
9.79.09 Abatement Procedures.............................................................................9.79-11
12
Appendices
Appendix A – Notice of Fair Housing Accommodation Procedures for Persons with Disabilities
Appendix B – Fair Housing Accommodation Request
Appendix C - Notice of Decision on Fair Housing Accommodation Request
Appendix D - Appeal of Denial of Fair Housing Accommodation Request
Quick Reference Tables
Table No. Name
9-1 Permitted and Conditional Uses, Non-Residential Zones
9-2 Non-Residential Zone Development Standards
9-3 Permitted and Conditional Uses, Residential Zones
9-4 Residential Zone Development Standards
9-5 Parking Requirements
9-6 Signs Permitted
9-7 Vehicle Storage and Parking Regulations

9.01-1
Chapter 9.01
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
Sections:
9.01.01 CITATION
9.01.02 ADOPTION
9.01.03 PURPOSES OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE
9.01.04 APPLICABILITY
9.01.05 COMPLIANCE WITH THE ORDINANCE
9.01.06 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
9.01.07 BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION
9.01.08 VALIDITY
9.01.09 REPEALS
9.01.01 CITATION. This Title shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the
“Zoning Ordinance of the City of Avenal.”
9.01.02 ADOPTION. There is adopted a zoning ordinance for the City of Avenal, State of
California, said zoning ordinance establishing regulations pertaining to uses of land
use, locations, height, bulk, size and types of buildings in certain districts of the
City, specifying said districts; providing for the administration and enforcement of
such regulations and prescribing penalties for violations thereof.
9.01.03 PURPOSES OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Avenal is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare
through the orderly regulation of land uses. Its regulations are imposed to:
A. Provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned
use of land resources.
B. Guide development so that it is consistent with the City of Avenal General Plan
and to promote good design through adhering to accepted standards.
C. Prescribe and apply zoning districts of a number, size and location deemed
necessary to carry out the purposes of the City of Avenal General Plan and this
Ordinance.
D. Coordinate policies and regulations of the City of Avenal with regard to the use
of land with such policies and regulations of the County of Kings in order to
facilitate transition from county to municipal jurisdiction.
E. Regulate the size and use of lots, yards and other spaces.
F. Regulate the use, location, height, bulk and size of buildings and structures.
9.01-2
G. Regulate the intensity of land use.
H. Regulate the density in residential areas to conform with the General Plan.
I. Establish requirements for off street parking.
J. Regulate signs and billboards.
K. Maintain and enhance significant environmental resources.
L. Protect agricultural producers in areas of planned urban expansion
M. Provide for the enforcement of the regulations of this Ordinance.
9.01.04 APPLICABILITY. This Title shall apply, to the extent permitted by law to all
property in the incorporated boundaries of the City of Avenal whether owned by
private individuals, firms, corporations or organizations; by the City Avenal or its
agencies, by the County of Kings or its Agencies, by the State of California or its
agencies or political subdivisions, by the United States or any of its agencies. Any
governmental agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance only to
the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the City of Avenal.
9.01.05 COMPLIANCE WITH THE ORDINANCE.
A. It shall be unlawful for any building or structure to be moved, erected, altered,
enlarged, or rebuilt that does not strictly conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance, except as may be otherwise authorized by Section 9.74 relating to
non-conforming uses and standards.
B. It shall be unlawful for any lot, parcel, yard, open space, or land to be used for
any purpose not specifically permitted by this Ordinance.
C. Any use not specifically permitted by the provisions of this Ordinance is
prohibited.
D. No department, official, or employee of the City of Avenal vested with the duty
or authority to issue permits or licenses for buildings, structures, or uses subject
to the requirements of this Ordinance may or shall issue a permit or license in
conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance; any permit or license issued in
conflict with any provisions of this Ordinance shall become null and void from
its beginning. No permit or license may or shall be issued by any department,
official or employee of the City of Avenal for any building, structure; or use
subject to the requirements of this Ordinance on a parcel of land where the
department, official, or employee is aware that a violation of this Ordinance
exists.
9.01-3
9.01.06 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS. This
Ordinance and the provisions thereof shall amend and supersede all prior related
Ordinances.
9.01.07 BUILDINGS UNDER CONSTRUCTION. Any building or structure for which a
building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may be
completed and used in accordance with the plans, specifications, and permits on
which said building permit was granted, if construction is commenced within 180
days after the issuance of said permit and is diligently pursued to completion.
9.01.08 VALIDITY. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of
this Ordinance is for any reason declared to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this Ordinance. The City Council hereby declares that it would have
adopted this Ordinance and each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or
phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the section, that any one or more sections,
subsections, clauses, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
9.01.09 REPEALS. The repeal, amendment or modification of any prior Ordinances of the
City of Avenal shall not effect any pending prosecutions for violation of any
Ordinances hereby repealed, amended, or modified.

9.02-1
Chapter 9.02
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:
9.02.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF BASE ZONING DISTRICTS
9.02.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMBINING ZONING DISTRICTS
9.02.03 ZONING MAPS
9.02.04 RULES APPLYING TO UNCERTAIN BOUNDARIES ON ZONING MAP
9.02.05 PRE-ZONING
9.02.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
9.02.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF BASE ZONING DISTRICTS. In order to classify,
regulate, and restrict the uses of lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the
height, bulk and construction of buildings, to regulate the area of yards and other
open spaces around buildings, and to regulate the intensity of land use and the
density of population, the following Base Zoning Districts are hereby established:
Residential Districts
R-E Residential Estate 20,000 sq. ft. lot minimum
R-1 Single-Family Residential 6,000 sq. ft. lot minimum
R-2 Medium Density Multi-family Residential 7,000 sq. ft. lot minimum
R-3 High Density Multi-family Residential 6,000 sq. ft. lot; 1,500 sq. ft. per
unit minimum
MHP Mobilehome Park 1 acre, 1,500 sq. ft. per unit minimum
Commercial Districts
S-C Service Commercial
D-C Downtown Commercial
H-C Highway Commercial
C-C Community Commercial
Industrial Zone
M-1 Light Manufacturing
M-2 Heavy Manufacturing
Special Purpose Districts
O Open Space, Parks and Recreation
P Off-Street Parking
UR Urban Reserve
P-F Public Facilities
9.02-2
PUD Planned Unit Development Overlay
Every lot or parcel of land, or portion thereof, within the incorporated City of
Avenal shall be classified in only one of the Base Zoning Districts established by
this section.
9.02.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMBINING ZONE DISTRICTS. In order to classify,
restrict, and segregate the uses of lands and buildings, to regulate and restrict the
height, bulk and construction of buildings, to regulate the area of yards and other
open spaces around buildings, and to regulate the intensity of land use and the
density of population, in addition to those restrictions contained in a Base Zone
District, the following Combining Zoning Districts are hereby established:
P-D Precise Development District
C-L Cluster Combining District
In addition to being classified in a Base Zoning District, a lot or parcel of land, or
portion thereof, may be classified in one or more Combining Zoning Districts
established by this section. In such cases all building and properties shall be
designed in accordance with the regulations in the Base and Combining Zone
Districts.
9.02.03 ZONING MAPS. The boundaries of the zones established by this Ordinance are not
included in this Title, but are shown on the Official Zoning Maps available at the
Avenal Community Development Department and other information shown thereon
shall be as much as part of this Ordinance as if the matters and information set forth
on such maps were all fully described herein. Where an interpretation is required
for the precise boundary of a zone district, such interpretation shall be made in
conformance with Chapter 9.73 (Interpretations and Miscellaneous Provisions).
9.02.04 RULES APPLYING TO UNCERTAIN BOUNDARIES ON ZONING MAP. The
following shall apply in determining uncertain boundaries of a district as shown on
the Official Zoning Map:
A. Where a boundary follows a public street or alley, the centerline of the street
shall be the boundary. Where a boundary follows a lot line, the lot line shall be
the boundary.
B. Where a district boundary divides a lot or parcel, the location of the boundary,
unless indicated by dimension, shall be determined by the Planning Commission
based on facts of the property, existing and planned land use, General Plan
conformity, site planning constraints and opportunities and other material facts.
Such decisions shall govern unless appealed to the City Council.
C. Where any public right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the land use
district regulations applied to abutting property shall thereafter extend to the
centerline of such vacated or abandoned right-of-way.
9.02-3
D. In remaining cases, the Community Development Director shall determine the
location of the district boundary. The decision shall be based on the conformity
with the General Plan. Such a decision may be appealed to the Planning
Commission in accordance with B above.
9.02.05 PRE-ZONING. The City may pre-zone unincorporated property adjoining the City.
This process shall comply with Chapter 9.76 (Amendments to this Ordinance). The
zoning shall become effective upon annexation.
9.02.06 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
A. APPLICATION
All land or structures shall be used and constructed in accordance with the
regulations and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance including obtaining
applicable permits prior to use initiation.
B. CONFLICTING PERMITS AND LICENSES TO BE VOIDED
All permits and licenses shall be issued in conformance with the provisions of
this Zoning Ordinance. Any permit or license issued and in conflict with this
Zoning Ordinance shall be null and void.
C. SIMILAR USES PERMITTED
When a use is not specifically listed in this Zoning Ordinance, the Community
Development Director may, but is not required to, determine, based on
substantial evidence, that the use is similar to other uses listed, and may
therefore be treated the same as that similar use.
In making such determination, the Community Development Director shall
make all of the following findings based on substantial evidence:
1. The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with the goals,
objectives and policies of the General Plan;
2. The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with the goals,
objectives and policies of any applicable Specific Plan;
3. The proposed use meets the stated purpose and general intent of the district
in which the proposed use is to be located;
4. The proposed use does not adversely impact the public health, safety and
general welfare of the City's residents;
9.02-4
5. The proposed use shares characteristics common with, and is not of greater
intensity, density, or greater environmental impact, than those uses listed in
the Zone District in which it is to be located.
D. CLASSIFICATION
The commission (or council in case of an appeal) shall classify such use as to
permitting such use by right or permitting such use subject to a conditional use
permit.
E. LIMITATIONS IN POWERS TO CLASSIFY
In no instance shall the commission (or council in case of an appeal) determine
that a use shall be permitted in a district when such use is specifically listed as
first permissible in a less restricted district e.g., a use listed in the M-1 district
shall not be permitted in the M-2 district.
F. EFFECT OF DETERMINATIONS
Uses classified pursuant to this section shall be regarded as listed uses. The
City shall maintain an up-to-date list of all such classifications.
G. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
When interpreting and applying the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance, the
provisions shall be the minimum requirements, unless otherwise specified.
H. CONFLICT WITH OTHER REGULATIONS
Where conflicts occur between the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and the
Building and Fire Codes, or other regulations of the City, the more restrictive
shall apply.
It is not intended that this Zoning Ordinance shall interfere with, repeal,
abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement in effect at the
time of adoption. Where this Zoning Ordinance imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of structures or land, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall
apply.
Nothing contained in this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed to repeal or amend
any regulation of the City requiring a permit or license or both. Nor shall
anything in this Zoning Ordinance be deemed to repeal or amend the Building
Code of the City.
9.02-5
I. LANGUAGE
In interpreting this Zoning Ordinance, the term "shall" is mandatory, and the
term "may" is permissive.
J. DENSITY AND INTENSITY
The density and intensity limitations established in the Zoning Ordinance shall
apply to each lot.
K. IMPROVEMENTS
All provisions and improvements shall be installed as required by the Avenal
Municipal Code, the City of Avenal Subdivision Ordinance and Improvement
Standards.

9.03-1
Chapter 9.03
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
9.03.01 CONSTRUCTION
9.03.02 DEFINITIONS
9.03.01 CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Ordinance,
words, phrases, and terms shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in
Section 9.03.02. In constructing the provisions of this Ordinance, specific
provisions shall supersede general provisions relating to the same subject, and text
shall supersede diagrams relating to the same subject. Words, phrases, and terms
not defined in this Section shall have the meaning commonly or logically associated
therewith, or as clarified by the Planning Commission.
9.03.02 DEFINITIONS.
Abandoned. To cease or suspend from developing or maintaining a building, structure or use for
90 days or lesser time as may be specified herein.
Abandoned Activity. A business or activity with no reported sales or activity for a period of at
least 180 days. Exceptions are temporary closures for repairs, alterations, or other similar
situations.
Abut, Abutting (Adjacent). Two or more parcels sharing a common boundary, of at least 1 point.
To physically touch, border upon border, or to share a common corner or property line, except
where two (2) or more lots adjoin only at a corner or corners, they shall not be considered as
abutting unless the common property line between the two (2) parcels measures not less than
eight (8) feet in a single direction. For the purposes of this title, abutting properties shall include
those properties separated by any road, street, walkway, easement, alley right-of-way or
highway, except a Major Highway as defined by Circulation Element of the General Plan.
Access. Safe, adequate, and usable ingress or egress to a property or use.
Access Drive or Access Way. A way or means of approach to provide entrance to a property
that is safe, adequate and useable as ingress or egress for pedestrians and vehicles.
Accessory Building or Structure. A structure detached from a principal structure on the same lot,
incidental to the principal building, and not designed for human habitation (not a Second
Dwelling Unit). An accessory building or structure may be erected only after the principal
structure or building is established.
Accessory Living Quarters. Living quarters within an accessory building located on the same
premises with the main building, for use by temporary guests of the occupant of the premises,
9.03-2
such quarters having no kitchen facilities and not rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling
unit.
Accessory Use. A use of land or building that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the land or building located on the same lot. An accessory use may be
established only after the principal use is established.
Acre. A full acre containing forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet of area
within property lines of a lot or parcel.
Action. The decision made by the review authority on a land use application, including
appropriate findings, environmental determination and conditions of approval, where applicable.
Actual Cash Value. Current market value as determined by a certified real property appraiser or
actual sales price.
Adjacent. Near, close or abutting; for example, an industrial district across the street or highway
from a residential district shall be considered as “adjacent.”
Adult Entertainment Facility.
1. An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in, or an
establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale, rental or other
consideration, the following: (a) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, CD ROM
discs or other computer software, or other visual representations which are characterized by
the depiction or description of SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES or SPECIFIED
ANATOMICAL AREAS; or (b) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed
for use in connection with SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES; or (c) the use of viewing
booths.
2. “Specified Anatomical Areas” means human genitals, pubic region, anus, buttocks, female
breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state, even if completely covered.
3. “Specified Sexual Activities” means (a) the fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or (b) sex acts, normal or perverted,
actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or (c)
excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) and
(b) above.
Adult-Oriented Businesses. Businesses selling goods or entertainment of a sexual nature.
Agriculture. The use of land for farming, dairying, pasteurizing and grazing, horticulture,
floriculture, viticulture, apiaries, animal and poultry husbandry, and accessory activities,
including but not limited to storage, harvesting, livestock feeding when in conjunction with
9.03-3
another permitted use (e.g., dairying) and maintenance of equipment. Agriculture as used herein
does not include stockyards, slaughtering of animals or commercial food processing.
Airport or Heliport. Any area of land designated and set aside for the landing and taking off of
any aircraft regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration.
Airport, Private. A private airport or airstrip intended for the sole use of the airport owner and
his or her invitees.
Airport, Public Use. A publicly or private owned airport that offers the use of its facilities to the
public without prior notice or special invitation or clearance, and that has been issued a
California Airport Permit by the Division of Aeronautics of the California Department of
Transportation.
Alley. A public or private way, at the rear or side of property, permanently reserved as an
ancillary means of vehicular or pedestrian access to abutting property.
Alterations. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the
supporting members of a building or structure, or change in the appearance of any building or
structure.
Amendment. A change in the wording, context or substance of this title, addition or deletion or a
change in the zone district boundaries or classifications upon the zoning map.
Amusement Park. An outdoor facility, which may include structures and buildings, where there
are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sales
of items, and buildings for shows and entertainment.
Ancillary Use. A use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use,
located on the same lot or parcel.
Animal Hospital. A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are
cared for during the time of such treatment; the ancillary use of the premises as a kennel or a
place where animals or pets are boarded for remuneration.
Antenna. A device for transmitting or receiving radio, television, or any other transmitted signal.
Apartment Hotel. A multifamily dwelling which also contains one (1) or more Guest Rooms as
defined herein.
Applicant. Owner(s) or lessee(s) of property, or their agent(s), or person(s) who have contracted
to purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this
Development Code, or the agent(s) of such persons.
Attached. Any structure that has an interior wall or roof in common with another structure.
9.03-4
Auto Accessory Parts (new) Retail Sales. The sale of differential and transmission assemblies,
engine blocks or heads and similar head parts, radiators, and tires and wheels, and tail pipes and
mufflers. There shall be no machine work or repairs or installation of merchandise permitted on
the premises, nor shall there be a service garage or automobile service of any kind.
Automobile Sales Lot. An open area used for the display, sale and/or rental of new or used
automobiles.
Automobile Service Station. An area which provides for the servicing or fueling of motor
vehicles, including tube and tire repairs, battery charging, storage of merchandise and supplies
related to the servicing of motor vehicles, sale of gasoline and other fuel and lubricants, motor
vehicle washing, grease racks, and motor vehicle repairs, excluding body and fender work,
engine overhauling and replacement, transmission work and other similar activities.
Automobile Wrecking. The wrecking or dismantling of motor vehicles or trailers, or the storage
of, sale of or dumping of dismantled, partly dismantled, or wrecked motor vehicles or their parts,
or salvaging of their parts. The presence on a site of three (3) or more motor vehicles which
have not been capable of operating for thirty (30) days or more shall constitute prima facie
evidence of a motor vehicle wrecking yard.
Awning. A roof-like cover that is attached to and projects from the wall of a building for the
purpose of shielding from the elements.
Bakery Large. A commercial enterprise engaged in large-scale production and wholesale
marketing of bakery goods, and which may include incidental retail sales.
Bakery Small. A retail commercial enterprise engaged in the production of bakery goods
intended for retail sale on site and not including any wholesale activities.
Bar. A structure, or part of a structure, used primarily for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages by the drink.
Barbecue. A method of cooking food with indirect heat and smoke, or the end-result of cooking
by this method. It is usually cooked in a covered environment heated by an outdoor open flame
of wood, charcoal, natural gas or propane. Restaurant barbecue may be cooked in large brick or
metal ovens specially designed for that purpose.
Base Flood. A flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year; also referred to in other sources and this text as the one hundred (100) year flood.
Base Zone. A zoning district which includes use, height, bulk, space, and development standards
for the regulation of development in a particular area (e.g., R-1, S-C, M-1).
Basement. A story partly or completely underground. A basement shall be counted as a story
for purposes of height measurement where any portion of a basement has more than 1/2 of its
height above grade.
9.03-5
Bed and Breakfast. A transient lodging establishment primarily engaged in providing overnight
or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public and may provide meals to the extent
otherwise permitted by law.
Berm. A mound or embankment of earth.
Bicycle Shop. A business devoted to retail sales, service or repair of bicycles which are not
powered by any type of mechanical device.
Billboard. The same as an “advertising structure.”
Block. A parcel of land, or contiguous group of lots or parcels surrounded by public streets,
highways, freeways, railroad rights-of-way, flood control channels, creeks, washes, rivers or
unsubdivided acreage or any combination thereof.
Block Face. One complete side of a block, usually facing a public street.
Boarding or Rooming House. A structure where lodging and meals for 3 or more boarders is
provided for compensation.
Breezeway. A roofed passageway, open on at least two (2) sides where the roof is structurally
integrated with the structure of the main building. A fence or wall not exceeding six (6) feet in
height may be permitted on one side of the breezeway.
Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, built for the support,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
Building Area. The net portion of the lot remaining after deducting all required setbacks from
the gross area of the lot.
Building Coverage. The percent of lot area which may be covered by all the footprints of
buildings or structures on a lot.
Building Height. The building height is the vertical distance from the average elevation of the
finished grade to the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys and vents.
Building, Main. A building within which is conducted the principal use permitted on the lot or
site as provided by this title.
Building Official. The Chief Building Officer of the City or a designee.
Building Setback Line. The minimum distance as prescribed by this title between any property
line and the closest point of the foundation of any building or structure related thereto.
9.03-6
Building Site. The ground area of a building together with all open spaces required by this
Ordinance.
Business, Retail. The retail sale of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood,
conducted within a building, but not the sale of lumber or other building materials or the open
storage or sale of any building materials or the sale of used or second-hand goods or materials of
any kind.
Business, Wholesale. The wholesale handling of any article, substance or commodity for profit
or livelihood, conducted within a building, but not including the sale of lumber or other building
materials or the open storage or sale of any material or commodity, and not including the
processing or manufacture of any product or substance.
Campground. A plot of ground upon which two or more campsites are located, established, or
maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for
recreation, education, or vacation purposes.
Camp Site. An Area within a campground prepared and maintained for the purpose of
occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation,
education, or vacation purposes.
Camping Trailer. See Travel Trailer.
Camping Unit. Any tent, trailer, cabin, lean-to, or similar structure established or maintained
and operated in a campground as temporary living quarters for recreation, education, or vacation
uses.
Caretaker’s Residence. A single-family residence on the same property with, or an abutting
property owned by the owner of, a commercial or manufacturing use which residence is
occupied by one (1) or more persons charged with care or protection of facilities used in such
commercial or manufacturing use, and which residence is provided to the occupant as
compensation for such services and for which he does not pay money or other thing of value
other than his services.
Cargo Container. A large metal box typically used for the shipment of containerized goods.
Carnival. a group of two (2) or more devices or acts, operated or conducted for five (5) days or
less from time of set up and, in conjunction with an established business for the purpose of
attracting the public, or to advertise a product, idea or program.
Carport. A permanent roofed structure not completely enclosed to be used for vehicle parking.
Carwash, Self Service. Any occupancy which provides for automobile washing to be done by
the customer.
Cemetery. An area for burial or entombment of the deceased.
9.03-7
Centerline. A line designated by official survey to be the center of the future or existing fully
developed easement, street, road or highway, which may or may not coincide with the
construction centerline.
Certificate of Occupancy. A permit issued by the Building Department prior to occupancy of a
structure to assure that the structure is ready for occupancy.
Church. A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly
assemble for worship, and which buildings, together with its accessory buildings and uses, is
maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship.
City. The City of Avenal.
City Attorney. The City Attorney of the City of Avenal or his/her designee.
City Council. The City Council of the City of Avenal.
City Official. Any employee of the City of Avenal that has been duly authorized and delegated
by the City Council.
Clinic. A place for outpatient medical services to human patients.
Club. An association of persons (whether or not incorporated) organized for some common
purpose, but not including a group organized primarily to render a service customarily carried on
as a business.
Cluster District. A subdivision development in which building lots are sized to conform to the
“footprint” of the structures and sited closer together than conventional development, usually in
groups or clusters, provided that the total density does not exceed that permitted under
conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. The additional land that remains undeveloped
is preserved as open space and recreation land. Private development easements around the
structures are permitted for inclusion of private landscaping, pools, spas, yards, etc.
Cogeneration Facility. A facility which creates the sequential production of both thermal and
electrical energy.
Collection Facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of
recycling materials from the public, which may include the following:
1. Reverse vending machine(s);
2. Small collection facilities which occupy an area of less than 500 square feet and may
include:
a. A mobile unit to be removed from the site upon a daily basis;
9.03-8
b. Bulk reverse vending machine(s) or a grouping of reverse vending machines;
c. Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures
1. Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than 500 square feet and
may include permanent structures.
College. An educational institution offering advanced instruction in any academic field beyond
the secondary level, but not including trade schools or business colleges.
Columbarium. A structure of vaults lined with recesses for cinerary urns for the ashes of
cremated bodies.
Combining (Overlay) Zone Districts. A zoning district that modifies use, height, bulk, space, or
other development standards of the base zone with which it is combined (e.g., Design District,
Industrial Design District).
Commercial Coach. A vehicle, without motive power, designed and equipped for human
occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial purposes.
Commercial Districts. The S-C, D-C, H-C and C-C zoning districts.
Commercial Office. Any administrative or clerical office maintained as a business or any office
established by a public service over which this title has jurisdiction, other than professional
office.
Commercial Vehicle. A vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the transportation of
goods or people.
Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Avenal.
Common Area. Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated
for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents
of the development and which may include such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate.
Common Property Line. A lot line shared by two or more properties.
Communications Equipment Building. A building housing electrical and mechanical equipment
necessary for the conduct of a public communication business, with or without personnel.
Community Apartment. A development in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled
with the right of exclusive occupancy of an apartment located on the land.
Community Care Facility. A State-authorized, certified, or licensed family care home, foster
home, or group home serving six (6) or fewer mentally disordered or otherwise handicapped
persons or dependent and neglected children (Welfare and Institutions Code 5116).
9.03-9
Community Center. A building used for recreational, social, educational, or cultural activities,
usually owned and operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency.
Community Development Director. The Community Development Director for the City of
Avenal or his/her designee.
Community Recreation Facility. A recreational facility, such as a park or swimming pool,
maintained and operated for the benefit of residents of a particular residential development,
including an apartment, condominium, townhouse, subdivision, or mobilehome park.
Conditional Use Permit. A discretionary entitlement which may be granted under the provisions
of this Zoning Ordinance and which when granted authorizes a specific use to be made of a
specific property, subject to compliance with all terms and conditions imposed on the
entitlement.
Condominium. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common on a
portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential,
industrial, or commercial building on such real property. (Civil Code Section 783)
Contiguous. The same as “abut.”
Convalescent Home. See Rest Home.
Convalescent Hospital. An institution primarily engaged in the care of individuals recovering
from illness with doctors and nurses on duty 24 hours a day.
Convenience Zones. An area within ½-mile radius of a Supermarket.
Corner Cut-off. The provision for and maintenance of adequate and safe visibility for vehicular
and pedestrian traffic at all intersections of streets, alleys or private driveways.
Council. The City Council of the City of Avenal.
Country Club. A land area and building containing recreational facilities, clubhouses, and usual
accessory uses, open only to members and their guests for a membership fee.
County. The County of Kings.
County Official. Any employee of the County of Kings that has been duly authorized and
delegated.
Coverage. The same as “Lot Coverage.”
Cul-de-sac. See Street, Cul-de-sac.
9.03-10
Crematory. A building or structure operated in conjunction with a columbarium, mausoleum,
cemetery, or mortuary containing one or more furnaces for the reduction of bodies of deceased
persons to cremated remains.
Dairy Farm. Any place or premises upon which milk is produced for sale or other distribution
and where more than two (2) cows or six (6) goats are in location.
Day Care Facility, Children. A facility which provides non-medical care to children under 18
years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the
activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24 hour basis.
Family day care homes are further divided into the following categories: Small (up to 8
children); large (9 to 14 children; and day care center 15 + children). Day care facilities include
family day care homes, infant centers, day nurseries, child care nurseries, pre-schools, and
extended day care facilities.
Day. A calendar day.
Days. Shall always be consecutive calendar days unless otherwise stated.
Dead Storage. Is that type of storage in which goods, property, or equipment are stored for
safekeeping in an approved zoning designation and are not put to use. Said property shall not be
connected to utility services.
Decision Making Authority. The Community Development Director, Planning Commission, or
City Council, depending on which has been assigned the responsibility and authority for
reviewing and approving a particular permit pursuant to Chapter 9.75 (Permit Procedures).
Dedication. A conveyance of land to some public use, especially streets, made by owner and
accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public.
Defensible Space. A design concept term used to describe a series of physical design
characteristics that maximize resident control of behavior, particularly crime, within a public,
semiprivate, or private area, structure, or community.
Density. The number of dwelling units per gross acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential
uses.
Density Bonus. A density increase over the otherwise maximum residential density allowable by
the applicable General Plan land use category.
Department. The City of Avenal Community Development Department, hereafter referred to as
the “Department.”
Design. Includes the planning and engineering of the following: street alignments, grades and
widths; drainage, sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignment and grades thereof; location
and size of all required easements and rights-of-ways; fire roads and fire breaks; lot size and
9.03-11
configuration; traffic access; grading; land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes;
building and other such specific physical and aesthetic requirements.
Detached. Any building or structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with any other
building or structure.
Development. The placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal
of any dredged material or any gaseous liquid, solid or thermal waste; grading, removing,
dredging, mining or extraction of any soil or materials; change in the density or intensity of use
of land, including, but not limited to, a subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act
(commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code), and any other division of land,
including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the
purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of
use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the
size of any structure including any facility of any private, public or municipal utility; and the
removal of any major vegetation. As used in this Code, “structure” includes but is not limited to
any building, road pipe flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, commercial antenna,
and electrical power transmission and distribution line. A “project,” as defined in Government
Code Section 65931, is included with this definition.
Development application. An application for any permit or approval to be issued by any
City of Avenal officer, employee, department or other office, including subdivisions,
land-use permits, variances, building permits or any other entitlement for use.
Directional Signs. Any sign which contains only the name, location of building, services and/or
occupants that are not located on the parcel upon which the sign is located. Said signs are
separate from and are not to be construed as an advertising structure.
Director. The Community Development Director of the City of Avenal.
Discretionary Decision. A decision requiring the exercise of judgment or deliberation when the
public official or body decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity.
District. A zoning district established by this zoning ordinance.
District Attorney. The District Attorney of the County of Kings or a designee.
Domestic Agriculture. Agricultural activities carried on for noncommercial purposes.
Dormitory. A structure intended principally for sleeping accommodations, and where nonindividual
kitchen facilities are provided, where such structure is related to an educational or
public institution or is maintained and operated by a recognized non-profit welfare organization.
Double Frontage Lot. See Lot (through).
9.03-12
Drainage Channel. Any existing open ditch, culvert or channel, naturally created or designed to
transmit water for flood control or irrigation purposes.
Drugstore. A retail store engaged in the sale of prescription drugs and patent medicines, carrying
related items such as cosmetics and toiletries and such unrelated items as tobacco and novelty
merchandise. A drugstore may also include a soda fountain or lunch counter.
Dump. A place used for the disposal, abandonment or discarding of garbage, sewage, trash,
refuse, rubble, waste material, or dead animals.
Duplex. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living
independently of each other. Of which structure is joined by a common wall or roofline.
Dwelling. A structure or portion thereof designed for residential occupancy, not including hotels
or motels. (See Dwelling Unit)
Dwelling, Single-family. A building or buildings designed for or occupied exclusively by one(1)
family, including a manufactured home, or a mobilehome.
Dwelling, Multifamily. A structure containing 2 or more dwelling units or a combination of 2 or
more separate single-family dwelling units (duplexes, triplexes, townhouses or apartments).
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms including bathroom(s) and a kitchen, designed as a unit for
occupancy by 1 family for living and sleeping purposes.
Easement. A grant of 1 or more property rights by the property owner for use by the public, a
corporation or another person or entity.
Educational Institution. A school, college or university, supported wholly or in part by public
funds or giving general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed by the State
Board of Education.
Electric Distribution Substations. An assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the
distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage and
transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general public use.
Electric Transmission Substation. An assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the
transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at a very high voltage from its
source of generation by means of a network of high voltage lines and where, by means of
transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a low subtransmission voltage for purposes of
supplying electric power to large individual customers, interchange connections with other
power-producing agencies, or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower
voltages for distribution to smaller individual users.
9.03-13
Entertainment (Live). Any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, musical, concert, or
song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by 1 or more persons whether or not
they are compensated for the performance.
Family. One or more persons related or unrelated, living together as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel,
club, or similar dwelling for group use. A family shall include domestic servants employed by
the family but shall not include a fraternal, religious, social, or business group.
Farm Labor Camp. The same as “Labor Camp, Farm.”
Farmworker Housing, Permanent. The same as Labor Camp, Permanent
Farmworker Housing, Migrant. The same as Labor Camp, Temporary
Farm Labor Housing, Contract Labor. Living quarters, either single family or group housing,
provided by a labor contractor for farm laborers which are not full-time farm employees on lands
owned or leased by the owner of the living quarters.
Farm Labor Housing, On-site Employee. Living quarter, either single family or group housing,
provided for full-time farm laborers employed on the site or on lands owned or leased by the
owner of the living quarters.
Farmers Market. A retail market where agricultural produce is offered for sale to the general
public, either within an enclosed building or outdoors.
Fast-food Restaurant. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or
rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption
either within the restaurant building or off the premises.
Feed Lot or Feed Yard. A lot, or portion of a lot used for the enclosing of livestock for market,
and not operated in connection with a bona fide farm.
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to
enclose or screen areas of land.
Filling Station. The same as “Automobile service station.”
Flood or Flooding. Any general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or from the unusual and rapid
accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Boundary Floodway Map (FBFM). An official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administration, using their own information or information supplied by the Kings County Water
Agency, the Kings County Public Works Department, the State Reclamation Board, or other
Federal Agencies, has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
9.03-14
Flood Control Channel. The same as “Drainage channel.”
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special and historical flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the City of Avenal.
Flood Zone. The flood has a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year; also referred to as the one hundred (100) year flood, regulatory flood, Intermediate
Regional Flood, or base flood.
Floodplain. The relatively flat area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or which has been
or may be covered by floodwater.
Floodway or Designated Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot or increasing the velocity to greater
than seven (7) feet per second, whichever results in the widest floodway. The floodway is
delineated on the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the State Reclamation Board Designated
Floodway Map. Floodways are also delineated on the official zoning maps as Floodplain
Primary (FPP) District.
Floor Area. Whenever the term “floor area” is used in this zoning ordinance as a basis for
requiring off-street parking for any structure, it shall be assumed that, unless otherwise stated,
said floor area applies not only to the ground floor area but also to any additional stories, or
basement of the structure. All horizontal dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of
walls including enclosed porches.
Fowl. A bird, such as the duck, goose, turkey, or pheasant, that is used as food or hunted as
game.
Frontage. The side of a lot abutting a street (the front lot line), except the side of a corner lot.
Front wall. The nearest wall of a structure to the street upon which the structure faces, but
excluding cornices, canopies, eaves, or any other architectural embellishments.
Funeral Home. An establishment with facilities for the preparation of the deceased for burial or
cremation, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals.
Garage. An enclosed building, or a portion of an enclosed building used for the parking of
vehicles.
Garage, Private. A detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot
as a dwelling for five (5) but not more than fifteen (15) persons other than members of the
resident family, excepting a nursing home as defined in this section.
9.03-15
Garage, Repair. A building other than a private garage used for the care, repair of equipment or
automobiles, or where such vehicles are parked or stored for remuneration, hire or sale.
Garage or Yard Sale. The sale of goods which is undertaken by the occupant of a residence
where the garage sale occurs, which is no longer than two (2) consecutive days in duration and
which occurs no more frequently than twice a year.
Garage, Storage. Any premises, used exclusively for the storage of vehicles.
General Plan. The City of Avenal General Plan as adopted by the City Council, pursuant to
Government Code, hereafter referred to as the “General Plan.”
Grade. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface (see Slope), and the average of the
finished ground level at the center of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and
within five (5) feet of a sidewalk, said ground level shall be measured at the sidewalk.
“Granny” Flat. An additional dwelling unit intended for the sole occupancy of one or two adult
persons who are 62 years of age or over, and the floor area of the attached “granny” flat dwelling
unit does not exceed 30 percent of the existing living area of the primary residence or the floor
area of the detached “granny” flat dwelling unit does not exceed 1,200 square feet on a lot
designated as residential, as defined in Government Code Section 65852.1.
Greenhouse. A building or structure constructed chiefly of glass, glass-like translucent material,
cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants.
Gross Acreage. The total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land before public streets,
easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or
parcel, and does not include adjacent lands already dedicated for such purposes.
Group Care Facility. A facility or detached dwelling unit providing twenty-four (24) hour nonmedical
care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.
Gross Floor Area. The total horizontal area in square feet of the several floors of a structure,
including interior balconies, mezzanines, carports, and basements, but not including the area of
the inner courts.
Guest. Any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes.
Guest House. Living quarters, having no kitchen facilities, located on the same premises with a
main building and occupied for the sole use of members of the family temporary guest, or
persons permanently employed on the premises.
Guest Room. A room which is designed to be occupied by one (1) or more guests for sleeping
purposes, having no kitchen facilities, not including dormitories.
9.03-16
Guest Ranch. A building or buildings and open space for use of transients only, providing
housing and meals and having recreational activities of one (1) or more types for compensation.
Habitable Structure. Any structure used for living purposes, including working, sleeping,
cooking, eating, or recreation.
Half-Story. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, parts of which are not more than three
(3) feet above the floor of such story.
Hazardous Waste. A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either:
A. Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible, illness.
B. Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed.
Hedge. A fence or barrier formed of bushes set close together.
Hog Ranch or Farm. Any premises used for the commercial breeding or raising of hogs which
are kept confined as a stockyard and fed concentrated food for the purposes of developing or
fattening the animals for retail or wholesale sale. (Hogs raised as an FFA, 4-H, or Junior Farmer
project are not to be classified as a hog ranch or farm unless the express purpose is for the
commercial wholesale or retail sales market.)
Homeless Shelter. Short-term (from 3 to 90 days) housing for indigents, including shower
facilities and meal service.
Home Occupation. An activity conducted in compliance with Chapter 9.19 (Residential District
Specific Standards) carried out by an occupant conducted as an accessory use within the primary
dwelling unit.
1. Such home occupation may include:
a. Consultive professional occupations upon approval of the Planning Commission
and City Council, whose function is one of rendering a service and does not
involve the dispensing of goods or products;
b. The giving of music lessons and similar occupations;
c. Drafting, designing and the like, using only the normal drafting equipment.
Horticulture. The cultivation of an orchard or garden on a small or large scale.
Hospital. An institution, designed within an integrated campus setting for the diagnosis, care,
and treatment of human illness, including surgery and primary treatment.
9.03-17
Hotel. A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public
with most rooms gaining access from an interior hallway, and providing additional services, such
as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities.
Household Pets. Keeping of domesticated animals, fish, small birds; provided, that there shall be
not more than two (2) mature animals, small birds or any one (1) species; provided, that they
shall be kept in a safe and sanitary manner; and keeping of other pets; provided, that such other
pets which are not kept exclusively within a dwelling shall be limited to not more than three (3)
adult animals, until such time that the keeping of animals as identified above, becomes a
commercial use as determined by the City Council.
1. Household pets shall not include horses, cows, goats, sheep, other equine, bovine, ovine
or ruminant animals, pigs, predatory wild animals, ducks, geese, turkeys, game birds and
fowl which normally constitute an agricultural use. The keeping of household pets or
other animals is lawful only in those districts where the use is listed as a permitted use or
when any household pets are kept as an accessory use to lawfully maintain residences in
other districts. The keeping of any animal not herein described as a household pet shall
not be deemed an accessory residential use.
2. Any person keeping or maintaining animals not defined as “household pets” by this
subsection within an enclosure nearer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential
zone shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and in violation of this title.
House Trailer. The same as Mobilehome.
Hunting Club. A designated area where wild game birds or animals may be hunted. Normally
membership or entry fee is required as a prerequisite to hunting.
Industrial Districts. The M-1 and M-2 zoning districts.
Industry. The manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction or destruction of any article,
substance or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form,
character or appearance thereof, and including storage elevators, truck storage yards,
warehouses, wholesale storage, and other similar types of enterprise.
Infill Development. Development that occurs on up to 4 contiguous vacant lots scattered within
areas that are already largely developed or urbanized.
Intent and Purpose. The commission and council, by the adoption of this zoning ordinance, have
made a finding that the health, safety and welfare of the community will be served by the
creation of the district and by the creation of the district and by the regulations therein.
Junk and Salvage Facility (also, Dismantling and Wreckage Yard). Primary or accessory use of
structures and/or land for storage, dismantling and/or selling of cast-off, unused, scrap or salvage
material or any sort.
9.03-18
Kennel. Any lot where 4 or more dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of 4 months are
kept, where such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting, including places where
said animals are boarded, kept for sale, or hire.
Kitchen. Any room, all or part of which is designed and/or used for storage, refrigeration,
cooking and the preparation of food.
Labor Camp, Permanent Farm. Living quarters, dwellings, boarding houses, bunkhouses,
automobile trailers or other permanent housing accommodations, maintained in connection with
any farm work of five (5) or more farm employees.
Labor Camp, Temporary Farm. Living quarters such as tents or automobile trailers temporarily
maintained in connection with any farm work or place where farm work is being performed on
the premises, provided for the camping of five (5) or more temporary farm employees. Such
camp shall be occupied or used for a period not to exceed ninety (90) consecutive days.
Land Use. A description of how land is utilized.
Laundromat. An establishment providing washing, drying, or dry cleaning machines on the
premises for rental use to the general public for family laundering or dry cleaning purposes.
Landscaping. An area devoted to or developed and maintained predominantly with native or
exotic plant materials including turf, groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and
also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools, fountains, paved
or decorated surfaces (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural
elements.
Livestock. Any cattle, sheep, swine, goat, horse, mule, or other equine animals.
Livestock Feedlot. An enclosed area where animals are confined and fed concentrated food to
raise or fatten them for slaughter or commercial sale.
Living Area. The interior inhabitable area of a dwelling unit, including the basement and attic,
but excluding the garage or any accessory structure.
Loading. The removal or placement of any commodity in, on or from a vehicle of any type.
Loading Space. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a main building, or contiguous
to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or
unloading, and which abuts a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress or egress.
Local Street. A street or road primarily for service to abutting property.
Lot.
9.03-19
1. A single parcel of land for which a legal description is filed on record or the boundaries
of which are shown on a subdivision map or record of survey map filed in the office of
the county recorder.
2. The term “lot” shall include a part of a single parcel of land when such part is used as
though a separate lot for all of the purposes of this title.
3. The term “lot” shall include two (2) or more abutting lots when combined and used as
though a single lot.
The classification of lots are as follows:
Corner. A lot located at the intersection of 2 or more streets at an angle of not more than
135 degrees. If the angle is greater than 135 degrees, the lot shall be considered an “interi
or lot.”
Cul-De-Sac. A lot fronting on, or with more than one-half (1/2) of its lot width fronting
on, the turnaround-end of a cul-de-sac street.
Curve. A lot fronting on the outside curve of the right-of-way of a curved street, which
street has a centerline radius of two hundred fifty (250) feet or less.
Flag. A lot having access or an easement to a public or private street by a narrow, private
right-of-way.
Interior. A lot abutting only 1 street.
Key. A lot with a sideline that abuts the rear line of any 1 or more adjoining lots.
Reverse Corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot.
Through. A lot having frontage on 2 generally parallel streets.
Lot Area. The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way and
including only that area which is usable for its intended purpose.
Lot Area, Minimum. The smallest lot area established by this Ordinance on which a use
structure may be located in a particular zoning district.
Lot Averaging. The design of individual adjoining lots within a residential subdivision in which
the average lot area equals the minimum prescribed area for the Low Residential Land Use
Zoning District. To maintain an average, some lots may be reduced to a maximum of 10%
below the minimum lot size, while a corresponding number of lots shall each maintain a lot area
of at least 10% above the minimum lot size. Allowable density shall be within the prescribed
maximums.
Lot Coverage. That portion of the lot that is covered by buildings and structures.
9.03-20
Lot Depth. The average distance between the front and rear lot lines or between the front line
and the intersection of the two sidelines, if there is no rear line.
Lot Frontage. The portion of the lot contiguous to the street.
Lot Line. Any boundary of a lot. The classifications of lot lines are:
Front: On an interior lot, the line separating the parcel from the street. On a corner lot,
the shorter lot line abutting a street. (If the lot lines on a corner lot are equal in length, the
front lot line shall be determined by the Community Development Director.) On a
through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing access to the lot.
Interior. Any lot line not abutting a street.
Rear. A lot line, not intersecting a front lot line, which is most distant from and most
closely parallel to the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot
bounded by only three lot lines, a line within the lot having a length of 10 feet, parallel to
and most distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the
purpose of determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of this
Development Code.
Side. Any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot
depth at a midway point between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot of Record. A lot held in separate ownership as shown on the records of the county recorder
at the time of the passage of an ordinance or regulation establishing the zoning district in which
the lot is located.
Lower Income Households. Households with incomes eighty (80) percent or less of the County
median income.
Main Building. The building in which the principal use of a lot is located.
Major Street or Major Highway. A highway which is used, designed to be used, or is necessary
to carry heavy volumes of traffic, and designated as a “Major Highway or Arterial” in the
Circulation Element of the General Plan.
Manufactured Home. A factory built or manufactured home as permitted by the State of
California and Federal laws.
Mausoleum. A tomb for one (1) or more deceased persons.
Median. A paved or planted area separating a street or highway into 2 or more lanes of opposite
direction of travel.
9.03-21
Median Income. A specified threshold which complies with the California Department of
Housing and Community Development Guidelines where one-half of the County earns more and
one-half of the County earns less income.
Medical Building. Clinics or offices for doctors, dentists, oculists, chiropractors, osteopaths or
similar practitioners of the healing arts; including accessory laboratory and prescription
pharmacy uses, but not including office for veterinarians.
Medical Marijuana Dispensary. A facility where marijuana is made available for medical
purposes in accordance with California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5 (Proposition
215).
Mineral Exploration. Exploration by scientific means, in a manner similar to the exploration for
petroleum products, for the purpose of determining the existence and extent of commercial
mineral deposits.
Ministerial. Staff and planning department and/or building inspection personnel.
Ministerial Decision. A decision requiring the application of the statutes, ordinances, or
regulations to the facts as prescribed and involving little or no personal judgment by the public
official or decision making body as to the wisdom or manner of carrying out a project.
Mini-Mall. A parcel with a commercial structure divided into at least 3 spaces for rent or a
parcel with a collection of structures with different tenants.
Mini-Warehouse. A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or
rented on an individual basis.
Minor Plan Modification. A minor change or modification of an approved development plan
which is not in conflict with the intent, policy, or expectations or original project approvals.
Mixed Use Development. The development of a parcel(s) or structure(s) with 2 or more
different land uses such as, but not limited to a combination of residential, office, manufacturing,
retail, public, or entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures.
Mobile Recycling Unit. An automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of
Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials, including bins, boxes, or
containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable
materials.
Mobilehome. A structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, designed and equipped to
contain not more than two (2) dwelling units to be used with or without a foundation system.
Mobilehome does not include a recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or manufactured
housing. Inconsistent with above definition of manufactured home.
9.03-22
Mobile marijuana dispensary. Any clinic, cooperative, club, business or group which
transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or delivery, of medical marijuana to
a person.
Mobilehome Park. An area or tract of land where two (2) or more lots are rented or leased or
held out for rent or lease but not divided as owner occupied lots to accommodate mobilehomes
for human occupancy.
Mobilehome Accessory Structure. Any awning, cabana, ramada, storage cabinet, storage
building, private garage, carport, fence, windbreak, or porch of any residential building or
structure established for the use of the occupant of a mobilehome on a lot.
Moderate Income. Persons with income of 80% to 120% of the County Median Income.
Mortuary. A place in which the deceased are kept until burial.
Motel. A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units,
providing transient accommodations for up to thirty (30) days with garage or parking space
conveniently located to each unit with most rooms gaining access from an exterior walkway,
including tourist courts, auto courts, or motor lodges.
Nature or Wildlife Preserve. An area set aside for the preservation of natural vegetation or
wildlife where the general public may view the vegetation or wildlife, with or without charge.
Neighborhood. An area of a community with characteristics that distinguish it from other
community areas and which may include distinct ethnic or economic characteristics or
boundaries defined by physical barriers, such as major highways and railroads or natural feature
s, such as rivers.
Net Site Area. The total area within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land after public street
easements or other areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are deducted from such lot or
parcel.
Nonconforming Building (Structure). A structure or building the size, dimensions, or location of
which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this Zoning Ordinance but
which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform to the present
requirements of the zoning or districts.
Nonconforming (Illegal). A structure, lot, or use which did not conform to applicable laws when
constructed or initiated, and does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Nonconforming Lot. A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision, or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but which fails by reason of such
adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the applicable
zoning district or districts.
9.03-23
Nonconforming Use. A lawful use when established but which does not conform to
subsequently established zoning or zoning regulations.
Nuisance. An interference with the enjoyment and use of property.
Nursery School. See Day Care Facility, Children.
Nursing Home. See Rest Home.
Occupancy or Occupied. The residing of an individual or individuals overnight in a dwelling
unit, or the installation, storage, or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery in any public,
commercial, or industrial building.
Off-site. Located outside the lot in question.
Offsite Advertising Structure. Any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and all such
structures used as an outdoor display, regardless of size and shape, for the purposes of making
anything known, the origin or place of sale of which is not on the property with such advertising
structure.
Off-street Parking. An area for the temporary storage of motor vehicles that is directly
accessible to but not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
Office. A business or commercial establishment for the rendering of service, administrative or
consultation but excluding retail services.
Official Plan Line. The future right-of-way of any road or highway as adopted by resolution of
the City Council.
Oil or Gas Exploration by Scientific Means. Exploration by scientific means includes, but is not
limited to, the following: seismic surveys, magneto-telluric, magnetometer or gravity meter
surveys; surface mapping and holes less than five hundred (500) feet deep drilled for the purpose
of taking core samples, velocity readings, temperature measurements, or water samples.
One Ownership. Ownership of real property by a person, persons, firm, corporation, or
partnership, or any combination thereof, individually, jointly, or in common whereby such
property is under a single or unified control.
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to
one or more of the following uses: preservation of natural resources; the managed production of
resources; outdoor recreation; or public health and safety.
Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Avenal, of the Avenal Municipal Code.
Outdoor Advertising Structure. Any structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for
outdoor purposes, upon which any outdoor advertising sign may be placed, and either:
9.03-24
1. Advertising a use not located on the site or a product on the site where it is located; or
2. Exceeding three hundred (300) square feet in area. See “Advertising structure” and
“Sign.”
Parcel. A lot or parcel of land under one ownership that has been legally created or subdivided
or combined and is shown as a single parcel on the latest equalized assessment roll. (See Lot.)
Park. Public or private land used for active and passive recreation.
Parking Area. Any public or private land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles
capable of moving under their own power, including parking lots, garages, private driveways,
and legally designated areas of public streets.
Parking District. The same as the P district.
Parkway. The area of a public street that lies between the curb and the adjacent property line or
physical boundary definition such as fences or walls, which is used for landscaping tree lines
and/or passive recreational purposes.
Permit. Written governmental permission issued by an authorized official empowering the
holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization.
Permitted Use. Any use allowed in a land use zoning district and subject to the provisions
applicable to that district.
Person. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal
organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business,
business trust, public agency, school district, State of California, and its political subdivisions or
instrumentality's, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit,
including any trustee, receiver or assignee.
Pets. See Household Pets.
Permanent. To endure, remain or to continue without fundamental or marked change.
Pharmacy. See Drug Store.
Planning Commission. Hearing and review body established by City of Avenal.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A type of development characterized by comprehensive
planning for the project as a whole, clustering of structures to preserve usable open space and
other natural features, and a mixture of housing types within the prescribed densities.
Plot. A single unit parcel of land; or a parcel of land that can be identified and referenced to a
recorded plat or map.
Plot Plan. See Site Plan.
9.03-25
Poultry Ranch. The raising, breeding, hatching of poultry for commercial purposes.
Preschool. A licensed public or private institution which provides structured educational
services to children between the ages of two (2) and five (5).
Principal Dwelling. The dwelling in which is conducted the principal residential use of the lot
on which it is located.
Principal Use. The primary or predominant use of any lot, building or structure.
Processing Facility. A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of
recyclable materials to prepare either for efficient shipment, or to an end user's specifications by
means such as bailing, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical
sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:
1. Light processing facilities occupy areas under 45,000 square feet of collection, processing
and storage area, and average 2 outbound shipments per day. Light processing facilities
are limited to bailing, briquetting, compacting, grinding, crushing, shredding and sorting
of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing
facility. A light processing facility shall not shred; compact, or bale ferrous metals other
than food or beverage containers.
2. A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.
Produce Stand. A permanent or temporary structure utilized for the sale of agricultural,
horticultural, or farming products grown or products by the owner of lessee of the property on
which the structure is located, is used throughout the year and no thirty (30) day time period
elapses where the stand is not utilized. A Temporary Stand is one that is used seasonally and
normally periods of time in excess of thirty (30) days pass where the stand is not utilized.
Professional Office. Any building or portion thereof used or intended to be used as an office for
a lawyer, architect, engineer, land surveyor, accountant, optometrist, doctor, dentist and other
similar professions but shall not include other medical buildings or commercial offices.
Prohibited Use. A use that is not permitted in a zoning district.
Property Line. See Lot Line.
Public Buildings and Uses. Buildings, structures and use of land, maintained by federal, State,
County or City government or agency thereof, or by any school district or other special district
created by law, in either a governmental or proprietary capacity.
Public Hearing. A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the public with the
public given an opportunity to talk and participate.
9.03-26
Public Park. A park, playground, swimming pool, beach, pier, reservoir, golf course or athletic
field within the City which is under the control, operation or management of the City, the
County, or the State.
Public Works Department. The Public Works Department of the City of Avenal, and the
Building Inspection Division.
Public Works Director. The Public works Director of the City of Avenal or his/her designee.
Quadruplex. Four (4) attached dwellings in one (1) structure in which each unit has two (2) open
space exposures and shares one (1) or two (2) walls with the adjoining unit or units.
Quarry. A place where rock, ore, stone and similar materials are excavated, processed for sale or
for off-site use.
Queue (Line). An area for temporary waiting of motor vehicles or pedestrians while obtaining a
service or other activity.
Railroad Right-of-Way. A strip of land of a maximum width of one hundred (100) feet only for
the accommodation of mainline or branch line railroad trucks, switching equipment and signals,
but not including lands on which stations, offices, storage buildings, spur tracks, sidings,
employee housing, yards or other uses are located.
Ramada. An arbor or pergola-like structure.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the
chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for recreational or sporting purposes. The term
recreational vehicle includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pickup campers, camping
trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks or buses, boats and boat trailers, and all terrain
vehicles.
Recreational Vehicle Park. An area or tract of land where one (1) or more spaces are rented or
held out for rent to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents and which is occupied for
sixty (6) consecutive days or less.
Recycling. The process by which waste products are reduced to raw materials and transformed
into new products, including automobiles.
Recycling Facility. A center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A
certified recycling facility or certified processor is certified by the California Department of
Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and
Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers located on
a residential, commercial or manufacturing designated parcel used solely for the recycling of
material generated on the parcel.
9.03-27
Recycling or Recyclable Material. Reusable domestic containers including, but not limited to
metals, glass, plastic and paper which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for
the purpose of using in altered form. Recyclable material does not include reuse of hazardous
materials.
Rehabilitation. The upgrading of a building previously in a dilapidated or substandard condition
for human habitation or use.
Repair – Vehicle. The major repair or overhaul of any vehicle, including but not limited to the
following: pulling head, motor, transmission, rear end, or body work, as distinguished from
minor tune-up, replacing hoses, fan belts, and spark plugs.
Residence. A home, abode, or place where an individual family is actually living at a specified
point in time.
Residential Accessory Structures. Buildings and structures normally associated with dwellings,
such as detached garages, carports, greenhouses, storage buildings, and swimming pools, but
excluding cargo containers.
Residential Care Facility. A family home, group care facility, or similar facility for 24 hour nonmedical
care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for
sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.
Residential Districts. The following districts: R-A (Single Family Residential/Agricultural),
R-1-A (Single Family/Low Density Residential), R-1 (Single Family/Medium Density
Residential), R-2 (Medium/High Density Residential), R-3 (High Density Residential), R-3-A
(High Density Multiple Family Residential), and MHP (Mobilehome Park).
Residential Hotel. A hotel offering simple room or suite accommodations on a weekly or
monthly basis. (also see Single Room Occupancy – SRO)
Resort Hotel. A group of buildings containing guest rooms and providing outdoor recreational
activities.
Restaurant. A use providing preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, including café’s
coffee shops, sandwich shops, ice cream parlors, fast food take-out (i.e., pizza), and similar uses,
and may include licensed “on-site” provision of alcoholic beverage for consumption on the
premises when accessory to such food service.
Restaurant, Drive-Thru. A use providing preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, as
defined under “Restaurant” with added provision of one or more drive-thru lanes for the ordering
and dispensing of food and beverages to patrons remaining in their vehicles.
Rest Home. An institution primarily engaged in the provision of permanent living space for the
elderly or mentally infirm.
9.03-28
Retail Services. Establishments in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption.
Review Authority. The person, committee, Commission or Council responsible for the review
and/or final action on a land use entitlement.
Reverse Vending Machine(s). An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or
more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and
plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the
container's redemption value as determined by the State. A reverse vending machine may sort
and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the
machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all container types in a proportion
commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification
as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary. A bulk
reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than 50 square feet, is
designed to accept more than 1 container at a time and will pay by weight instead of by
container.
Rezone. To change the zoning classification of particular lots or parcels pursuant to provisions
of this Ordinance.
Right-of-Way. A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation
and intended to be occupied or is occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission
lines, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar uses.
Road. See Street.
Roof. The outside top covering of a building.
Room. An unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathroom, kitchen,
closets, hallways and service porches.
Rooming House. See Boarding House.
Rounding of Quantities. The consideration of distances, unit density, density bonus calculations,
or other aspects of development or the physical environment expressed in numerical quantities
which are fractions of whole numbers; the numbers are to be rounded to the nearest highest
whole number when the fraction is .5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the
fraction is less than .5, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
Sanitary Landfill. A disposal site employing an engineered method of disposing of solid wastes
in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest
practical volume, and applying cover material over all exposed wastes at the end of each
operating day.
Satellite Dish Antenna. An apparatus capable of receiving or transmitting communications from
a satellite in excess of 3 feet in diameter.
9.03-29
Schools, Elementary, Middle or High. An institution of learning for minors, whether public or
private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education
Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This
definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle high school, senior
high school or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or
professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or
university.
School, Trade. Schools offering preponderant instruction in the technical, commercial or trade
skills, such as real estate schools, business colleges, electronic schools, automotive and aircraft
technician schools, and similar commercial establishments operated by a nongovernmental
organization.
Second Dwelling Unit. An attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single
family dwelling is situated.
Secondary Highway. A street or highway to carry moderate volumes of traffic and designed as a
“Secondary Highway Collector Street” or in the Circulation Element of the General Plan and
described in the City of Avenal Subdivision standards.
Security Bars, Windows. Means and includes bars, grilles, grates, or similar devices located on
the inside or outside of windows.
Senior Congregate Care Housing. A structure(s) providing residence for a group of senior
citizens (60 years of age or more) with central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, etc.
facilities with separate bedrooms and/or living quarters.
Servants Quarters (separate). Complete living quarters either attached or detached from that of
the main dwelling, including kitchen facilities but not rented or used for permanent or temporary
living quarters by members of the family.
Service Station. The same as Automobile Service Station.
Services, Commercial. Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to
products, to the general public.
Setback. The required distance that a building, structure, parking or other designated item must
be located from a lot line.
Setback, Front/Rear Average. The average front/rear yard setback of a group of 5 adjacent
dwelling units. The setback on any unit may vary up to 5 feet as long as the average setback of
all 5 units equals the minimum required for the land use zoning district.
9.03-30
Sidewalk. A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street,
used as a pedestrian walkway.
Sidewalk/Parking Lot Sale. A promotional sales event conducted by 1 or more businesses which
is held outside the confines of the commercial or manufacturing structure(s) in which such
business is normally conducted and which sale involves the outdoor display within a paved or
concrete area on the same lot as the structure(s) of merchandise which is normally displayed
within the structure(s).
Sign. Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors, or indoors,
which is used to advertise, identify, display, or direct attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. (See Chapter
17.61 for further interpretation of signage and signage related definitions.)
Sign Area. The total exterior surface of a sign, including all sides of a sign having more than one
(1) surface unless otherwise specified, and including spaces between or within letters and
symbols.
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Facility. A cluster of 7 or more units within a residential hotel
of weekly or longer tenancy providing sleeping or living facilities for 1 or 2 persons per unit, in
which sanitary facilities may be provided within the units, and cooking facilities may be shared
within the hotel.
Site. Any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous parcels of land.
Site Line. The area with a site triangle preserved at a height between thirty (30) inches to eight
(8) feet above grade and to be maintained free of landscaping and structures to preserve safety at
an intersection.
Site Plan. A process requiring submission of plans for review by the Community Development
Director.
Site Plan Review. A process requiring submission of plans for review by the Community
Development Director.
Site Triangle. A line of site or vision preserved to protect public health and safety associated
with vehicle and pedestrian conflict at intersections defined as the area within twenty-five (25)
feet parallel to each public street or right-of-way with the connecting line or hypotenuse of the
triangle defining the area. No structures with a height between thirty (3) inches and eight (8) feet
shall be located within said site triangle with the exception of Government and traffic regulatory
signals.
Slope. The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or
degrees.
9.03-31
Slope Percentage = Rise x 100 = %
Run
Slope Ratio = Run – (x) feet run to one foot rise = x:1/5
Rise
% Grade 100% 50% 40% 33.3% 30% 25% 20% 15% 12% 10% 8% 6%
Degrees 45 26.6 21.8 18.4 16.7 14 11.3 8.5 6.8 5.7 4.6 3.4
Ratio 1:1 2:1 2.5:1 3:1 3.3:1 4:1 5:1 6.7:1 8.3:1 10:1 12.5:1 16.7:1
Small Fowl. Birds raised or grown for hobby purposes, show, or racing, normally no larger than
a small chicken (e.g., pigeon, parrot, or cockatiel).
Soffit. The horizontal underside of an eave.
Solar Access. The airspace over and around a parcel that provides access to sunlight for the
effective use of solar energy.
Solid Waste. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including
garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction
wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure,
vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes.
Specific Plan. A plan consisting of text, maps, and other documents and exhibits regulating
development within a defined area of the City, consistent with the General Plan and the
provisions of Government Code Section 65450 et.seq.
Specific Plan Line. The designated centerline of any road or highway as adopted by resolution
of the City Council from which the ultimate right-of-way is determined in accordance with the
Circulation Element of the General Plan.
Stable, Commercial. A structure for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies which are boarded
for compensation.
Stable, Private. An accessory structure for the keeping of horses or ponies for the use of
occupants of the premises.
Start of Construction. The first placement of permanent construction on a site, such as the
pouring of slabs or footings, or any site preparation work, including, but not limited to, leveling
and grading.
Stockyard. An enclosed area where livestock are temporarily confined and fed concentrated
food while waiting for shipping to market, slaughter, or resale.
9.03-32
Storage. A space or place where goods, materials and/or personal property are put for more than
24 hours.
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and ceiling
above it.
Story, Half. A story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor
area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area immediately below it.
Stream. A watercourse having a source and terminus, banks, and channel through which waters
flow at least periodically.
Street. Any public or private thoroughfare, which affords a primary means of access to abutting
property.
Street, Cul-de-sac. A street with a single common ingress and egress and with a turnaround at
the end.
Street, Local. A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting property and to
discourage through traffic.
Street, Public. A street built to standards required and maintained by the City of Avenal.
Street, Private. A street owned and maintained by a person or persons and intended for access to
a limited number of private lots.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or
attachment to something having location on the ground.
Structure Floor. The floor sheathing, structural beams, floor joists, or concrete slab of a building.
Subdivision. Pursuant to California Subdivision Map Act definition Section 66424, the division,
by any sub-divider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof,
shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the
purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as
contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-ofway.
"Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined in subdivision (f) of Section
1351 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section
1351 of the Civil Code.
Substantial Improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds twenty five (25) percent of the assessed value of the structure, either (a)
before the improvement is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored
after the damage occurred. Substantial improvement is started when the first alteration of any
structural part of the building commences.
9.03-33
Supermarket. A full service, self-service retail store of at least 20,000 square feet which sells a
line of dry grocery, canned goods, or non-food items and some perishable items.
Swap Meets. Any indoor or outdoor place, location, or activity where new or used goods or
secondhand personal property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude
of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces; and, where a fee may be
charged to prospective buyers for admission, or a fee may be charged for the privilege of
offering or displaying such merchandise. The term swap meet is interchangeable with and
applicable to: flea markets, auctions, open air markets, farmers markets, or other markets, or
other similarly named or labeled activities; but the term does not include the usual supermarket
or department store retail operations.
Swimming Pools. A structure which shall conform to yard requirements but which shall not
count as part of lot coverage requirements.
Temporary Structure. A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed
when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected
has ceased.
Temporary Use. A use established for a specified period of time, with the intent to discontinue
the use at the end of the designated time period.
Tire, Battery and Accessory Parts Retail Sales and Service Store. An occupancy for the retail
sale and installation of automobile tires, batteries and other automobile parts and accessories
wherein all activity including storage, shall be conducted completely within a building designed
and intended for this purpose. Such occupancy shall exclude the sale and installation of
differential and transmission assemblies, engine blocks or heads, and similar hard parts and
radiators, and shall also exclude machine work, tire recapping, retreading, rebuilding, and
vulcanizing, battery repair or rebuilding, or general automobile repair, except as permitted in an
automobile service station.
Traffic Safety Sight Area. A space that is set aside on a corner lot in which all visual
obstructions, such as structures and plantings that inhibit visibility and thus cause a hazard to
traffic and pedestrian safety are prohibited. (See Site Triangle)
Trailer. A structure mounted on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle, and use for shortterm
human occupancy, carrying materials, goods or objects, or as a temporary office.
Trailer Court. Travel Trailer and Recreational Vehicle Park.
Trailer Sales and Service Lot. An open area where trailers, travel trailers, or mobilehomes are
sold, leased or rented, but where no repairs, repainting or remodeling are done and where no
trailers or mobilehomes are occupied as a dwelling.
9.03-34
Transfer/Processing Station. Includes those facilities utilized to receive solid wastes, temporarily
store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the materials in the solid wastes, or to transfer the
solid wastes directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport. Transfer station does not
include any facility with the principal function of which is to receive, store, separate, convert, or
otherwise process, in accordance with State minimum standards, manure; nor does it include any
facility, with the principal function of which is to receive, store, convert, or otherwise process
wastes which have already been separated for reuse and are not intended for disposal.
Transfer Station Large Volume. A transfer station which receives more than one hundred (100)
cubic yards of waste per operating day.
Transfer Station, Small Volume. A transfer station which receives less than one hundred (100)
cubic yards of waste per operating day.
Transient Basis. A continuous period of thirty (30) days or less.
Transitional Housing. Longer-term housing other than Homeless Shelters offering additional
services rendered to meet needs of recovery, life skills training, education, job training, job
placement, and/or child care.
Travel Trailer. A portable unit mounted on wheels and of such a size and weight as not to
require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motor vehicle, and for human
habitation for recreational or temporary occupancy.
Travel Trailer Park. See Recreational Vehicle Park.
Truck Parking. The parking of trucks including “Bob Tail” trucks in the rear yard only, but
restricting five (5) ton or greater diesel trucks or rigs in designated districts. All other trucks
allowed on streets or lots in conformance with City regulations.
Truck Repair. A commercial activity engaged in the service and repair of trucks, including truck
tire repair.
Truck Service Station. An occupancy which provides especially for the servicing of trucks with
incidental operations similar to those permitted for an “Automobile service station.”
Use. The purpose (type and extent) for which land or a building is arranged, designed or
intended, or for which either land or a structure is occupied or maintained.
Utility Easement. See Easement.
Variance. A discretionary entitlement which permits the departure from the strict application of
the development standards contained in this Zoning Ordinance.
Wading Pools. See Swimming Pools.
9.03-35
Washroom. A room equipped with washing and toilet facilities.
Wall. An architectural partition with a height and length greater than its thickness; used to
divide or enclose an area or to support another structure.
Warehousing. A building or buildings used for the storage of goods, of any type, when such
building or buildings contain more than five hundred (500) square feet of storage space, and
where no retail operation is conducted.
Waste to Energy Facility. Also called a Biomass Energy Facility. A facility where the burning
of clean organic materials produce steam or electrical energy. The facility may produce both
steam and electrical energy and in such cases it will also be a cogeneration facility.
Watercourse. A natural or man-made intermittent or perennial drainage channel which includes,
but is not limited to, the terms river, tributary, steam, or creek.
Wholesaling. The selling of any type of goods for the purpose of resale.
Wildlands. Any area of land that is essentially unimproved, in a natural state of hydrology,
vegetation and animal life, and not under cultivation.
Wild Animal Keeping. Keeping or maintaining any dangerous, wild, carnivorous, or exotic
animal that is wild by nature and not customarily domesticated by man so as to live and breed in
a tame condition.
Wind-driven Electrical Generators, Experimental. Wind systems that are the first of their kind
and their use constitute a testing of a new concept or design.
Wind-driven Electrical Generators, Production. Electrical generators that have progressed
beyond the experimental stage and construction of a significant number on a continuing basis has
occurred.
Wind-driven Electrical Generators, Prototype. Electrical generators that have progressed beyond
the experimental stage and construction of a significant number on a continuing basis has
occurred.
Yard. An open space, other than a court, that lies between the principal or accessory building or
buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as may be specifically provided in this Zoning Ordinance.
Yard, Front. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line or the
existing or future street right-of-way and a structural setback line parallel thereto. On corner
lots, the shortest street frontage shall be the front yard in residential land use districts, while the
longest street frontage shall be the front yard in commercial/industrial land use districts.
9.03-36
Yard, Front Determination. The narrowest portion of the lot abutting a street. In no case shall
the front yard be determined by the placement of a structure, or include an alley accessway or
railroad right-of-way.
Yard, Impound. The outside storage of autos, trucks, or other vehicles for commercial purposes.
Yard, Interior Side. An area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no
required front yard, from the front lot line to the required rear yard or, where there is no required
rear yard, to the rear lot line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto.
Yard, Junk. The storage and dismantling of autos, trucks, or other machinery for commercial
purposes. Includes salvage yards and dismantling yards.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the
nearest line or point of the main building or of any accessory building or structure. On flag lots,
the rear yard location shall be determined through project review.
Yard, Side of Street. An area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no
required front yard, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and from the side street lot line, or
the existing or future side street right-of-way (which ever is greater) to a structural setback line
parallel thereto.
Zero Lot Line. The location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that 1 or more of the
structure's sides rest directly on a lot line.
Zone. See District, as defined and described in this title.
Zoning. Dividing of the City into districts and the establishments of regulations governing the
use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
Zoning District. A specifically delineated area or zone in the City within which regulations and
requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing, and size of land and buildings.
Zoning District, Change of. The legislative act of removing one (1) or more parcels of land from
one (1) zoning district and placing them in another zoning district on the official zone map of the
City of Avenal.

9.04-1
Chapter 9.04
INTENSIVE AGRICULTURE (A-I) ZONE
Sections:
9.04.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.04.02 PERMITTED USES
9.04.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.04.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.04.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.04.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.04.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.04.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.04.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.04.010 PARKING
9.04.011 SIGNS
9.04.012 LANDSCAPING
9.04.013 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.04.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. To preserve lands best suited for intensive
agriculture, mining, and other rural activities from the encroachment of
incompatible uses, to prevent the intrusion of urban development into agricultural
areas in such a manner as to make agricultural production uneconomical or
impractical.
9.04.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 (Interpretations and
Miscellaneous Provisions) are permitted.
9.04.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 and all others determined to be similar to those uses pursuant to Section
9.73.03 are permitted subject to securing a CUP in accordance with the standards
and procedures set forth in Chapter 9.70 (Conditional Use Permits) of this
Ordinance. In addition the Community Development Director may require a Precise
Development District (P-D) overlay pursuant to the procedures and standards set
forth in Chapter 9.54 of this Ordinance.
9.04.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by sections 9.04.02 and 9.04.03
are prohibited, including Final Tract Map Subdivision.
9.04.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. Each lot shall have a minimum size of at least five (5)
gross acres. There shall be no minimum lot size for agricultural industrial uses
approved in conjunction with a conditional use permit.
9.04-2
9.04.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. There shall be no more than one
principal single family dwelling and one second residential unit per legal lot.
9.04.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.04.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.04.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.04.010 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.04.011 SIGNS. The following types of signs are permitted in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs advertising the property for sale not to exceed eight
(8) feet in height and thirty-two 32 square feet each.
B. Temporary construction signs.
C. Temporary political, religious or civic campaign signs.
D. One agricultural sign with a maximum height of 8 feet and a maximum sign
area of 32 square feet per face in conjunction with a use permitted by this zone.
9.04.012 LANDSCAPING. None required except as follows:
A. When a CUP (Conditional Use Permit) is issued.
1. Landscaping shall be required.
2. To be done in accordance with Chapter 9.63
9.04.013 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Temporary produce stands ("stand") for the sale of agricultural, horticultural or
farm products permitted pursuant to Section 9.04.02 shall comply with the
following standards:
1. The floor area of the stand shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet
in size.
2. The stand shall comply with the setbacks required in Table 9-2.
3. The stand shall be erected in such a manner that it may be readily moved by
the means of skids or other device.
9.04-3
4. The owner shall remove the stand at his/her expense when the stand is not in
use for a period of thirty (30) days or longer.
5. Offsite customer parking areas shall be provided which enable patrons to
safely exit and enter adjacent roadways and shall be treated with a dust
binder in a manner to continuously prevent fugitive dust.

9.05-1
Chapter 9.05
EXTENSIVE AGRICULTURE (A-E) ZONE
Sections:
9.05.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.05.02 PERMITTED USES
9.05.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.05.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.05.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.05.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.05.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.05.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.05.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.05.010 PARKING
9.05.011 SIGNS
9.05.012 LANDSCAPING
9.05.013 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.05.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of the Extensive Agriculture (A-E)
zone is to designate areas suitable for less intensive, high acreage, agriculture uses
and to prevent development of agricultural land to non-agricultural uses that will not
be consistent with the General Plan.
9.05.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.05.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 and all others determined to be similar to those uses pursuant to Section
9.73.03 are permitted subject to securing a CUP in accordance with the standards
and procedures set forth in Chapter 9.70 of this Ordinance. In addition the
Community Development Director may require a Precise Development District (PD)
overlay pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in Chapter 9.53 of this
Ordinance.
9.05.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by sections 9.05.02 and 9.05.03
are prohibited, including Final Tract Map Subdivision.
9.05.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. Each lot shall have a minimum size of at least 160 gross
acres. There shall be no minimum lot size for agricultural industrial uses approved
in conjunction with a conditional use permit.
9.05.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. There shall be no more than one
principal single family dwelling per legal lot.
9.05-2
9.05.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.05.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.05.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.05.010 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.05.011 SIGNS. The following types of signs are permitted in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs advertising the property for sale not to exceed eight
(8) feet in height and thirty-two 32 square feet each.
B. Temporary construction signs.
C. Temporary political, religious or civic campaign signs.
D. One agricultural sign with a maximum height of 8 feet and a maximum sign
area of 32 square feet per face in conjunction with a use permitted by this zone.
9.05.012 LANDSCAPING. None required except as follows:
A. When a CUP (Conditional Use Permit) is issued.
1. Landscaping shall be required.
2. To be done in accordance with Chapter 9.63.
9.05.013 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Temporary produce stands ("stand") for the sale of agricultural, horticultural or
farm products permitted pursuant to Section 9.05.02 shall comply with the
following standards:
1. The floor area of the stand shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet
in size.
2. The stand shall comply with the setbacks required in Table 9-2.
3. The stand shall be erected in such a manner that it may be readily moved by
the means of skids or other device.
4. The owner shall remove the stand at his/her expense when the stand is not in
use for a period of thirty (30) days or longer.
9.05-3
5. Offsite customer parking areas shall be provided which enable patrons to
safely exit and enter adjacent roadways and shall be treated with a dust
binder in a manner to continuously prevent fugitive dust.

9.06-1
Chapter 9.06
RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT (R-E)
Sections:
9.06.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.06.02 PERMITTED USES
9.06.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.06.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.06.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.06.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.06.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.06.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.06.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.06.10 PARKING
9.06.11 SIGNS
9.06.12 LANDSCAPING
9.06.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.06.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The R-E district is intended to provide for low
density residential development on large lots in order to preserve the rural character
of Avenal, allow for limited agricultural uses and serve as a transition area between
urbanizing lands and agriculture.
9.06.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.06.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 and all others determined to be similar to these uses pursuant to Section
9.73.03 are permitted subject to securing a CUP in accordance with the standards
and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of this title.
In addition the Community Development Director may require a PD overlay to be
used in connection with some projects pursuant to the procedures and standards set
forth in Chapter 9.54 of this Ordinance.
9.06.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not expressly permitted by Sections 9.06.02
and 9.06.03 are prohibited.
9.06.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. Each lot shall have a minimum lot size of at least 20,000
square feet.
9.06.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-2.
9.06.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.06-2
9.06.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.06.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.06.10 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.06.11 SIGNS. The following types of signs are permitted in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs advertising the property for sale, not to exceed eight
(8) feet in height and 32 square feet of sign area.
B. Temporary construction signs.
C. Temporary political, religious, or civic campaign signs.
D. One agricultural sign with a maximum height of 8 feet and 32 square feet of
sign area per face in conjunction with a use permitted by this Zone.
9.06.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be required in accordance with Chapter 9.63.
9.06.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. The breeding and raising of livestock permitted pursuant to Section 9.06.02,
including but not limited to sheep, goats, horses, mules, and swine. The total
number of animals shall not exceed two (2) mature animals per acre except in
the case of newborns. Newborns less than four (4) months in age shall not be
considered a part of the calculation.
B. Temporary produce stands ("stand") for the sale of agricultural, horticultural or
farming products permitted pursuant to Section 9.06.02 shall comply with the
following standards:
1. The floor area of the stand shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
2. The stand shall comply with the setbacks as set forth in Table 9-2.
3. The stand shall be erected in such a manner that it can be readily removed
by means of skids or other devices.
4. The owner shall remove the stand at his/her own expense when the stand is
not in use for a period of thirty (30) days.
9.06-3
5. Offsite customer parking areas shall be provided which enable patrons to
safely exit and enter adjacent roadways and shall be treated with a dust
binder in a manner to continuously prevent fugitive dust.
C. A Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle may be permitted as a temporary
dwelling pursuant to Section 9.06.02 and shall comply with the following
standards:
1. Building permits for the construction of the conventional single-family
residence shall be obtained prior to or in conjunction with the installation
permit for the Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle.
2. The Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle shall be removed from the
premises or placed in storage if:
a) Six (6) months have passed since the Mobilehome or Recreational
Vehicle was installed.
b) Seven (7) days have passed since the conventional dwelling was
approved for occupancy.
c) The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity.
3. One (1) extension of time for a period not to exceed six (6) months may be
granted by the Community Development Director upon written request of
the property owner. The extension of time may only be approved subject to
the following conditions:
a) An active building permit is on file with the Avenal Building Inspection
Division.
b) The construction of the conventional dwelling unit on the site has
progressed to a stage of inspection and approval of the framing, rough
electrical, rough mechanical, and top-out of plumbing of the dwelling.
4. Any Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle permitted as a temporary
dwelling in excess of a six (6) month period of time pursuant to Section
9.06.13D.3 shall be removed or placed in Dead Storage if:
a) The extension of time expired.
b) Seven (7) days have passed since the conventional dwelling unit was
approved for occupancy.
c) The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity.
9.06-4
E. Development in the R-E zone shall also comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.
F. The number of dogs per household shall be limited to three with the exception
of newborns. Any number of puppies shall be allowed until they reach the age
of six (6) months.

9.10-1
Chapter 9.10
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-1)
Sections:
9.10.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.10.02 PERMITTED USES
9.10.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.10.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.10.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.10.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.10.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.10.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.10.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.10.10 PARKING
9.10.11 SIGNS
9.10.12 LANDSCAPING
9.10.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES)
9.10.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.10.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The district is intended to provide living areas
within the City where development is limited primarily to low density
concentrations of one (1) family dwellings on a lot of not less than six thousand
(6,000) square feet in area. Regulations are designed to:
A. Promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life;
B. Provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential
area and for institutions which require a residential environment; and
C. Minimize traffic congestion and avoid the overloading of utilities designed to
serve only low density residential use.
D. Provide housing options for all segments of the population.
9.10.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-3 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 (Determination of Similar Use)
are permitted.
9.10.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-3 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted subject to securing a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of
this Ordinance.
9.10.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Sections 9.10.02 and 9.10.03
are not permitted.
9.10.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-4 and Figure 9.10-1.
9.10-2
9.10-3
9.10.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-4.
9.10.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-4 and Figure 9.10-2.
9.10.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-4.
9.10.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-4.
9.10.10 PARKING. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.10.11 SIGNS. Real Estate signs up to six square feet shall be permitted, in accordance
with Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
9.10.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.10.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES).
A. Applicability: All fences, walls, and hedges which are equal to or exceed 36
inches in height, located in any district, are subject to the requirements set forth
herein.
B. Building Permit: A building permit application for a fence shall consist of a
standard building permit application together with a site plan drawn to scale.
The site plan must show abutting streets, lot lines and their dimensions, existing
buildings and their dimensions, the proposed fence location and proposed
setbacks. A drawing or picture of the fence indicating its style and height shall
also be provided.
C. Fence Standards:
1. Residential Fences, walls and decorative posts shall be constructed of wood
fence material, stone, brick, and wrought iron. Plywood sheathing material
shall not be used. Any residential fence constructed in a street (front) yard
or side street yard shall not exceed 50% in opacity. Residential fences shall
not exceed 3 feet in height when located within a required street (front) yard
or side street yard, and shall not exceed 7 feet in height when located in any
other yard.
2. Temporary Fences for the purpose of protecting construction and excavation
sites, and protecting plants during grading and construction is permitted for
up to 180 consecutive days or for intervals not exceeding an aggregate of
180 days in any calendar year.
3. Swimming pools shall be entirely enclosed by a non-climbable wall or fence
at least five (5) feet in height. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term
“nonclimbable” shall mean, “lacking any fingerholds or toeholds on the
9.10-4
9.10-5
9.10-6
outside surface of the wall.” The wall or fence shall be equipped with selfclosing
gates, with the latching mechanism being located not less than four
(4) feet above the ground. The fence or wall must be installed and approved
by the building inspector prior to the pool being filled with water.
4. Fences or structures exceeding seven (7) feet in height, to enclose tennis
courts or other game areas, located within the rear half of a lot shall be
composed of wire mesh capable of admitting at least ninety (90) percent of
light as measured on a calibrated light meter.
5. Chain link fencing may be used subject to permission of the Community
Development Director.
D. Fence Location: On all properties, no fence, wall, or hedge shall be located
closer than 1 foot to a front lot line or street right-of-way and shall be set back at
least 1 inch from other lot lines, unless a city encroachment permit is issued.
E. Orientation: In any case where a fence, wall or hedge separates two distinctly
different land uses, the fence supports or other structural components of the
fence or wall shall face the more intensive land use as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
F. Maintenance of Fences: All fences, walls and hedges shall be maintained in a
structurally sound and attractive manner.
9.10.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. The breeding and raising of animals for domestic, hobby, food, scientific or fur
bearing purposes is prohibited.
B. A Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling
pursuant to Table 9-3 shall comply with the following standards:
1. Building permits for the construction of the conventional single-family
residence shall be obtained prior to or concurrently with the installation of
the Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle.
2. The Mobilehome or Recreational Vehicle is to be removed from the
premises or placed in Dead Storage when:
a) Six (6) months have passed since the Mobilehome or Recreational
Vehicle was installed.
b) Seven (7) days have passed since the conventional single-family
dwelling unit was approved for occupancy.
c) The building permit has lapsed due to lack of activity.
9.10-7
C. All development in the R-1 Zone shall comply with the minimum standards set
out in Chapter 9.19 (Residential District Specific Standards).
D. No poultry or fowl of any type is allowed in the R-1 Zone (chicken, rooster,
duck, pheasant, geese, etc.).
E. The number of dogs per household shall be limited to three with the exception
of newborns. Any number of puppies shall be allowed until they reach the age
of six (6) months.

9.11-1
Chapter 9.11
MEDIUM DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
(7,000 SQUARE FOOT MINIMUM LOT) ZONE (R-2)
Sections:
9.11.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.11.02 PERMITTED USES
9.11.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.11.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.11.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.11.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.11.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.11.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.11.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.11.10 PARKING
9.11.11 SIGNS
9.11.12 LANDSCAPING
9.11.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES)
9.11.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.11.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The district is intended to provide living area within
the City where development is limited primarily for medium density residential
development not to exceed one dwelling unit per three thousand five hundred
(3,500) square feet of lot area. Regulations are designed to:
A. Promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life;
B. Provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential
areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; and
C. Minimize traffic congestion and avoid the overloading of utilities designed to
serve only low density residential use.
D. Provide housing options for all segments of the population.
9.11.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-3 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.11.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-3 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Chapter 9.73 of this Title are permitted subject to securing a Conditional
Use Permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70
of this Ordinance.
9.11.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Section 9.14.02 and 9.14.03
are prohibited.
9.11.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-4 and Figure 9.11-1.
9.11-2
9.11-3
9.11.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-4.
9.11.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-4.
9.11.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-4.
9.11.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-4.
9.11.10 PARKING. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.11.11 SIGNS. Real Estate signs up to six square feet shall be permitted in accordance
with Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
9.11.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.11.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES). Fencing standards in 9.10.13
shall also apply to this zone. Additionally, on property developed with four (4) or
more dwelling units, all property lines that adjoin a single family residential district
shall construct a seven (7) foot solid masonry wall along the adjoining property
lines. The wall shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height within any required
front yard, or in the side yard on the street side of a corner lot.
9.11.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
All procedures and standards found in Section 9.10.14 shall apply to this zone.

9.12-1
Chapter 9.12
HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT (R-3)
Sections:
9.12.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.12.02 PERMITTED USES
9.12.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.12.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.12.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.12.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.12.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.12.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.12.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.12.10 PARKING
9.12.11 SIGNS
9.12.12 LANDSCAPING
9.12.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES)
9.12.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.12.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The R-3 district is intended to provide for high
density residential development located along arterial or collector streets not to
exceed one dwelling unit per two thousand (2,000) square feet of lot area. All
regulations for this district are deemed necessary for the protection of the quality of
the residential environment and for securing of the health, safety and general
welfare of the residents.
This district provides for two high density multiple family residential zones: R-3
(1) and R-3 (2). The R-3 (1) zone provides for the multiple family development
with buildings limited to a single story (not to exceed twenty feet). The R-3 (2)
zone provides for multiple family development with buildings up to two stories (not
to exceed thirty feet).
9.12.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-3 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.12.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-3 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Chapter 9.73 of this Title are permitted subject to securing a Conditional
Use Permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70
of this Ordinance.
9.12.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Section 9.12.02 and 9.12.03
are prohibited.
9.12.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-4.
9.12-2
9.12.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-4.
9.12.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-4.
9.12.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-4.
9.12.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-4.
9.12.10 PARKING. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Title.
9.12.11 SIGNS. The following signs are permitted in the R-3 Zone in accordance with
Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance:
A. Two monument signs (one per major entrance) up to six feet in height and 16
square feet per sign face.
B. One Real Estate sign up to six square feet.
9.12.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.12.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES). Fencing standards in Section
9.11.13 shall apply to this zone.
9.12.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. All development in the R-3 zone shall comply with the minimum standards set
out in Chapter 9.19, Residential District Specific Standards.
B. Development in the R-3 zone shall also comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.
C. Development in the R-3 zone shall include a minimum 10 percent landscaped
open space.
E. All projects shall require a Site Plan Review, pursuant to Chapter 9.75.02.
F. No poultry or fowl of any type is allowed in the R-3 zone (chicken, rooster,
duck, pheasant, etc.).
G. The number of dogs per household shall be limited to three with the exception
of newborns. Any number of puppies shall be allowed until they reach the age
of six (6) months.

9.15-1
Chapter 9.15
MOBILEHOME PARK DISTRICT (MHP)
Sections:
9.15.01 PURPOSE
9.15.02 USES PERMITTED
9.15.03 USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.15.04 USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED
9.15.05 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.15.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
9.15.07 SITE PLAN REVIEW
9.15.01 PURPOSE. The MHP district is intended to provide for accommodation of
residential mobilehomes in unified parks.
9.15.02 USES PERMITTED.
A. Carnivals;
B. Signs;
C. Telephone booths;
D. The keeping of household pets subject to the provisions of Section 9.10.14;
E. Trailer parks, to include accessory buildings and swimming pools.
9.15.03 USES PERMITTED SUBJECT TO CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
A. Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a conditional use;
B. Electrical distribution substation;
C. Mobilehome parks allowing overnight or short-term transient occupancy;
D. Water pump station.
9.15.04 USES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
A. Advertising structures;
B. Commercial uses;
C. Industrial uses;
D. Multiple-family residences;
E. Truck parking.
9.15.05 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
Reference Section 9.19.01(I).
9.15.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND EXCEPTIONS. All uses shall be subject to the
“General Provisions and Exceptions,” prescribed in Chapters 9.70 through 9.79.
9.15.07 SITE PLAN REVIEW. Before any residential mobilehome park may be approved
and before any buildings for mobilehome park purposes are erected, the applicant
shall submit a site plan review to the Community Development Director for
9.15-2
approval.

Chapter 9.16
Reasonable Accommodation
Sections:
9.16.01 PURPOSE
9.16.02 APPLICATION
9.16.03 REQUIRED INFORMATION
9.16.04 NOTICE OF REQUEST FOR ACCOMODATION
9.16.05 PROCEDURE
9.16.06 GROUNDS FOR ACCOMODATION
9.16.07 DIRECTOR’S HEARING
9.16.08 NOTICE OF DIRECTOR’S DECISION FOLLOWING A HEARING
9.16.09 EXPIRATION OF GRANTS OF REASONABLE ACCOMODATION
9.16.10 APPEAL
9.16.11 FEE
9.16.01 Purpose. It is the policy of the City of Avenal to comply with the
Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California
Fair Employment and Housing Act to provide reasonable
accommodation in the application of its zoning or building laws,
policies or procedures for persons with disabilities seeking fair
access to housing. The purpose of this chapter is to establish the
process for making a request for reasonable accommodation. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "disabled" or "disability" shall have
the same meaning as that term is defined in the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act.
9.16.02 Application. (a) Any person who requests reasonable
accommodation, because of a disability, in the application of a zoning
or building law, policy or procedure, which may act as a barrier to fair
housing opportunities, may do so by filing a completed application
with the director of community development ("director"). The director
shall promulgate application forms for this purpose.
(b) If the project for which the request is being made also requires
some other approval, permit or entitlement, the applicant shall file the
request together with the application for such approval, permit or
entitlement.
9.16.03 Required information. The applicant shall provide the following
information:
9.16-1
(a) Applicant's name, address, and telephone number;
(b) Address of the property for which the request is being made;
(c) The current actual use of the property;
(d) A description of the accommodation requested including
reference to the Zoning Ordinance, policy or procedure from which
modification is being requested;
(e) The basis for the claim that the applicant is considered disabled
under the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 or the
California Fair Employment Housing Act; and
(f) A detailed explanation of why the accommodation is reasonable
and why the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant an
equal opportunity to use and enjoy a specific dwelling in the city.
9.16.04 Notice of request for accommodation. Written notice of a request for
reasonable accommodation shall be given as follows:
(a) In the event that there is no approval sought other than the
request for reasonable accommodation, the notice shall be mailed to
the owners of record of all properties which are immediately adjacent
to the property which is the subject of the request.
(b) In the event that the request is being made in conjunction with
some other approval, permit or entitlement, the notice shall be
transmitted along with the notice of the other proceeding.
9.16.05 Procedure. (a) The director shall review each application for
reasonable accommodation and, within five days of receipt thereof,
determine whether the application is complete. If the application is
determined to be incomplete, the director shall promptly give the
applicant written notice of the additional information necessary to
complete the application.
(b) Within 30 days of receipt of an application that has been
determined to be complete, the director shall complete a review of
the application and, pursuant to the standards provided in section 9.
16.06, either approve, approve subject to conditions or deny the
request. However, in the event that the applicant also seeks an
approval, permit or other entitlement that is reviewed by the Planning
Commission, then the Planning Commission shall review the
application for reasonable accommodation.
9.16-2
(c) The director shall give the applicant written notice of the director's
decision. Notice of the director's decision shall also be given in the
same manner as provided in section 9.75.02.A.3.
(d) Within ten days of the date the notice is mailed, any person may
make a request for a director's hearing of the decision.
(e) If no request for hearing is received, the decision shall become
final.
9.16.06 Grounds for accommodation. In making a determination about the
reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the following factors
shall be considered:
(a) Whether the accommodation is reasonable considering the
nature of the applicant's disability, the surrounding land uses, and the
rule, standard, policy, or practice from which relief is sought;
(b) Whether the accommodation is necessary to afford the applicant
equal opportunity to enjoy and use a specific dwelling in the city;
(c) Whether the accommodation will have only incidental economic
or monetary benefits to the applicant, and whether the primary
purpose of the accommodation is to assist with real estate
speculation or excess profit making;
(d) Whether the accommodation will create a substantial adverse
impact on surrounding land uses, or a public nuisance, that cannot
be reasonably mitigated;
(e) Whether the accommodation is reasonably feasible considering
the physical attributes of the property and structures;
(f) Whether there are alternative accommodations which may
provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant, while
minimizing adverse impacts on surrounding land uses and lessening
the financial and/or administrative burden on the city;
(g) Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue
financial or administrative burden on the city; and
(h) Whether the requested accommodation would constitute a
fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies or
procedures of the city.
9.16-3
9.16.07 Director's hearing. Within 30 days of receipt of a request, the director
shall conduct an informal hearing on the request for reasonable
accommodation at which all reasonable evidence and credible
testimony shall be considered.
9.16.08 Notice of director's decision following a hearing. (a) Within five days
after the hearing, the director shall issue a written decision approving,
including any reasonable conditions, or denying the application.
(b) The notice of director's decision shall contain the director'sfactual
findings, conclusions, and reasons for the decision.
(c) Notice of the director's decision shall be given in the same
manner as provided in section 9.75.02.A.3.
9.16.09 Expiration of grants of reasonable accommodation. Any modification
granted for an individual with a disability shall be a personal
accommodation for the individual applicant and shall not run with the
land, unless the director determines that it would be impractical to
require the property to be returned to its previous condition once the
disabled person no longer occupies the property. Prior to the
issuance of a building permit or any other applicable permit for such
modification, the permittee shall execute a notarized statement that
permits the city to inspect the affected property at least annually to
verify compliance with this chapter and with any applicable conditions
of approval. Prior to any transfer of interest in the property, the
permittee shall notify the transferee of the existence of the
accommodation, the personal status of the accommodation and the
requirements that the tranferee must apply for a new accommodation
as necessary. Except as otherwise provided by the director, as set
forth herein, once such transfer takes effect the accommodation shall
have no further validity.
9.16.10 Appeal. The decision of the director or the planning and
transportation commission shall be subject to appeal pursuant to the
procedures set forth in chapter 9.75.02.B of the Ordinance.
9.16.11 Fee. There shall be no fee for an application under this chapter.
9.16-4

9.19-1
Chapter 9.19
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Sections:
9.19.01 LAND USE DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS
9.19.01 LAND USE DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS. In addition to the general and
specific design guidelines contained in each applicable Base Zone, the following
standards shall apply to specific residential districts:
A. Accessory Structures
Accessory structures in residential land use districts shall be subject to the
permit procedure described in 9.75.02, are subject to Ministerial Review, and
shall be compatible with the materials and architecture of the main dwelling on
the property. Accessory structures may only be constructed on a lot containing
a primary dwelling unit. Accessory structures may be built to the interior side
and rear property lines provided that such structures are not closer than ten (10)
feet to any other structure. Zoning Ordinance requirements may further restrict
the distance to be maintained from property lines or other structures. The
accessory structure may be a maximum of 20% of the main structure footprint
and comply with the requirements set forth in Table 9-4.
B. Livestock
Livestock shall be considered those typically associated with farms or
agricultural land uses such as cattle, sheep, goats, horses or hogs. Livestock are
allowed in zones identified in Table 9-3. In zones where Livestock are
permitted, all of the following development standards and conditions apply:
1. Breeding, raising and keeping of birds, rabbits, chinchillas, or fish for
domestic use of the resident on the lot is permitted, however, there shall be
no killing of animals or dressing of such animals for any purpose except
within the R-E zone.
2. Keeping of cattle, sheep, goats, horses or hogs owned by the resident of the
lot is permitted in the R-E Zone provided that any combination of such
animals be limited to one animal per 1/2 acre. No killing or dressing of such
animals shall be conducted on the lot.
3. In the R-E Zone, pens, coops, stables and other structures housing livestock
or poultry shall be at least:
9.19-2
a) 100 feet from the front property line and 25 feet from side and rear
property lines.
b) Corrals and other enclosures shall be no less than 30 feet from dwelling
units within the same zoning district or less restrictive agricultural
districts, but no less than 100 feet from division lines separating the R-E
District from more restrictive zoning districts. Pastures may be located
within the front yard setback for those lots with substantial front yard
setbacks.
4. All fencing shall comply with the applicable Design District. Fencing
within the front yard setback parallel to the street shall be of an aesthetic
variety, type, material and color such as split rail fencing as approved by the
Community Development Director.
5. All development which involves housing or enclosing livestock shall be
reviewed by the Community Development Director for compliance with this
Section and any other applicable statutes, laws and ordinances.
6. Applicant shall allow inspection of animal maintenance facilities by the City
of Avenal Building Inspector, Animal Control, and by the Kings County
Department of Public Health.
7. Any permit issued pursuant to this Section may be revoked or modified
pursuant to section 9.75 (Permit Procedures) of this Ordinance upon receipt
of a recommendation for revocation or modification from the Kings County
Department of Public Health, Avenal Animal Control Officer or from the
City of Avenal Building Inspector.
C. Day Care Standards
An operating license, if required, shall be obtained through the Kings County
Human Services Department prior to or concurrently with obtaining a permit
pursuant to this Chapter. The applicant shall comply with all State, County, and
City regulations which are administered by the Human Services Department or
any other agency designated by the State Department of Social Services. Day
care homes for both children and/or adults shall comply with the following
provisions:
1. The activity shall conform to all property development standards of the land
use district in which it is located. Day Care Centers shall be located in a
single family dwelling, detached from any other dwelling structure.
2. Day Care centers may be located no closer than 500 feet, in any direction,
from an existing Day Care Center, measured from property line to property
line except that they may be located no closer than 250 feet measured from
9.19-3
property line to property line from any existing Day Care Center not
fronting on the same street.
3. Day Care Centers shall have a maximum capacity of 14 individuals
receiving care unless otherwise specified herein.
4. The maximum number of children (including licensee's own children) under
the age of 12 for whom care shall be provided when there is no assistant
provider in the home shall be consistent with the State Health and Safety
Code.
5. The capacity specified on the license shall be the maximum number of
children for who care can be provided.
6. An outdoor play area of no less than 75 square feet per child, but in no case
less than 450 square feet in area shall be provided. The outdoor play area
shall be located in the rear area. Stationary play equipment shall not be
located in required side and front yards.
7. All fences shall meet the requirements of the Base Zone District. Materials,
colors, textures and design of the fence or wall shall be compatible with onsite
development and adjacent properties. All fences or walls shall provide
for safety with controlled points of entry.
8. On-site landscaping shall be consistent with that prevailing in the
neighborhood and shall be installed and maintained, pursuant to Chapter
9.63. Landscaping shall be provided to reduce noise impacts on surrounding
properties.
9. All on-site parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 9.60, (Off-street
Parking) sufficient off-street loading space shall be provided in addition to
the required off-street parking to serve the dwelling. The required loading
space may be located within the required front yard setback; however, it
cannot impede access to the off-street parking required to serve the
dwelling.
10. All on-site lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way, and of an appropriate intensity to the
use it is serving.
11. All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.61 (Sign
Standards).
12. All Day Care Centers shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector
devices and meet all standards established by the Kings County Fire
Marshall.
9.19-4
13. A Day Care Center within a residential land use district may operate up to
14 hours per day.
14. Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
15. All Day Care Centers shall file a City application pursuant to Chapter 9.75.
16. Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked, modified or
appealed pursuant to Chapter 9.75.
17. Day Care Centers shall be subject to a CUP in accordance with Chapter 9
.70.
D. Density Bonus
The purpose of the Density Bonus provision is to implement General Plan
policies and State law requirements for density bonuses in specified residential
projects. Density Bonuses of up to twenty (20) percent shall be granted for
specified residential projects of five (5) or more units in which at least twenty (
20) percent of the units are affordable to persons and families of low income or
moderate income or in which ten (10) percent of the units are affordable to
lower income households.
1. Affordable Housing:
State Government Code Section 65915 provides for the granting of a
Density Bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value when a
developer of housing agrees to construct at least one of the following:
a) Ten percent of the total units of a housing development for persons and
families of lower income, as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health
and Safety Code.
b) Five percent of the total units of a housing development for very lowincome
households, as defined in Section 50105 of the Health and
Safety Code.
c) Any number of dwelling units of a housing development for qualifying
senior citizen housing, as defined in Section 51.2 of the Civil Code.
d) Ten percent of the total units in a condominium development for
moderate-income households, as defined in Section 50093 of the Health
and Safety Code.
9.19-5
e) The density bonus will increase incrementally as follows:
1) for each one percent increase above 10 percent minimum for lower
income households, the density bonus shall increase by 1.5 percent
to a maximum of 35 percent;
2) for each one percent increase above five percent minimum for very
low income households, the density bonus shall increase by 2.5
percent to a maximum of 35 percent; and
3) for each one percent increase above 10 percent minimum for
moderate-income households, the density bonus shall increase by
one percent to a maximum of 35 percent.
2. Interpretation:
A request for a Density Bonus and regulatory concessions and/or incentives
pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 shall be ministerial, and
subject to the following interpretations:
a) For the purpose of this Section, "Density Bonus" shall mean a density
increase of 20% over the otherwise maximum allowable residential
density under this Ordinance. When determining the number of housing
units which are to be affordable, the Density Bonus shall not be
included.
b) The procedures for implementing this section are as follows:
1) The City shall within 30 days of receipt of a written proposal, notify
the developer in writing of the procedures governing these
provisions.
2) The Community Development Director may grant the Density Bonus
and regulatory concessions (and/or incentives), which must result in
identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions, only if
all of the following findings are made based on substantial evidence:
a. The developer has proven that the Density Bonus and adjustment
of standards is necessary to make the project economically
feasible;
b. That additional adjustment of standards are not required in order
for the rents for the targeted units to be set, pursuant to
Government Code Section 65915;
9.19-6
c. The proposed project is compatible with the purpose and intent
of the General Plan and this Ordinance;
d. The Density Bonus shall only apply to housing developments
(subdivision, planned unit development or a condominium
project) consisting of 5 or more dwelling units;
e. The Density Bonus or combination of bonuses may not exceed
20%.
f. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any dwelling unit in
a development for which "Density Bonus Units" have been
granted or preliminary incentives received, the developer shall
submit documentation to the Community Development Director
which identifies the restricted units. A written affordability
covenant shall be executed with the City to guarantee for 30
years the units continued use and availability to low and
moderate income households. The agreement shall extend more
than 30 years if required by another financing program. The
terms and conditions of the agreement shall run with the land
which is to be developed, shall be binding upon the successor in
interest of the developer, and shall be recorded in the Office of
the Kings County recorder.
g. The Density Bonus Units are generally dispersed throughout a
development project and shall not differ in appearance from
other units in the development if combined with fair market
value.
3) Agreement:
The agreement shall include the following provisions:
a. The developer shall give the City the continuing right of first
refusal to purchase or lease any or all of the designated units at
fair market value;
b. The deeds to the designated units shall contain a covenant stating
that the developer of his/her successor in interest shall not sell,
rent, lease, sublet, assign, or otherwise transfer any interests for
same without the written approval of the City confirming that the
sales price of the unit is consistent with the limits established for
low- and moderate income households, which shall be related to
the Consumer Price Index;
9.19-7
c. The City shall have the authority to enter into other agreements
with the developer or purchasers of the dwelling units, as may be
necessary to assure that the required dwelling units are
continuously occupied by eligible households.
4) Review and approval:
No development may occur pursuant to this Chapter until an
application for a Density Bonus permit has been submitted and
approved as provided in this Section:
a. Application Contents:
An application for a Density Bonus permit review shall include
the following:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s)
3. Assessor's parcel number(s)
4. Legal description
5. A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the
Community Development Director, which includes the
following information:
a) Topography of the lot(s)
b) Proposed street system and parking area
c) Lot design
d) Location of buildings
e) Location of other proposed uses
f) Proposed setbacks
g) Areas to be reserved for parks, schools, or other public or
quasi-public facilities
h) Proposed landscaping
i) Water supply and distribution
j) Sewage disposal system
k) Drainage system
l) North arrow
6. A narrative description of the proposed development,
including the following:
a) Total number of dwelling units and number of dwelling
units per acre.
b) Number of dwelling units to be made available to persons
of low and moderate income or to lower income
households, if applicable.
9.19-8
c) Methods of maintaining the affordability of the units
described in two (2) above, if applicable.
d) Building coverage expressed as a percent of the total area
of the property.
e) Area of land devoted to landscaping or open space usable
for recreation purposes and its percentage of the total land
area.
f) Method of sewage disposal.
g) Water supply, both domestic and fire.
h) Proposed on-site drainage facilities.
i) Methods of flood control, where appropriate.
j) Phasing or development schedule.
b. Review and Approval:
Where a discretionary permit or rezoning is required for the
residential project, the Density Bonus permit application shall be
reviewed and approved in conjunction with that discretionary
permit or rezoning approval project. Where no discretionary
permit or rezoning is required for the residential project, the
Density Bonus permit application shall be reviewed and
approved in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 9
.75.02.
c. Preliminary Review:
Prior to submitting a formal application for a Density Bonus
permit pursuant to this Article, an applicant shall submit to the
Community Development Director a preliminary proposal in
writing for the residential project or condominium project. The
Community Development Director shall, within ninety (90) days
of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant in writing of
the procedures the applicant must follow to secure a Density
Bonus provided for in this Chapter.
E. Front/Rear Yard Averaging Standards
See Chapter 9.52, Cluster Combining District and Chapter 9.74, Nonconforming
Structures, Uses, Lots and Sings.
F. Guest House, Granny Flat, (Secondary Dwelling Units)
9.19-9
Guest Houses, and Granny Flats (Secondary Dwelling Units) are to be treated as
Accessory, are subject to Ministerial Permit review and shall be constructed in
the following manner:
1. All Secondary Dwelling Units shall conform to all developmental standards
of the underlying land use district;
2. There shall be no more than one Secondary Dwelling Unit on any lot;
3. The floor area of the Secondary Dwelling Unit shall not exceed 1,200 square
feet or 30% of the primary dwelling unit;
4. The Secondary Dwelling Unit shall not exceed one story in height, or the
height of the main dwelling;
5. The Secondary Dwelling Unit shall conform to all of the setback regulations
outlined in the applicable land use district;
6. A Secondary Dwelling Unit shall be used only by the occupants of the main
dwelling, their non-paying guests, or domestic employees. The Secondary
Dwelling shall not be rented, or as may be permitted by Section 65583, et.
seq. of the Government Code.
7. The City may require that the Secondary Dwelling Unit be metered
separately from the main dwelling unit for gas, electricity and water/sewer
services with the approval of the City Engineer and Building Services;
8 Prior to issuance of a Building Permit for the Secondary Dwelling Unit, a
covenant of restriction to run with the land, shall be recorded which
specifies that the use of the second dwelling unit as an independent dwelling
may continue only as long as one unit on the property is owner-occupied.
9. The Secondary Dwelling Unit is compatible with the design of the main
dwelling unit and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of landscaping,
scale, height, length, width, bulk, lot coverage and exterior treatment, and
will not cause excessive noise, traffic or other disturbances to the existing
neighborhood or result in significantly adverse impacts on public services
and resources;
10. The Secondary Dwelling Unit shall not cause a high concentration of such
units sufficient to change the character of the surrounding residential
neighborhood.
11. One on-site parking space shall be provided for a Secondary Dwelling Unit
in addition to the primary dwelling units parking requirement.
9.19-10
G. Home Occupation Standards
These provisions allow for the conduct of Home Occupations which are
incidental to and compatible with surrounding residential land uses. A Home
Occupation represents a legal income-producing activity by the occupant of the
dwelling. In general, a Home Occupation is a residential accessory use so
located and conducted that the average neighbor, under normal circumstances,
would be unaware of its existence. The standards and provisions for Home
Occupations are intended to ensure compatibility with other permitted uses and
with the residential character of the neighborhood.
1. Permitted Home Occupations. Home Occupations may include, but are not
limited to the following:
Activity Includes
a On-site professional service and
consultation - by appointment only
Minister, rabbi, priest, architect,
broker, consultant, engineer,
insurance agent, land surveyor,
bookkeeper, accountant, typist,
private investigator or similar use as
determined by the Community
Development Director.
b Off-site personal services requiring
home office
Gardening and landscaping service,
locksmith, and other uses where
storage in vehicle is required, or
similar use as determined by the
Community Development Director.
c Sales - no door-to-door sales,
delivery to customers only
Sales representative (including
jewelry, cosmetics, products of
domestic consumption),
manufacturing representative,
catalog and telephone sales only or
similar use as determined by the
Community Development Director.
d Artisan Studio Artist, sculptor, photography studio,
author, composer, weaver, crafts,
model making, rug and blanket
weaving, lapidary or similar use as
determined by the Community
Development Director.
e Group Instructional (income
producing activities)
Day Care, educational craft and
music instruction, tutor (limited to 6
9.19-11
or fewer students and one vehicle at
a time and/or 1 session per week) or
similar use as determined by the
Community Development Director.
No Home Occupation Permit shall be required for an in-home educational
activity, including but not limited to music lessons, academic tutoring, or
religious instruction, provided that no more than six students are present at any
one time, and the use complies with all of the operating standards outlined
below. In addition, no Home Occupation Permit shall be required for a business
using the owners or any partners home solely as its business mailing address.
2. Operating Standards. Home Occupations shall comply with all of the
following operating standards:
a) The Home Occupation shall not alter the appearance of the dwelling
unit;
b) There shall be no displays, sale or delivery of merchandise or
advertising signs on the premises;
c) There shall be no signs other than the address and name of the resident;
d) There shall be no advertising which identifies the Home Occupation by
street name;
e) The Home Occupation shall be confined completely to one room located
within the dwelling. It shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the
gross area of one floor of the residence. No portion of any garage,
carport or other accessory structure shall be used for Home Occupation
purposes, other than for storage which does not impair required parking
in the garage.
f) Only 1 vehicle no larger than a 3/4-ton truck may be used by the
occupant directly or indirectly in connection with a Home Occupation;
g) No external alterations or construction features can be made to
accommodate a Home Occupation nor can any change be made which
would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which
the structure is located;
h) There shall be no use or storage of material or mechanical equipment,
either indoor or outdoor, not recognized as being part of a normal
household or hobby use;
9.19-12
i) Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change
the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises. Utility
consumption shall not exceed normal residential usage;
j) No use shall create or cause noise, dust, light, vibration, odor, gas,
fumes, toxic/hazardous materials, smoke, glare, or electrical interference
or other hazards or nuisances;
k) Only the occupants of the dwelling may be engaged in the Home
Occupation;
l) The Home Occupation shall not require the services of commercial
carrier freight deliveries at the site in a frequency greater than what is
normally found in a residential area;
m) The Home Occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic
in excess of that customarily associated with the land use district in
which it is located;
n) No business license shall be issued until a home occupation permit is
obtained, pursuant to the Municipal Code;
o) A Home Occupation Permit shall not be transferable;
p) There shall be no more than one (1) Home Occupation in any dwelling
unit;
q) If the Home Occupation is to be conducted on rental property, the
property owner's written authorization for the proposed use shall be
obtained prior to the submittal of a Home Occupation Permit;
r) Any special condition established by the Community Development
Director and made a part of the record of the Home Occupation Permit,
as deemed necessary to carry out the intent of this Section.
3. Prohibited Home Occupation Uses.
The following list presents example uses that are not incidental to, nor
compatible with residential activities, and are prohibited:
a) Antique shop
b) Auto Repair
c) Barber and beauty shop
9.19-13
d) Businesses which engage in the training, breeding, raising, or grooming
of dogs, cats, or other animals on the premises
e) Cabinetry
f) Carpentry
g) Funeral chapel or funeral home
h) Kennel
i) Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories
j) Mini storage
k) Repair, fix-it or plumbing shops
l) Storage of equipment, materials, and other accessories to the
construction and service trades
m) Vehicle repair (body or mechanical), upholstery and painting
n) Welding and machining
o) Any other use determined by the Community Development Director to
not be incidental nor compatible with residential activities.
4. Application. The conduct of a Home Occupation requires the approval of
the Community Development Director who may establish conditions to
further the intent of this Section. An application for a Home Occupation
Permit shall be a form prescribed by the Community Development Director
and shall be filed with the Department pursuant to Chapter 9.75. All
permitted Home Occupations shall fall under one of the five listed
categories in Section 3, or be a prohibited use pursuant to Section 3. No
Home Occupation shall be established until an application for a Home
Occupation Permit has been submitted to and approved by the Community
Development Director as being consistent with the requirements of this
Chapter in accordance with the procedures set out in Section 9.75.02 of this
Ordinance.
5. Revocation:
9.19-14
A Home Occupation Permit (Permit) may be revoked or modified by the
Community Development Director if any 1 of the following findings can be
made:
a) That the use has become detrimental to the public health, safety or traffic
or constitutes a nuisance.
b) That the Permit was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud.
c) That the use for which the Permit was granted has ceased or was
suspended for 6 or more consecutive calendar months.
d) That the condition of the premises, or the area of which it is a part, has
changed so that the use is no longer justified under the meaning and
intent of this Section.
e) That one (1) or more of the conditions of the Home Occupation Permit
have not been met; and
f) That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation.
H. Mobile Home and Manufactured Housing on Individual Lots
Manufactured Homes are subject to Ministerial Permit review and shall be
installed in the following manner:
1. Manufactured Homes may be used as single family dwellings if the home is
no more than 25 years old and is certified under the National Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974;
2. Manufactured Homes which are used as single family residences shall be
installed on an approved permanent foundation system in compliance with
applicable codes in all residential zones;
3. The Community Development Director shall determine that the subject lot
together with the proposed mobile or manufactured home is compatible with
surrounding development. This determination shall include an assessment
of on-site design and development standards and materials, architectural
aesthetics, setbacks, building height, accessory buildings, access, off-street
parking, and any other criteria determined appropriate by the Community
Development Director. If individual Codes, Covenants and Restrictions
governing development within a subdivision are applicable, and more
restrictive than those imposed by this Ordinance, the codes, covenants and
restrictions shall prevail;
9.19-15
4. The following design standards shall govern the installation and
construction of Manufactured and Mobile Homes:
a) All homes shall have a minimum eave dimension of 12 inches;
b) All roofing and siding shall be of similar materials on dwelling
structures on adjacent properties excepting that siding and roofing shall
be non-reflective and shall be installed from the ground up to the roof;
c) All roofs shall have a minimum pitch that meets State Specifications;
d) All homes shall have a minimum width (across the narrowest portion) of
20 feet.
e) A 2-car garage, a minimum 20’ x 20’ shall be provided.
I. Mobilehome Park Development Standards
Mobilehome Parks are subject to a conditional use permit and shall be
constructed in the following manner:
1. Individual mobilehome space minimum setbacks shall be measured from the
edge of internal private streets and space lines;
2. Maximum mobilehome space coverage (mobilehome and its accessory
structure) shall be 60%;
3. Each mobilehome shall be equipped with skirting or provided with a support
pad which is recessed to give the appearance of the mobilehome being
located on grade;
4. All on-site utilities shall be installed underground in accordance with the
City of Avenal Improvement Standards;
5. The Mobilehome Park shall be provided with parking as required by
Chapter 9.60 (Off-Street Parking Standards);
6. A common recreation area which may contain a recreation building shall be
provided in the park for use by all tenants, owners and their invited guests.
The area shall be provided in 1 common location with a minimum aggregate
area of 400 square feet of recreational space per mobile home space or lot;
7. All exterior boundaries of the mobilehome park shall appear similar to
conventional residential developments and shall be screened by a decorative
wall, fence or other comparable device 6 feet in height and include
landscaping pursuant to this Chapter;
9.19-16
8. Common open space shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape
plan approved by the review authority consistent with Chapter 9.63;
9. All Mobilehome Park or subdivision developments shall provide open space
recreational amenities within the site which may include: a swimming pool;
spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter - BBQ area; court
game facilities such as tennis, basketball or racquetball; improved baseball
or softball fields; or, day care facilities. The types of amenities shall be
approved by the Community Development Director and provided according
to the following schedule:
Dwelling Units Amenities
0-9 0
10-50 1
51-100 2
101-200 3
201-300 4
Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units or fraction thereof.
10. Landscaped setback easements shall be provided along the periphery of the
mobilehome development and shall be 10 feet in width for all sides adjacent
to public right-of-way. The interior edge of this landscape easement (and
not the edge adjacent to the public right-of-way) shall be used for setback
purposes.
11. Mobile homes shall have individual space setbacks as follows:
Front: 15'
Side: 8'
Street Side: 10'
Rear: 10'
Rear Yard Through Lot: 10'
12. Mobilehomes shall be limited in height to one-story or 15 feet, whichever is
less.
13. Minimum distance between mobile homes and mobile home accessory
structures shall be ten feet.
14. All fences and walls shall be no taller than three feet within the required
front yard space setback and no taller than six feet within the required side
and rear yard space setbacks. All fences and walls shall be constructed of
the following: wood (no plywood or particleboard), stone, brick or wrought
iron.
9.19-17
15. Mobilehomes 15 years or older shall not be relocated unless it can be
demonstrated to the Community Development Director that said
mobilehome meets all safety and energy requirements, and development
standards in this section.
J. Multi-Family Development Standards
Multi-Family Development shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Multi-Family Developments shall provide 10% useable open space for
passive and active recreational uses. Useable open space areas shall not
include: rights-of-ways; vehicle parking or maneuvering areas; areas
adjacent to or between any structures less than 15 feet apart; setbacks; patio
or private yards;
2. Each dwelling shall have a private (walled) patio or balcony not less than 50
square feet in area or 10% of the dwelling unit (whichever is less), and said
patio or balcony shall not be used for storage;
3. All Multi-Family Developments shall provide recreational amenities within
the site which may include: a swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with
play equipment; picnic shelter - BBQ area; court game facilities such as
tennis, basketball or racquetball; improved softball or baseball fields; or day
care facilities. The type and number of amenities shall be approved by the
Community Development Director and provided in accordance with the
following schedule:
Dwelling Units Amenities
0-11 1
12-50 2
51-100 3
4. Off-street parking spaces for Multi-Family Developments shall be located
within 150 feet from the dwelling unit (front or rear door) for which the
parking space is provided;
5. Driveway approaches within Multi-Family Developments of 12 or more
units shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough textured concrete,
or stamped concrete and landscaped medians;
6. If laundry hookups are not provided in each dwelling unit, common laundry
facilities of sufficient number and accessibility consistent with the number
of living units and the Uniform Building Code shall be provided at a rate of
at least one washer and one dryer for each five dwelling units;
9.19-18
7. Management and security plans shall be submitted for review and approval
for multi-family developments with 15 or more dwelling units. These plans
shall be comprehensive in scope.
8. Multi-Family Site Planning
a) Building Articulation
Long, unbroken facades and box like forms shall be avoided. Building
facades shall be broken up to give the appearance of a collection of
smaller structures. To the extent possible, each of the units shall be
individually recognizable. This can be accomplished with use of
balconies, setbacks and projections which help articulate individual
dwelling units or collections of units, and by the pattern and rhythm of
windows and doors. Wall planes shall be offset no less frequently than
every 32' and rooflines shall be articulated with varying heights.
b) Clustering of Units
Clustering of multi-family units shall be a consistent site planning
element. Structures composed of a series of simple yet varied planes
assure compatibility and variety in overall building form.
The following design techniques shall be considered and implemented
whenever possible:
1) Varying front setbacks within same structure
2) Staggered and jogged unit planes
3) Use of reverse building plans to add variety
4) Maximum of 2 adjacent units with identical wall and rooflines
c) Project Entries
Project entries shall provide direct visibility to the project with
landscaping, recreational facilities and project directories. Special
attention is to be given to the hardscape and landscape treatments to
enhance the overall project image at project entries.
d) Entry Drives
The principal vehicular access into a multi-family housing project shall
be through an entry drive rather than a parking drive.
e) On-Site Parking and Drives
9.19-19
1) Projects with parking drives longer than 250 feet, or contiguous
parking lots in excess of 50 cars are not permitted.
2) Parking areas shall be visible from the residential units which use
them.
f) Parking Courts
1) A parking court of any length shall not consist of more than 2 double
loaded parking aisles (bays) adjacent to each other;
2) The maximum length of a parking court shall not exceed 10 stalls;
3) The parking courts shall be separated from each other by dwelling
units or by a landscaped bulb not less than 80 square feet in area.
Architectural elements such as trellises, porches or stairwells may
extend into these landscaped bulbs.
g) Garages
1) Individual parking garages within residential structures shall be
enclosed behind garage doors;
2) Garages with parking aprons less than 20 feet in length or width
shall have automatic garage door openers and/or sectional roll-up
doors.
h) Carports
Where carports are utilized, they shall follow the same criteria for spatial
arrangement as parking courts (#f above). Carports may be incorporated
with patio walls or used to define public and private open space, but
incorporating carports into exterior project walls adjacent to streets shall
be prohibited. The ends of each cluster of carports shall be landscaped.
i) Pedestrian Access from Parking
Landscape bulbs shall align with major building entrances to provide
pedestrian access to the building entrance from a parking court or drive.
Bulbs that align with entrances shall include a pathway as well as a
vertical landscape or architectural element, for example a trellis or a tree.
j) Open Space
9.19-20
Residents of housing projects shall have safe and efficient access to
useable open space, whether public or private, for recreation and social
activities. The design and orientation of these areas shall take advantage
of available sunlight and shall be sheltered from the noise and traffic of
adjacent streets or other incompatible uses.
Required common open spaces shall be conveniently located for the
majority of units. Private open spaces shall be contiguous to the units
they serve and screened from public view. Projects shall have secure
open spaces and children's play areas that are visible from the units.
k) Planted Areas
All areas not covered by structures, drives, parking or hardscape shall be
appropriately landscaped. Such planted area shall include trees at a rate
of one 15-gallon tree per 500 square feet of planted area, or such greater
amount in order to achieve 50 percent shading in 10 years.
l) Refuse Storage/Disposal
Trash bins shall be fully enclosed in accordance with the City of Avenal
Improvement Standards. Said enclosures shall be landscaped on their
most visible sides. Locations shall be conveniently accessible for righthand-
side trash collection and maintenance and shall not block access
drives during loading operations.
m) Support Facilities
Any support structures within multi-family residential projects such as
laundry facilities, recreation buildings and sales/lease offices shall be
consistent in architectural design and form with the rest of the complex.
Temporary sales offices shall also be compatible with these guidelines.
n) Mailboxes
Where common mailbox services are provided, they shall be located
close to the project entry, or near recreational facilities. The
architectural character shall be in similar form, materials and colors to
the surrounding buildings. Mailbox locations must be approved by the
U. S. Postal Service.
9.19-21
o) Security
Multi-family projects shall be designed to provide a maximum amount
of security for residents and visitors. Parking areas shall be well lit and
located so as to be visible from residential units. Landscaping shall be
planned and maintained to provide views into open space areas.
9. Multi-Family Architecture
The design of multi-family developments shall comply with the
requirements of the underlying zone district and the following:
a) Facade and Roof Articulation
Structures containing 3 or more attached dwellings in a row shall
incorporate at least one of the following:
1) For each dwelling unit, at least 1 architectural projection not less
than 2 feet from the wall plane and not less than 4 feet wide shall be
provided. Such projections shall extend the full height of single
story structures, at least 1/2 the height of a 2 story building, and 2/3
the height of a 3 story building;
2) A change in wall plane of at least 2 feet in depth for at least 12 feet
in length for each 2 units shall be provided.
b) Materials
Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in materials shall be
avoided.
c) Balconies, Porches and Patios
Balconies, porches and patios shall be required. These elements shall be
integrated to break up large wall masses, and to offset floor setbacks.
d) Dwelling Unit Access
The use of long, monotonous access balconies and corridors which
provide access to 5 or more units shall be avoided. Instead, access
points to units shall be clustered in groups of 4 or less. To the extent
possible, the entrances to individual units shall be plainly visible from
nearby parking areas. The use of distinctive architectural elements and
materials to denote prominent entrances shall be used.
9.19-22
e) Exterior Stairs
Simple, clean, bold projections of stairways shall be used to compliment
the architectural massing and form of the multi-family structure.
Stairways shall be of smooth stucco, plaster or wood, with accent trim of
complimentary colors. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs are
prohibited.
f) Carports, Garages and Accessory Structures
Carports, detached garages, and accessory structures shall be designed as
an integral part of the architecture of projects. They shall be similar in
materials, color and detail to the principal structures of the development.
Carports may utilize flat roofs but shall not project above any exterior
walls adjacent to the streets, and shall be located in parking courts to the
rear of buildings.
Where garages are utilized, doors shall appear to be recessed into the
walls rather than flush with the exterior wall. Their design shall be
simple and unadorned.
g) Solar Panels
Solar panels, when used, shall be integrated into the roof design, flush
with the roof slope. Frames shall be colored to match the roof colors.
Natural aluminum finish is strongly discouraged. Any mechanical
equipment shall be enclosed and completely screened from view.
h) Mechanical and Utility Equipment
All mechanical equipment whether mounted on the roof or ground shall
be screened from view. Utility meters and equipment shall be placed in
locations where they are not exposed to view from the street or they
shall be suitably screened. All screening devices shall be compatible
with the architecture and color of the adjacent structures.
i) Antennas
All antennas shall be placed in attics or building interiors. All new units
shall be pre-wired to accept cable reception. Satellite dish antennas are
specifically prohibited on roofs and shall be considered early in the
design process in terms of location and any required screening.
9.19-23
10. Multi-Family In-fill in Single Family Neighborhoods
If multi-family projects are located in existing neighborhoods they shall be
compatible with adjacent structures and fit within the context of the existing
neighborhood. Minimum requirements include the following:
a) Front Yard Setbacks
Front Yard Setbacks for new multi-family projects are pursuant to the
requirements of the Base Zone District (shown in Table 9-4) and if
setback average is used, the setback shall be equal to or greater than the
average setbacks for the 2 adjacent properties.
b) Architectural Compatibility
New multi-family development in existing neighborhoods shall
incorporate architectural characteristics and maintain the scale of
existing structures on the property and surrounding development, by
incorporating window and door detailing, facade decoration, materials,
color, roof style and pitch, porches and other features that are
compatible.
K. Recreational Vehicle Storage Facilities
If recreational vehicle storage facilities are proposed or required by the
Community Development Director, they shall be reviewed through application
of a ministerial or discretionary permit and shall be constructed in the following
manner:
1. Centralized storage areas shall be provided for recreation vehicles, boats,
etc., at a minimum rate of 1 space for each 6 dwelling units. Any fractional
space requirement shall be constructed as requiring 1 full storage space
pursuant to Chapter 9.60 Off-Street Parking Standards.
2. Individual storage spaces shall measure not less than 12 feet by 30 feet, and
shall have direct access to a driveway with a minimum paved width of 25
feet.
3. Storage areas shall be paved and drained.
4. Storage areas shall be completely screened from exterior view by the
combination of landscaping, masonry walls, fences or other comparable
screening devices 6 feet in height, subject to the approval of the Community
Development Director.
9.19-24
L. Planned Unit Development/Small Lot Subdivisions
Residential uses are permitted in the Cluster Combining District, and small lot
divisions are permitted in residential land use zone districts subject to the
procedures in Section 9.75.03. Attached and detached single-family dwelling
units are permitted. The purpose of allowing these types of developments is to
promote residential amenities beyond those expected in conventional residential
developments, to achieve greater flexibility in design, to encourage well
planned neighborhoods through creative and imaginative planning as a unit, to
provide for appropriate uses of land which is sufficiently unique in its physical
characteristics or other circumstances to warrant special methods of
development through the encouragement of integrated planning and design. All
such projects shall conform with the following:
1. Density
The underlying residential use district and combining district shall
determine the maximum number of dwelling units allowed in a planned unit
development or small lot subdivision. Where a parcel or parcels having
more than one land use district, the maximum number of dwelling units
shall be determined by adding together the allowable density for each land
use district area.
2. Site Coverage
Structures shall not occupy more than 40% of the gross site area for singlefamily
detached units, and 60% for zero lot line and patio homes.
3. Height
Detached single-family structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories, or 35 feet.
Attached single-family structures shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet. If
more than 2 units are attached, the Multi-Family Development Standards
shall apply.
4. Setbacks
The minimum setback from the project perimeter shall be determined by
setbacks related to the Street Functional Classification or 25' whichever is
less. Setbacks between dwelling units in planned unit developments
(Cluster Developments) shall be determined by the Base Zoning District.
5. Open Space
All Cluster Developments with 12 or more dwelling units shall provide 30%
useable open space for passive and active recreational uses. Useable open
9.19-25
space areas shall not include: rights-of-ways; vehicle parking and
maneuvering areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than 15
feet apart; setbacks; patios and private yards.
6. Amenities
All Cluster Developments shall provide recreational amenities within the
site which may include a: swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play
equipment; picnic shelter-BBQ area; court game facilities such as tennis,
basketball or racquetball; improved baseball or softball fields; or, day care
facilities. The type of amenities shall be approved by the Community
Development Director and provided according to the following schedule:
Dwelling Units Amenities
0-11 1
12-50 2
51-100 3
101-200 4
201-300 5
Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units or fraction thereof.
7. Private streets shall not be allowed pursuant to the City of Avenal
Subdivision Ordinance.
8. Maintenance and Completion of Open Space, Amenities, Landscaping, and
Manufactured Slopes
No lot or dwelling unit in the development shall be sold unless a
corporation, home owner's association, assessment district or other approved
appropriate entity has been legally formed with the right to assess those
properties which are jointly owned or benefited to operate and maintain all
of the mutually available features of the development including, but not
limited to, open space, amenities, and landscaping. Conditions, Covenants
and Restrictions (CC&R's) may be developed and recorded for the
development subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney. The
recorded CC&R's shall not be under the jurisdiction of the City for
enforcement. No lot or dwelling unit shall be sold unless all approved and
required open space, amenities, landscaping, or other improvements, or
approved phase thereof, have been completed or completion is assured by a
financing guarantee method approved by the City Engineer.
9.19-26
M. Senior Citizen/Congregate Care/Group Quarter Housing Design Standards
Senior group housing developments designed to accommodate more than 6
persons are subject to Discretionary Permit review and shall be constructed in
the following manner:
1. A bus turnout and shelter on the on-site arterial or collector frontage shall be
dedicated if the project is located on a bus route as determined by the
Community Development Director;
2. The parcel upon which the senior group housing is to be established shall
conform to all standards of the underlying land use district;
3. The senior/group housing shall conform with all local, State and Federal
requirements;
4. The main pedestrian entrance to the development, common areas, and the
parking facility shall be provided with handicapped access pursuant to the
Uniform Building Code;
5. Indoor common areas and living units shall be handicap adaptable and be
provided with all necessary safety equipment (i.e. safety bars, etc.) as well
as emergency signal/intercom systems as determined by the Community
Development Director;
6. Adequate internal and external lighting including walkways shall be
provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient,
stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-ofway,
and of an intensity compatible with the surrounding neighborhood;
7. Common recreational and entertainment activities of a size and scale
consistent with the number of living units to be provided. The minimum
size shall equal 100 square feet for each living unit;
8. Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility consistent
with the number of living units and the uniform building code shall be
provided. The facilities shall have keyed access for tenants only;
9. The project shall be designed to provide maximum security for residents,
guests and employees;
10. Trash receptacles shall be provided for on the premises and be of sufficient
size and number as determined appropriate by the Public Works Director;
11. The City may require a traffic study for senior citizen/congregate care/group
quarter facilities located in R-2 or less intensive Residential Zones.
9.19-27
N. Residential Architectural Design Criteria
It is the intent of the General Plan and the provisions of this Section to require a
variety of residential development types, which are innovative in design and
compatible with surrounding neighborhoods while being conducive to creating a
balanced housing market in the City. The following represents components of
design requirements for all residential subdivisions.
1. Houses within new residential subdivisions situated on lots deeper than one
hundred (100) feet shall have a minimum five (5) foot variation in the front
yard setback from twenty five (25) to thirty (30) feet. No more than two
houses with the same front yard setback shall be placed on adjacent lots.
2. The use of roof forms, including shed, gable, and hip roofs, alone or in
combination shall be used to achieve a variety of roof lines for houses
adjacent to public streets. All such roofs shall be of a concrete tile,
approved shake, or a twenty-five (25) year minimum architectural style
composition shingle with dimensional variations. All other proposed
roofing materials shall be subject to review and approval by the City of
Avenal Planning Commission.
3. All exterior wall elevations of buildings and screen walls shall have
architectural treatments enhancing building appearance. Uniform materials
and consistent style should be evident within a development in all exterior
elevations. Secondary materials should be used to highlight building
features and to provide visual interest.
4. All houses within new subdivisions shall provide decorative lighting on both
sides of the garage or shall provide lighting under the eave of said garage.
5. Residential mechanical equipment shall not be visible from street frontage.
6. The second story of a two-story residence shall be situated to the rear of the
house.
7. Front yard fencing shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. Front
yard see through fencing, such as wrought iron, is allowed to a height of
four (4) feet. Front yard fencing shall be compatible with the architectural
style and character of the house.
8. If custom homes are not proposed, subdividers/developers of residential
subdivision tracts shall provide a variety of floor plans and building
elevations as follows:
9.19-28
RESIDENTIAL FLOOR PLAN AND
ELEVATION GUIDELINES
Number of Single
Family Dwellings
Min. No. of Bldg.
Footprints
Min. No. of Elevations
per Bldg. Footprint
(excludes reverse plans)
1-3 1 1
4-8 2 2
9-18 3 2
19-36 3 3
37-60 3 4
61-99 4 4
100+ 4 for the first 100 houses,
plus 1 for each 20 houses
over 100
4
* The required number of building elevations may be reduced by one for every two
building footprints added to the required minimum number specified above.
9. No two identical elevations shall be placed side by side within a subdivision.
10. Color
a) The use of monochromatic and complementary accent and trim colors is
considered to meet the intent of this Chapter.
b) The use of bright or garish colors (i.e., fluorescent “hot” or “day-glow”
colors) shall not be permitted.
c) Using building materials in their natural state, such as brick or stone, is
strongly recommended.
11. The following defines the landscaping requirements for all new residential
developments.
a) All new residential developments shall provide landscaping and automatic
irrigation in the front-yard setback area.
b) The front-yard setback shall be landscaped with a minimum of sod and two
(2) trees, and shall be planted a minimum of ten (10) feet from any common
property line.
c) All landscaping shall be watered by an automatic irrigation system.
9.19-29
d) All sod shall be uniformly cut and fully mature prior to installation.
e) All trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons and free of insect
infestation, plant diseases, sun scalds or any other objectionable
disfigurements.
f) All new trees shall be required to have heavy weight tree stands to provide
support.
g) All landscaping and irrigation required under these standards shall be
installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
12. A two car garage, a minimum 20’ X 20’, shall be provided.
O. Residential Unit Standards
In order to achieve the City’s Housing Element objectives and the objectives of
this chapter, residential developments 10 acres or greater in size shall provide a
range of housing opportunities necessary to increase the community’s supply of
moderate and above moderate housing. Each such housing development shall
demonstrate that it provides at least 40 percent of its housing suitable for abovemoderate
income groups, and at least 16 percent for moderate income groups, or
such other amounts in conformance with the City’s most recent adopted
Regional Housing Needs Allocation. Such suitability may include lot size,
housing price and amenities, dwelling unit size and amenities, as determined by
the Community Development Director. In order to implement this section,
applicants shall provide the following:
1. Applications shall provide a schedule of lot size, dwelling unit sizes, and
pricing.
2. Applications shall provide a range of lot size appropriate to achieve the
regulations herein.
3. Applications shall demonstrate conformity with Chapter 9.10 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
P. The determination of the Community Development Director herein may be
appealed to the City Manager. The decision of the City Manager shall be final
unless appealed to the Planning Commission in conformance with Chapter 9.71
of the Zoning Ordinance.

9.21-1
Chapter 9.21
SERVICE COMMERCIAL (S-C) DISTRICT
Sections:
9.21.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.21.02 PERMITTED USES
9.21.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.21.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.21.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.21.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.21.07 YARDS & SETBACKS
9.21.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.21.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.21.10 PARKING
9.21.11 SIGNS
9.21.12 LANDSCAPING
9.21.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.21.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this district is to provide a
location for wholesale and heavy commercial uses and services in Avenal which are
not suited for other commercial zones. It also provides areas for light industrial uses
which manufacture, assemble or package products within a building and do not emit
fumes, odor, dust, smoke, or gas beyond the confines of the building.
9.21.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others deemed to be
similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.21.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of
this Ordinance.
9.21.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Section 9.21.02 and 9.21.03
are prohibited.
9.21.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-3.
9.21.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-3.
9.21.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-3.
9.21.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-3.
9.21-2
9.21.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-3.
9.21.10 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.21.11 SIGNS. The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of this
Ordinance:
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet).
B. Temporary subdivision signs.
C. Temporary construction signs.
D. Temporary political campaign signs.
E. One monument sign along each street frontage for building and tenant
identification up to 16 square feet per sign face, and not to exceed 32 square feet
in aggregate. The maximum height of signs shall be five feet.
F. Building Signs.
9.21.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.21.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Development in the S-C zone shall comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.
B. The Community Development Director or the Planning Commission may waive
or reduce parking requirements where a documented hardship, not involving
economics exists, where there are unusual circumstances that prevent
compliance with any required development standards, or when there is not a
demonstrated need for all of the parking required by this ordinance.

9.22-1
Chapter 9.22
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (D-C) DISTRICT
Sections:
9.22.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.22.02 PERMITTED USES
9.22.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.22.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.22.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.22.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.22.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.22.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.22.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.22.10 PARKING
9.22.11 SIGNS
9.22.12 LANDSCAPING
9.22.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.22.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The Downtown Commercial district is intended
to implement the Downtown Specific Plan, preserve and enhance older architectural
styles, provide an increased variety and density of development, promote pedestrian
enjoyment and pedestrian uses where feasible, and discourage the development of
uses and building designs which could erode the special character of the downtown
area. The District emphasizes the development of businesses which generate and
cater to pedestrian shopping, in buildings which are located at the sidewalk’s edge.
It discourages uses of a service or industrial nature or those generating high volumes
of vehicle traffic. The Redevelopment Agency’s Art Deco design guidelines are
applicable to the redevelopment area only and are separate and distinct from this
Zoning Ordinance.
9.22.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.22.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of
this Ordinance.
9.22.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Sections 9.22.02 and 9.22.03
are prohibited.
9.22.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-2.
9.22-2
9.22.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-2.
9.22.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.22.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.22.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.22.10 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.22.11 SIGNS. Signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
9.22.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.22.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Development in the D-C zone shall comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.
B. The Community Development Director or the Planning Commission may waive
or reduce parking requirements where a documented hardship, not involving
economics exists, where there are unusual circumstances that prevent
compliance with any required development standards, or when there is not a
demonstrated need for all of the parking required by this ordinance.

9.24-1
Chapter 9.24
HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL (H-C) DISTRICT
Sections:
9.24.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.24.02 PERMITTED USES
9.24.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.24.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.24.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.24.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.24.07 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.24.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.24.09 PARKING
9.24.10 SIGNS
9.24.11 LANDSCAPING
9.24.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.24.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The Highway Commercial designation provides
for localized concentrations of uses catering to the traveling public including service
stations, hotels, restaurants, or other visitor-serving uses. Highway Commercial
nodes may be located in appropriate highway and gateway locations and on one
corner of major intersections outside of the contiguous community. Such Highway
Commercial nodes shall be limited in size to three total acres unless it can be
demonstrated that a greater amount will not have an adverse impact on existing or
planned commercial facilities in the community.
9.24.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Sections 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.24.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a CUP in
accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of this
Ordinance.
9.24.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Sections 9.24.02 and 9.24.03
are prohibited.
9.24.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-2.
9.24.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.24.07 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.24-2
9.24.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.24.09 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.24.10 SIGNS. The following signs are permitted in accordance with the Chapter 9.61 of
this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet)
B. Temporary construction signs.
C. Temporary political signs.
D. Wall signs (on site identification only) not to exceed 25 percent width of the
primary building face.
E. One sign per arterial or collector street frontage with a maximum height of 30
feet.
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet for
each lineal foot of street frontage.
9.24.11 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.24.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Development in the H-C zone shall comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.
B. Site area shall be in conformance with 9.24.01.
C. The Community Development Director or the Planning Commission may waive
or reduce parking requirements where a documented hardship, not involving
economics exists, where there are unusual circumstances that prevent
compliance with any required development standards, or when there is not a
demonstrated need for all of the parking required by this ordinance.

9.25-1
Chapter 9.25
COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL (C-C) DISTRICT
Sections:
9.25.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.25.02 PERMITTED USES
9.25.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.25.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.25.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.25.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.25.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.25.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.25.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.25.10 PARKING
9.25.11 SIGNS
9.25.12 LANDSCAPING
9.25.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.25.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this district is to provide sites for
a wide range of commercial and office uses which are diverse, visually pleasing,
convenient in terms of parking and access, attractive, and used by citizens of Avenal
as well as visitors to the area.
9.25.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.25.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a Conditional Use
Permit in accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of
this Ordinance.
9.25.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Sections 9.25.02 and 9.25.03
are prohibited.
9.25.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-2.
9.25.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. See Table 9-2.
9.25.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.25.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.25.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.25-2
9.25.10 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.25.11 SIGNS. The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 9.61 of this
Ordinance:
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet).
B. Temporary construction signs.
C. Temporary political signs.
D. Wall signs not to exceed 5 percent of building face area (on site identification
only).
E. Monument signs not to exceed 5 feet in height and 35 square feet, of cumulative
copy area (on site only).
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed one half (½) square foot
for each lineal foot of public street frontage.
9.25.12 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63.
9.25.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Development in the C-C zone shall comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.
B. Screening and Storage. The following shall apply to all developments.
1. All roof mounted air conditioners, roof vents, etc. should be screened from
view from ground level whenever possible. Such screening must be of a
style and material such that it is an integral part of the building architecture.
2. Where commercial or industrial property adjoins a residential zone, a
concrete block or masonry wall to a height recommended by the Community
Development Director shall be located on the property line except in a
required front yard, or the street side setback of a corner lot. This
requirement may be waived if an alternative landscaped buffer is provided
and approved by the Planning Commission as an exception.
3. Approved uses that are not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed
structure, on a site across a street or alley from a residential district shall be
screened by a concrete block or masonry wall and be landscaped along the
frontage of the wall to a height to be determined by the Community
9.25-3
Development Director. No materials or equipment shall be stored to a
height greater than that of the wall or fence.
4. In the C-C district, all businesses, services and processes shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-street parking
and loading areas, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas, nurseries,
garden shops, bus depots and transit stations and electric distribution
substations where permitted.
5. Where commercial or office uses are so situated abutting property zoned for
single-family residential use, the second story of the structure to be occupied
as a commercial or office use shall be designed to limit visibility onto the
adjacent residential property.
C. Curb Cuts. Curb cuts for proposed developments shall be limited to the extent
that access is provided to the site with minimum of ingress and egress points so
as to protect the safe traffic flow of Avenal's Arterial and Collector streets.
Unless an exception is granted by the Planning Commission, drive access points
in Commercial and Industrial Zones shall be shared access easements unless it
is not feasible to do so.
D. Lighting. No on-site lighting shall directly or indirectly illuminate adjacent
properties or the public street which provides access. The lights and standards
to be used shall be approved by the Community Development Director.
E. Auto Traffic Easements. When deemed necessary for the traffic safety of the
community, the Community Development Director shall have the right to
require as a condition of granting approval of a planning entitlement, that a
parcel provide an easement for purposes of vehicular traffic.
F. Residential Architectural Design Criteria. All subdivisions shall comply with
Section 9.19.01 (N) of this Ordinance.
G. Residential Landscaping Requirements. All new residential developments shall
comply with Section 9.19.01 (N) of this Ordinance.
H. General Standards. All development shall comply with the following standards.
1. Street and road dedications shall be made to the City, in a manner prescribed
by the City of Avenal Public Works Department, for all existing or proposed
local, collector, and arterial streets. The required dedication shall be
consistent with the requirements of the Circulation Element of the City of
Avenal.
2. All developments within the City of Avenal shall provide road or street
improvements pursuant to the Avenal Subdivision Ordinance. Street
improvements shall include base and pavement ties to existing pavement.
9.25-4
3. Obstructions within street rights-of-way shall be removed.
4. Curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall be constructed as required by the City of
Avenal Subdivision Ordinance when required as part of street
improvements.
5. All access drives, parking areas, and vehicle maneuvering areas shall be
surfaced with a minimum of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete paving or
material of higher quality.
6. All new on-site utility services shall be placed underground.
7. Prior to the issuance of any building permits, a plan for the disposal of
drainage waters originating on-site and from adjacent road rights-of-way
shall be approved by the City of Avenal Public Works Department, if
required. Easements or grant deeds shall be given to the City of Avenal for
drainage purposes or access thereto, as necessary.
8. The method of water supply and sewage disposal shall be as required and
approved by the City of Avenal and Kings County Health Department.
9. Fire flows and fire protection facilities shall be as required and approved by
the Kings County Fire Department.
10. When commercial or industrial property is adjacent to property zoned for
single-family residential purposes, a six (6) foot-high solid masonry wall set
in a planter of minimum five (5) foot width with trees spaced at twenty (20)
foot intervals shall be constructed between the proposed development and
the adjacent property along the rear and side property lines. The design and
materials proposed shall be approved by the Community Development
Director prior to construction of said wall.
11. When Multi-Family Residential, Commercial or Industrial construction in
excess of one (1) story is proposed adjacent to property zoned for residential
uses, structures shall be situated so that windows above the first story do not
have direct views of other residential areas, Collectors and Arterials, or
noise producing equipment or activities.
12. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties.
13. All trash receptacles shall be screened so that they are not visually obtrusive
from any off-site location. The location and method of screening for all
trash receptacles shall be approved by the Community Development
Director.
14. Architectural design and materials of all proposed buildings shall be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
9.25-5
15. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
16. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this
Section.
17. Signs may be provided as specified by the applicable zoning district
regulation and Chapter 9.61 of this Ordinance.
18. During all on-site grading and construction activities, adequate measures
shall be implemented to control fugitive dust.
19. Street improvements and construction of curb, gutter, and sidewalks shall be
required for additions to development existing on the effective date of this
Ordinance, unless waived in accordance with Chapter 9.75.
I. The Community Development Director or the Planning Commission may waive
or reduce parking requirements where a documented hardship, not involving
economics exists, where there are unusual circumstances that prevent
compliance with any required development standards, or when there is not a
demonstrated need for all of the parking required by this ordinance.

9.26-1
Chapter 9.26
FORTUNE TELLING BUSINESSES
9.26.01 - PURPOSE.
9.26-02 - LICENSE REQUIRED.
9.26.03 - APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
9.26.04 - APPLICATION FEE.
9.26.05 - INVESTIGATION, RIGHT TO REFUSE, AND APPEAL.
9.26.06 - LAND USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
9.26.07 - ISSUE OF LICENSE.
9.26.08 - LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
9.26.09 - EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
9.26.10 - REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
9.26.11 - TAXES AND RECORDS.
9.26.12 - PENALTY.
9.26.13 - PROTECTED SPEECH.
9.26.14 – DEFINITIONS.
9.26.01 – PURPOSE.
Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the business of fortune telling to protect
members of the public who are consumers of such services from, among other things, fraud.
9.26.02 - LICENSE REQUIRED.
No person may engage in fortune telling for compensation in the City of Avenal without a
business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.
9.26.03 - APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
Any person who desires a business license for fortune telling must file an application with the
city manager on a form furnished by the city. The form must require the applicant to furnish, at a
minimum, the following:
A. Full legal name of the applicant and all prior names;
B. Permanent home address of applicant for the past five (5) years;
C. Present or proposed address where applicant will engage in fortune telling business;
D. A brief description of the proposed business;
9.26-2
E. A statement, under penalty of perjury, as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
violating section 332 of the California Penal Code or a crime involving moral turpitude, the
nature of the offense and the penalty imposed.
F. Any other information which is reasonably necessary to confirm the identity of the applicant.
9.26.04 - APPLICATION FEE.
When an application is filed, the applicant shall pay the Conditional Use Permit application fee,
as fixed and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council, for the cost of
processing the application. The application fee is nonrefundable and is in addition to any/all
other fees prescribed by this chapter or any other fee required by this code or any other statute or
regulation.
9.26.05 - INVESTIGATION, RIGHT TO REFUSE, AND APPEAL.
A. Investigation: Upon receipt of an application, the city manager shall have an investigation
made of the applicant's criminal and/or business record, which may include any civil
judgments against the applicant. The city manager may refer the applicant to the chief of
police for a report and recommendation. The city manager must require a photograph,
background check and fingerprinting of the applicant, and a Live Scan submittal to the
California Department of Justice.
B. Right To Refuse: If the city manager finds and determines that the applicant has been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude and/or Penal Code section 332, or is subject
to a civil judgment for fraud or similar acts of deception the city manager must refuse to
issue a license. Upon determining to refuse to issue a license, the city manager shall notify
the applicant of his or her decision in writing, mailed to the applicant at the address provided
by the applicant via first class mail, postage prepaid within forty five (45) days after the
filing of the application. The decision of the city manager shall be final fourteen (14) days
from the date the notice of denial is mailed unless the applicant files a timely appeal pursuant
to Chapter 1-4 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
C. Appeal From Denial Of Permit To The City Council: The applicant may appeal the decision
of the city manager to deny a fortune telling license pursuant to Chapter 1-4 of the Avenal
Municipal Code. The decision of the city council shall be final. The city council shall notify
the applicant of its decision in writing.
D. Conditional Approval: If the city manager finds that the applicant has not been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude and the applicant's business record is satisfactory, the city
manager shall notify the applicant of the city's intent to issue a license conditioned upon the
applicant obtaining a land use permit pursuant to section 9.26.06 of this chapter within one
hundred twenty (120) days after the date of conditional approval. If the applicant fails to
apply for the appropriate land use permit within this timeframe, the conditional approval
shall automatically expire.
9.26-3
E. Failure To Give Notice: If the city manager fails to act on an application for a fortune telling
license within forty five (45) days after the filing of the application, the application will be
deemed denied and may be appealed to the city council pursuant to subsection (C) of this
section.
9.26.06 - LAND USE PERMIT REQUIRED.
A. Application: If the city manager, pursuant to section 9.26.05 of this chapter, decides that a
license may be issued to the applicant, the applicant must file with the planning commission
an application for a land use permit for a particular location.
B. Consideration and Conditions Of Approval: In addition to any other provision of this code,
the planning commission in considering an application for a land use permit for fortune
telling shall have the discretion to:
1. Consider and fix and/or prescribe advertising and signs;
2. Consider and approve exterior appearance and elevations of the premises;
3. Limit the number of employees in fortune telling and/or prohibit persons convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude from engaging in fortune telling on the premises;
4. Limit the hours of operation which must at least prohibit operations between midnight and
6:00 A.M., and other business conducted on the premises.
C. Permanent Premises Required: The planning commission must not issue a conditional use
permit for the operation of a fortune telling business from a trailer, vehicle or temporary
structure.
D. Zoning Requirements: The planning commission must not consider or approve any
application for a land use permit for the conduct of the business of fortune telling in any land
use or zoning district other than the commercial districts. All fortune tellers are prohibited
from engaging in any part of a fortune telling for pay within the private residence of any
customer.
E. Appeal: Any party aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission whether or not to
issue a land use permit may appeal said decision to the city council pursuant to the procedure
prescribed by Chapters 9.75 of this code for conditional use permits.
9.26.07 - ISSUE OF LICENSE.
If the city manager notifies the applicant of his or her intent to issue a license pursuant to section
9.26.05 of this chapter and the planning commission approves a land use permit pursuant to
section 9.26.06 of this chapter, then the city manager shall issue a license for fortune telling to
the applicant subject to the existence of a valid land use permit and the terms and conditions of
the land use permit and any other terms and conditions the city manager may impose if the city
9.26-4
manager finds that it is necessary to do so in order to protect the general public from the threat of
fraud or misrepresentation or public nuisance.
9.26.08 - LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
A license for fortune telling in the City of Avenal may not be assigned or transferred.
9.26.09 - EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
A. Expiration: A license for a fortune telling business shall expire one year from the date of
issuance.
B. Renewal: The holder of a fortune telling license may file an application for renewal with the
city manager on a form provided by the city and paying the license renewal fee which shall
be set by resolution of the city council in an amount necessary to cover the costs to the city of
processing the license renewal. In determining whether or not the holder of a license shall
have the license renewed, the city manager may deny renewal of the license if the city
manager, in his or her discretion, finds that any of the conditions for revocation or suspension
as described in section 9.26.10 of this chapter exist.
C. Appeal: The holder of the license may appeal the decision of the city manager to deny
renewal of the license in the same manner described in subsection 9.26.05(C) of this chapter.
9.26.10 - REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
A. Grounds For Suspension Or Revocation: The city manager may suspend or revoke the
fortune telling license for one or more of the following grounds:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application;
2. Violation of an ordinance or regulation of the city, or the conditions of the conditional use
permit;
3. Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
4. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of engaging in the fortune
telling business;
5. Conducting the fortune telling business in violation of a term or condition of the license, or
in a manner that is in breach of the peace or a nuisance or endangers the health, safety, or
general welfare of the public.
B. Duration Of Suspension: The city manager shall have the authority to determine the duration
of any suspension he or she deems necessary and to impose new or additional terms and
conditions upon the license when the suspension is terminated. The suspension or revocation
will be effective five (5) days after personal service of the notice of suspension or revocation
9.26-5
or eight (8) days after mailing a notice of suspension or revocation to the licensee, unless
prior to the effective date of suspension the licensee requests or the city manager sets a duly
noticed hearing to consider the suspension in which case the suspension may commence
immediately following conclusion of said hearing.
C. Appeal: The licensee may appeal a decision by the city manager to suspend or revoke the
license to the city council in the manner described in subsection 9.26.05(C) of this chapter.
9.26.11 - TAXES AND RECORDS; DISPLAYS.
A. The licensee must keep and maintain records and pay or have levied taxes in accordance
with title 3 of the Avenal Municipal Code.
B. All fortune tellers must provide each and all customers with a written receipt containing
the date, time and amount paid by the customer and the services purchased. All fortune
tellers must maintain copies or duplicates of said receipts for five (5) years.
C. During normal business hours, all fortune tellers must display their City business license
in a location of the physical premises where it can be read by any and all potential
customers.
D. All fortune tellers must display a list of all services available and the corresponding
actual rate or fee schedule in a font no smaller than 20-point. A copy of all rate or fee
schedules must be kept by fortune teller for at least five (5) years and must indicate the
effective dates of such rate or fee schedules. All fortune tellers are prohibited from
charging any customer more than the posted rate or fee.
9.26.12 – PENALTY.
A person who violates this chapter shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in title 1, chapter 2
of this code.
9.26.13 - PROTECTED SPEECH.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with any person's exercise of
free and open speech or religion.
9.26.14 – DEFINITIONS.
The following words and phrases, as used in this Chapter, shall have the following meanings:
A. “For pay” means a fee, reward, donation, loan, compensation or receipt of anything of
value.
B. “Fortune teller” means any person who, for pay or for any consideration whatsoever,
engages in the practice of fortune telling as herein defined unless otherwise excepted.
9.26-6
C. “Fortune telling” means telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing of any
information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of
any occult, psychic power, faculty, force, chiromancy, clairvoyance, clair-audience,
cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such
reading, mediumship, telepathy, or other craft art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion,
magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing or magic, of any kind or
nature. Fortune telling shall include pretending to perform these actions.

9.29-1
Chapter 9.29
COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
Sections:
9.29.01 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.29.01 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. The following standards shall
apply to commercial projects.
A. Adult Entertainment Facility
An Adult Entertainment Facility (reference definition in Section 9.03) shall be
consistent with Table 9-1 and shall comply with the following minimum
standards:
1. An Adult Entertainment Facility shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any
perimeter border of an elementary or secondary public or private school,
church and park. Any Adult Entertainment Facility located less than 1,000
feet from any elementary or secondary public or private school, church and
park shall not be a use allowed by this Chapter.
B. Alcohol Sales
A business or establishment requiring issuance of an Alcohol Beverage Control
(ABC) permit or license shall obtain the required permits consistent with Table
9-1 and shall comply with the following minimum standard(s):
1. Structures subject to an off-site ABC license shall not be located within 500
feet of any religious institution, school, or public park within the City; 100
feet of any property designated for residential purposes; and shall not be
adjacent to another similar use to cause oversaturation of the district. The
license application shall be reviewed by the Community Development
Department prior to City approval.
2. Sit-down restaurants whose predominant function is the service of food and
where the on-site sale of alcoholic beverages is incidental or secondary to
the sale of food, are exempt from the requirement of a Conditional Use
Permit. An incidental bar or lounge may be allowed for the convenience of
dining patrons. If the bar area exceeds 25 percent of the floor area a
Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
9.29-2
C. Automobile and Automobile Accessory Sales, Parts and Service
New and used automobile sales and service dealerships and auto service centers
in the City shall conform with this Zoning Ordinance. All auto related uses
shall be constructed in the following manner:
1. All parts, accessories, etc., shall be stored within a fully enclosed structure;
2. Service and associated car storage areas shall be screened from public view;
3. All on-site lighting shall be stationary and directed away from adjoining
properties and public rights-of-way;
4. All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 9.63;
5. All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.61 Sign
Standards;
6. All loading and unloading of vehicles shall occur on-site and not in the
adjoining streets or alleys;
7. All vehicles associated with the business shall be parked or stored on site
and not in adjoining streets, alleys or on landscaped areas (in contrast to
planned, hardscape areas for display of vehicles);
8. An adequate on-site queuing area for service customers shall be provided.
Required parking spaces may not be counted as queuing spaces;
9. No vehicle service or repair work shall occur except within a fully enclosed
structure. Service bays with individual access from the exterior of the
structure shall not directly face or front on a public right-of-way;
10. All on-site parking shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.60 (Off-
Street Parking Standards). A parking plan shall be developed as a part of
the permit review process;
11. Access drives shall be spaced at least 50' apart or as required in Section 9.63
of this Ordinance.
12. Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises.
The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted Public Works Standards and
be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles
shall be screened from public view on at least 3 sides with gate access on the
fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Avenal
Improvement Standards for bin enclosures.
9.29-3
D. Convenience Stores
The retail sale of groceries, staples and sundry items and/or alcoholic beverages
where the gross floor area is less than 5,000 square feet is subject to and shall
comply with all of the following:
1. The minimum site area shall be 10,000 square feet;
2. The site shall have direct frontage along an Arterial or Collector street;
3. One access drive may be permitted for each street frontage. The design and
location of the access drives) shall be subject to City Engineer approval;
4. All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary and directed away
from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way;
5. All on-site signage shall comply with provisions of Chapter 9.61 Sign
Standards including the prohibitions of fence mounted signs, window signs,
and banner restrictions;
6. All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in accordance
with Chapter 9.63;
7. All on-site parking shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.60 (Off-
Street Parking Standards). A parking plan shall be developed as part of the
permit review process;
8. The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times;
9. Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises.
The trash receptacle shall comply with the adopted subdivision ordinance
and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The
receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least 3 sides with gate
access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of
Avenal Improvement Standards for bin enclosures;
10. If on-site dispensing of automotive fuels is provided, the design, location
and operation of these facilities shall be consistent with the provisions of
Subsection J (Service Station Standards). Additionally, the cashier location
shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands, the vehicles parked
adjacent to the islands and propane storage area if applicable;
11. A bicycle rack shall be installed in a convenient location visible from the
inside of the store;
12. Each Convenience Store shall provide a public restroom located within the
store;
9.29-4
13. Public pay telephones provided on-site shall not be set up for incoming
calls. Public telephones shall be featured with call out service only and shall
be located in a well lighted area adjacent to the structure;
14. Video games may not be installed or operated on the premises;
15. A Convenience Store adjacent to any residentially designated district shall
have a 6 foot high decorative masonry wall and landscaping along the
property lines adjacent to such districts;
16. All parking, loading, circulation aisles, and pump island bay areas shall be
constructed with asphalt or concrete.
E. Day Care Facilities
Day Care Facilities for both children and/or adults that require a Conditional
Use Permit pursuant to Table 9-1 shall comply with the following provisions:
1. The activity shall conform to all property development standards of the land
use district in which it is located.
2. Day Care Facilities shall be located no closer than 500 feet, in any direction,
from an existing day care facility, measured from property line to property
line except that they may be located no closer than 250 feet measured from
property line to property line from any existing Day Care Facility not
fronting on the same street.
3. The capacity specified on the license shall be the maximum number of
children for whom care can be provided.
4. An outdoor play area of no less than 75 square feet per child, but in no case
less than 450 square feet in area shall be provided. The outdoor play area
shall be located in the rear area. Stationary play equipment shall not be
located in required side and front yards.
5. All fences shall meet the requirements of the Base Zone District. Materials,
colors, textures and design of the fence or wall shall be compatible with onsite
development and adjacent properties. All fences or walls shall provide
for safety with controlled points of entry/exit.
6. On-site landscaping shall be consistent with that prevailing in the
neighborhood and shall be installed and maintained, pursuant to Chapter 9.
63.
7. All on-site parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 9.60 (Off-street
Parking), sufficient off-street loading space shall be provided in addition to
the required off-street parking to serve the dwelling.
9.29-5
8. All on-site lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent
properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity that is consistent
with a residential environment.
9. All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.61 (Sign
Standards).
10. The Day Care Facility shall contain a fire extinguisher and smoke detector
devices and meet all standards established by the Kings County Fire
Marshall.
11. Any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked,
modified or appealed pursuant to Chapter 9.75.
12. All passenger loading and unloading areas shall be on site in a secure area
behind the required setbacks.
13. No Day Care Facility shall be established until an application for a
Conditional Use Permit has been submitted to and approved by the
Community Development Director in accordance with the procedures set
out in Section 9.70 of this Ordinance.
F. Drive-through Restaurants
Drive-through Restaurants shall comply with all of the following standards:
1. Establishments providing drive-through facilities shall not be permitted in
the D-C zone.
2. Pedestrian ways should not enter through drive aisles, but where they do,
they shall have clear visibility, and they must be identified by special paving
or striping;
3. Drive-through aisles shall be a minimum 12 foot width on curves and a
minimum 11 foot width on straight sections;
4. Drive-through aisles shall provide sufficient stacking area behind the menu
board to accommodate a minimum queue of 6 cars;
5. All service areas, restrooms, ground mounted and roof mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened from public view to the extent possible;
6. Landscaping shall screen drive-through or drive-in aisles from the public
right-of-way and shall be used to minimize visual impact of readerboard
signs and directional signs;
7. Drive-through aisles shall be constructed with cement, asphalt, or other
material approved by the City Engineer;
9.29-6
8. Parking areas and the drive through aisle and structure shall be set back
from the ultimate curb face a minimum of 25 feet;
9. Menu boards shall be a maximum of 32 square feet, with a maximum height
of 8 feet and shall face away from the street;
10. Drive-through Restaurants within an integrated shopping center shall have
an architectural style consistent with the theme established in the center.
The architecture of any Drive-through Restaurant must provide
compatibility with surrounding uses in form, materials, color, scale, etc.
Structure plans shall have variation in depth and angle to create variety and
interest in its basic form and silhouette. Articulation of structure surfaces
shall be provided through the use of openings and recesses which create
texture and shadow patterns. Structure entrances shall be well articulated
and project a formal entrance through variation of architectural plane,
pavement, surface treatment and landscape plaza;
11. No drive-through aisles shall exit directly onto a public right-of-way;
12. Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises.
The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted Public Works Standards and
be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles
shall be screened from public view on at least three sides with gate access on
the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Avenal
Improvement Standards for bin enclosures;
13. Drive-through Restaurant loudspeakers shall not be audible above 65 db at
the edge of any adjacent property.
G. Medical Marijuana Dispensaries
1. Medical Marijuana Dispensaries shall not be a land use allowed by this
Chapter.
H. Mini-Malls
Mini-Malls are defined as structures having three or more tenants under one
roof, up to 30,000 square feet, are subject to site plan review and shall comply
with the following standards:
1. The development shall provide external continuity, uniformity and
compatibility relating to architectural design, vehicular and pedestrian
access, and on-site provisions for landscaping, loading, parking and signage;
2. To the extent feasible, the on-site vehicular circulation system shall provide
continuity with adjacent and similar commercial developments;
9.29-7
3. No outdoor displays or sale of merchandise shall be permitted. However,
limited outdoor sales may be allowed subject to the issuance of a Temporary
Use Permit;
4. Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises.
The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted Public Works Standards and
be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles
shall be screened from public view on at least 3 sides with gate access on
the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Avenal
Improvement Standards for bin enclosures;
5. All provisions of Chapter 9.60 (Parking and Loading); Chapter 9.63
(Landscaping Requirements); and Chapter 9.61 (Signs) shall be met.
I. Mini-Storage
Mini storage facilities shall be constructed in the following manner:
1. The minimum site area shall be 20,000 square feet;
2. The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures and landscaping;
3. All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary and directed away
from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way;
4. All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 9.63;
5. All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.61 (Sign
Standards);
6. The site shall be completely enclosed within a 6 foot high solid decorative
masonry wall, except for points of ingress/egress (including emergency fire
access) which shall be properly gated. The gates shall be maintained in good
working order and shall remain closed except when in use;
7. No business activity shall be conducted other than the rental of the storage
spaces for inactive storage use;
8. All storage shall be located within a fully enclosed structure(s);
9. No flammable or otherwise hazardous materials shall be stored on-site;
10. Residential quarters for a manager or caretaker may be provided in the
development;
9.29-8
11. The development shall provide for 2 parking spaces for the
manager/caretaker, and a minimum of 2 spaces located adjacent to or in a
close proximity to the managers quarters for customer parking;
12. Aisle width shall be a minimum of 20 feet between buildings to provide
unobstructed and safe circulation;
13. Trash receptacles shall be located on the premises in a quantity and manner
approved by the City. The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted
Public Works Standards and be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash
generated. The receptacles shall be screened from public view on at least 3
sides with gate access on the fourth side. All screening devices shall comply
with City of Avenal Improvement Standards for bin enclosures;
14. Storage facilities located adjacent to residential districts shall have their
hours of operation restricted to 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M., Monday through
Saturday and 9:00 A.M. to 9:00 P.M. on Sundays.
15. The storage of vehicles including autos, boats and RVs may be permitted
subject to approval of a CUP (Chapter 9.70).
J. Recycling Facilities for Reusable Domestic Containers
Recycling facilities are permitted in accordance with Table 9-1 and include
reverse vending machine(s), small collection, large collection, light processing,
and heavy processing and are defined and permitted as follows:
1. The standards for recycling facilities are as follows:
a) Reverse vending machine(s) located within a commercial structure shall
require a permit consistent with Table 9-1, shall not require additional
parking spaces for recycling customers, and may be permitted in all
commercial and industrial land use districts subject to compliance with
the following standards:
1) Shall be installed as an accessory use to a commercial use which is
in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Development Code and Municipal Code;
2) Shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial
store and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;
3) Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use;
4) Shall not occupy more than 50 square feet of floor space per
installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more
than 8 feet in height;
9.29-9
5) Shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and
rustproof material;
6) Shall be clearly marked to identify type of material to be deposited,
operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the
operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;
7) Shall have a sign area of a maximum of 4 square feet per machine,
exclusive of operating instructions and shall be included in the
overall allowable signage plan for the site;
8) Shall be maintained in a clean, sanitary and litter-free condition on a
daily basis;
9) Operating hours shall be consistent with the operating hours of the
primary use;
10) Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if
operating hours are between dusk and dawn;
11) Shall maintain an adequate on-site refuse container for the disposal
of non-hazardous waste.
12) Shall be located in an area screened from public right-of-way and in
a well lit, secure area.
b) Small collection facilities located within applicable commercial and
industrial land use districts shall comply with the following standards:
1) Shall be allowed as an accessory use to an existing commercial use
which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of this
Title and the Municipal Code;
2) Shall be no larger than 500 square feet and occupy no more than 5
parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed
for removal of materials or exchange of containers;
3) Shall comply with the setbacks of the base zoning designation, and
shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;
4) Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and
reusable items;
5) Shall use no power driven processing equipment except for reverse
vending machines;
6) Shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable
waterproof and rustproof material, covered when the site is not
9.29-10
attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material,
and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials
collected and collection schedule. Cargo containers are not
permitted;
7) Shall store all recyclable material in the mobile unit vehicle and shall
not leave the materials outside the unit when the attendant is not
present;
8) Shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner free of litter and
any other undesirable materials, including mobile facilities;
9) Shall not exceed noise levels of 65 dba as measured at the property
line of adjacent residential land use districts;
10) Attended facilities shall not be located within 100 feet of any
residential land use district;
11) Collection containers, site fencing, and signage shall be of such color
and design so as to be compatible with and to harmonize with the
surrounding uses and neighborhood;
12) Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material
which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to
identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and
the hours of operation and display a notice stating that no material
shall be left outside the recycling container enclosure of containers;
13) Signs may be provided as follows:
a. Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a
maximum of 15% per side of a structure, or 16 square feet,
whichever is greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side
will be measured from the ground to the top of the container;
b. Signs shall be consistent with the character of their location;
c. Directional signs consistent with Chapter 9.61 (Sign Standards),
bearing no advertising message may be installed with the
approval of the Community Development Director if necessary
to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from
the public right-of-way.
14) The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by Chapter 9.
63 for any concurrent use;
15) No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a
small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a
9.29-11
primary use. One space shall be required for the attendant, if
needed;
16) Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit
other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is
scheduled to be present;
17) Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant
shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum
number required by the primary use unless all of the following
conditions exist:
a. A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not
already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be
on the site; and
b. The permit shall be reviewed at the end of 18 months.
18) Small collection facilities shall not operate between the hours of 7:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M.;
19) Small collection facilities shall be screened from the view of public
right-of-way and adjacent residential land use districts with intensive
mature landscaping and/or landscaping in conjunction with 6 foot
solid decorative masonry walls which are similar in character and
architecturally compatible with the primary structure on site;
20) Shall maintain adequate refuse containers for the disposal of nonhazardous
waste;
21) Small recycling facilities shall not be clustered and shall be located
at least 1/2 mile from the nearest similar facility;
22) Conditions of Approval for a small recycling facility shall be clearly
visible on the site for the public's inspection at all times;
c) A large collection facility which is larger than 500 square feet, or on a
separate parcel not accessory to a "primary" use, which has a permanent
structure may be permitted in the industrial land use districts, and is
subject to the following standards:
1) The facility shall not abut a parcel designated or planned for
residential use;
2) The facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way, within an
enclosed structure;
9.29-12
3) Structure setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those
provided for in the land use district which the facility is located;
4) All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which
are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Outdoor
storage shall be screened by a 6 foot, solid decorative masonry wall.
No storage, excluding truck trailers shall be visible above the height
of the wall. No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the land use
districts which do not permit outdoor storage;
5) The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any
other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a
daily basis;
6) Space shall be provided on site for 6 vehicles to circulate and to
deposit recyclable materials;
7) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 9.60 plus 1
parking space for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling
facility shall be provided for on-site;
8) Noise levels shall not exceed 65 dba as measured at the property
boundary or any area planned for residential use. It shall not be in
operation between the hours of 7:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.;
9) Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable
materials shall be at least 50 feet from any residential land use
district, permanently located, of sturdy rustproof construction, and
shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected
and be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;
10) Donation areas shall be kept litter free, free from undesirable
material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify type of
material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice
stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;
11) The facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and
telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation;
identification and informal signs shall meet the standards of the land
use district; and directional signs bearing no advertising message
may be installed with the approval of the Community Development
Director, if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation;
12) Adequate refuse containers for the disposal of non-hazardous waste
shall be maintained on the site;
13) Conditions of Approval for a large recycling facility shall be clearly
visible on the site for the public's inspection at all times;
9.29-13
d) Light processing facilities and large processors may be permitted and
shall comply with the following standards:
1) Large processing facilities shall be subject to a Conditional Use
Permit and shall be located no closer than two miles from the nearest
similar facility;
2) The facility shall not abut a residentially designated parcel;
3) In the M-1 zone, the facility shall operate in a completely enclosed
structure;
4) Power driven processing shall be permitted provided all noise level
requirements are met. Light processing facilities are limited to
bailing, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and
sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and the repairing of
reusable materials;
5) A light processing facility shall be no larger than 45,000 square feet
and shall have no more than an average of 2 outbound truck
shipments of material per day and shall not shred, compact or bale
ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers;
6) Structure setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those
provided for in the land use district in which the facility is located;
7) All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which
are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage
containers for flammable materials (allowed only in the M-2 zone)
shall be constructed of nonflammable material. No storage,
excluding truck trailers shall be visible above the height of the wall.
No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the land use districts which
do not permit outdoor storage;
8) The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any
other undesirable material(s). Loose debris shall be collected on a
daily basis and the site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and
removal of materials when attendants are not present;
9) Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of
customers to circulate, park, and deposit recyclable materials. If the
facility is open to the public, a parking area shall be provided for a
minimum of 8 customers at any one time;
10) Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 9.60;
11) Noise levels shall not exceed 65 dba as measured at the property
boundary or any area planned for residential land use districts;
9.29-14
12) If the facility is located within 500 feet of property designated or
planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M. The facility shall be administered by on-site
personnel during the hours the facility is open;
13) Any containers provided for after hours donation of recyclable
materials shall be at least 100 feet from any residential land use
district permanently located, of sturdy rustproof construction, and
shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected
and be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;
14) Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable
material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type
of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice
stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;
15) Conditions of Approval for light processing facilities and large
processors shall be clearly visible on the site for the public's
inspection at all times;
16) Signs shall be installed pursuant to Chapter 9.61 (Sign Standards).
Additionally, the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and
phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation;
17) No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration, odor, or glare above ambient level
shall be detectable from adjacent residentially designated parcels;
18) The facility shall maintain adequate on-site refuse containers for the
disposal of non-hazardous waste.
K. Service Station (Gasoline) Standards
Service stations shall comply with the following standards:
1. New service stations shall be permitted only at the intersections of Arterial,
State Highway and Collector streets. A maximum of one service station
shall be permitted at each intersection. The use shall not face a residential
land use district;
2. The minimum parcel size shall be 10,000 square feet, with a minimum street
frontage of 100 feet on each street;
3. All activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed
structure, except as follows:
a) The dispensing of petroleum products, water and air from pump islands.
b) The provision of emergency service of a minor nature.
9.29-15
c) The sale of items via vending machines shall be placed next to the main
structure in an area not to exceed 32 square feet and shall be screened
from public view.
4. Pump islands shall be located behind the front yard setback line, or 25 feet
from a street property line, whichever is greater, however, a canopy or roof
structure over a pump island may encroach up to 3 feet in the required
setbacks. The maximum number of points of ingress/egress to any one
street shall be 2; except in the case of State Highways where a maximum of
1 shall be permitted;
5. There shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet between curb cuts along a
street frontage;
6. No driveway shall be located closer than 50 feet to the curb return, except in
the case of a State Highway where the minimum distance shall be 100 feet;
7. The width of a driveway shall comply with City of Avenal Improvement
Standards;
8. On site parking shall comply with Section 9.60;
9. Outside storage of motor vehicles shall be prohibited;
10. No vehicles may be parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways or alleys;
11. No vehicle may be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering same
for sale;
12. Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of 5 percent of the service station
site area, exclusive of required setbacks, and shall be provided and
permanently maintained according regulations, as well as those contained in
Chapter 9.63:
a) A minimum 5-foot wide planter shall be provided along interior property
lines, except for openings to facilitate vehicular circulation to adjacent
properties.
b) A planter area of not less than 200 square feet shall be provided at the
corner of two intersecting streets. Landscaping shall not obstruct views
in an area between 30 inches and 6 feet above ground level.
c) A minimum of 50 square feet of planter area shall be located along those
portions of the main structure fronting on a public street.
d) Additional landscaping may be required to screen the service station
from adjacent properties.
9.29-16
13. All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.61 (Sign
Standards);
14. Openings of service bays shall not face public right-of-ways and shall be
designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties;
15. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or disabled, junked or
wrecked vehicles may be located in any open area outside the main
structure;
16. Every parcel with a structure shall have a trash receptacle on the premises.
The trash receptacle shall comply with adopted Public Works Standards and
be of sufficient size to accommodate the trash generated. The receptacles
shall be screened from public view on at least 3 sides with gate access on the
fourth side. All screening devices shall comply with City of Avenal
Improvement Standards for bin enclosures;
17. Lighting shall comply with City of Avenal Improvement Standards for onsite
and off-site illumination. Provided, however, that canopy luminaries,
and lights in excess of 150 watts shall not be permitted to directly illuminate
the public right-of-way or adjoining properties;
18. Rest room entrances should be located within the structure, however, if
access is from the outside of the structure, the view from adjacent properties
or public rights-of-way shall be concealed by planters or decorative
screening;
19. Noise from bells or loudspeakers shall not exceed 65 decibels at the
property line at any time;
20. All parking, loading, circulation aisles and pump island bay areas shall be
constructed with concrete or asphalt.
L. Service Station Conversions
A structure originally constructed as a service station and which is proposed for
conversion to another allowable use, regardless of current use, shall require
upgrading and remodeling for such items as, but not limited to, removal of all
gasoline appurtenances, removal of canopies, signage, removal of pump islands,
removal of gas tank, removal of overhead doors, non-conforming structures,
additional street improvements to conform to access regulations, exterior
remodeling, and any additional standards as required by this Zoning Ordinance.
M. Office Conversions
A structure originally constructed as a single-family residence which is
proposed for conversion to low intensity office use shall require the following:
9.29-17
1. The building elevations and the landscaping between the front property line
and the building front shall be maintained in their residential character;
2. Parking shall be provided to the rear or side of the structure;
3. Any trees with a Breast Height Diameter (BHD) of 6 inches or greater shall
be preserved. If it becomes necessary to remove such tree, each tree
removed shall be replaced with a 36-inch box tree at a rate of three per one
removed;
4. If the rear property line abuts an alley, access to parking shall be provided
from the alley whenever possible;
5. Where 2 or more single family residences adjacent to one another are
converted to office uses, reciprocal access and parking may be required;
6. Parking spaces shall be provided as determined by Chapter 9.60 and at
project review. Landscaping and/or parking requirements may be reduced
in accordance with Chapter 9.72 upon the Community Development
Director's approval in order to preserve the character of the Design District;
7. Tandem parking shall not be allowed;
8. Loading spaces shall not be required;
9. Signs shall be permitted in accordance with the C-C Zone;
10. The structure shall be made to conform to the provisions of the Uniform Fire
Code and the Uniform Building Code for commercial structures;
11. Trash receptacles shall be placed to the rear of structures and be screened
from view. Location and size of receptacles will be determined at project
review.
N. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Facilities
SRO facilities are subject to the following standards:
1. SRO's shall not be located within 500 feet of a parcel which contains a
school for children, adult bookstore, theater or liquor store;
2. SRO's shall be located within 1/4 mile of a bus stop and/or have an adequate
bus/dial-a-ride turn-out bay adjacent to the site;
3. SRO's shall comply with the parking requirements set forth in Chapter 9.60;
9.29-18
4. Any design of an SRO project shall coordinate with and compliment the
existing architectural style and standards of the surrounding land uses and
local community;
5. An unrestricted drop-off/pick-up/loading/temporary parking area shall be
provided near an entry located adjacent to front entry/desk area;
6. Exterior common areas and/or open courtyards shall be provided throughout
the project. If common areas are made available, these areas should be
designed to provide passive open space with tables, chairs, planters, or small
garden spaces to make these areas useful and functional for the residents.
Exterior common areas, including parking areas, should be illuminated;
O. Sign Program
All centers, mini malls, parcels or sites with multiple tenants in which
businesses and structures are designed in an integrated and interrelated
development, shall develop a coordinated sign program for all tenants and uses
in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 17.61.03.
All sign programs shall have signage that is uniform in color, design and
placement for all tenant identification with the Center.
P. Security Bars
Security Bars are prohibited in all commercial zones.

9.30-1
Chapter 9.30
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M-1) ZONE
Sections:
9.30.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.30.02 PERMITTED USES
9.30.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.30.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.30.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.30.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.30.07 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.30.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.30.09 PARKING
9.30.10 SIGNS
9.30.11 LANDSCAPING
9.30.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.30.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. This district is intended to reserve appropriately
located areas for various types of processing, assembly, storage and manufacturing
uses and related activities; protect such areas from intrusion by residential or
inharmonious commercial uses; regulate and control hazardous or objectionable
influences incidental to certain industrial uses; and provide areas with adequate
space, access and separation from residential, commercial and public uses to
promote modern industrial development. The development of any industrial use
which utilizes or processes liquids or solids that are obnoxious or are hazardous
shall be subject to a CUP. The Light Industrial Zone is intended for uses such as
fabricating, assembly, research and development, electronics assembly,
warehousing and other such similar uses which do not involve the manufacturing of
finished product from raw materials. All work, materials, and equipment storage is
generally conducted indoors so that noise, dust, fumes, odors, smoke or gas will not
be emitted beyond the confines of the building. Light Industrial is also appropriate
as a buffer between Heavy Industrial and non-industrial uses and where the site is
visible from residential areas or major streets. Special landscaping, enclosures,
screening and other site development standards are applicable in the Light Industrial
Zone.
9.30.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all other determined to be
similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.30.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditioned and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a CUP in
accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of this
Ordinance.
9.30-2
9.30.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Section 9.30.02 and 9.30.03
are prohibited.
9.30.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-2.
9.30.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.30.07 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.30.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.30.09 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.30.10 SIGNS. The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 9.61 and
Table 9-6 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet).
B. Temporary subdivision signs.
C. Temporary construction signs.
D. Temporary political signs.
E. Wall signs (on site identification only) not to exceed 5 percent of the primary
street frontage.
F. One monument sign not to exceed 5 feet in height and 35 square feet, of total
copy area advertising on site businesses only.
The maximum permitted area of all signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet for
each lineal foot of street frontage.
9.30.11 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following
requirements:
a) Front: 25’ minimum.
b) Side (interior): None required.
c) Side (street/corner): 25’ minimum when adjacent to the ultimate right-of-way
of SH 269 and SH 33, otherwise 10’ minimum landscaping required.
d) Rear: 10’ landscaping when adjacent to residential districts, otherwise 5’
minimum landscaped setback required.
9.30-3
e) Where industrial zoning abuts any residential land designation, a ten foot wide
landscape easement shall be maintained on the portion of the lot nearest the
residential designation. The ten foot landscape easement shall be privately
maintained and include the following:
1) One 15-gallon evergreen tree spaced at 20’ intervals.
2) Decorative fencing shall be used and shall include vines and other shrubbery
to screen the wall.
3) No outdoor storage of materials shall be visible from any residential zone.
4) All outdoor storage shall be screened form public view in a manner
approved by the Community Development Director.
9.30.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. Outdoor industrial storage yards shall be completely enclosed by a solid
screening fence not less than six (6) feet in height. The design and materials
proposed shall be approved by the Community Development Director.
B. Development in the M-1 zone shall also comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.

9.31-1
Chapter 9.31
HEAVY MANUFACTURING (M-2) ZONE
Sections:
9.31.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.31.02 PERMITTED USES
9.31.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.31.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.31.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.31.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.31.07 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.31.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.31.09 PARKING
9.31.10 SIGNS
9.31.11 LANDSCAPING
9.31.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.31.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The M-2 general industrial district is intended to
provide for the establishment of industrial uses essential to the development of a
balanced economic base. The Heavy Industrial Zone allows for a range of activities
including manufacturing, wholesale distribution, storage and industrial uses
involved in the manufacturing of finished product from raw material.
9.31.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.31.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a CUP in
accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of this
Ordinance.
9.31.04 PROHIBITED USES. All other uses not permitted by Sections 9.31.02 and 9.31.03
are prohibited.
9.31.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. See Table 9-2.
9.31.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.31.07 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.31.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.31-2
9.31.09 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.31.10 SIGNS. The following signs are permitted in accordance with Chapter 9.61 and
Table 9-6 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet).
B. Temporary subdivision signs.
C. Temporary construction signs.
D. Temporary political signs.
E. Wall signs (advertising on site businesses only) not to exceed 5 percent of
building frontage area.
F. One monument sign not to exceed 10 feet in height and 64 square feet of total
copy area, (advertising on site businesses only).
9.31.11 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements:
a. Front: 25’ minimum.
b. Side (interior): None required.
c. Side (street/corner): 25’ minimum when adjacent to the ultimate right-of-way
of SH 269 and SH 33, otherwise 10’ minimum landscaping required.
d. Rear: 10’ landscaping when adjacent to residential districts, otherwise 5’
minimum landscaped setback required.
e. Where industrial zoning abuts any residential land designation, a ten foot wide
landscape easement shall be maintained on the portion of the lot nearest the
residential designation. The ten foot landscape easement shall be privately
maintained and include the following:
1) One 15-gallon evergreen tree spaced at 20’ intervals.
2) Decorative fencing shall be used and shall include vines and other shrubbery
to screen the wall.
3) No outdoor storage of materials shall be visible from any residential zone.
9.31-3
4) All outdoor storage shall be screened form public view in a manner
approved by the Community Development Director.
9.31.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. All development in the M-2 zone shall be done in conformance with all
applicable standards set out in Chapter 9.54 of this Ordinance.
B. Development in the M-2 zone shall comply with the interpretation and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.

9.41-1
Chapter 9.41
PUBLIC FACILITIES (P-F) ZONE
Sections:
9.41.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.41.02 PERMITTED USES
9.41.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.41.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.41.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.41.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.41.07 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.41.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.41.09 PARKING
9.41.10 SIGNS
9.41.11 LANDSCAPING
9.41.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.41.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. This designation includes areas owned and
maintained by public or institutional agencies such as the city, schools, hospitals,
and other special districts.
9.41.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.41.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are subject to securing a CUP in accordance with the
standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of this Ordinance.
9.41.04 PROHIBITED USES. All others uses not permitted by Section 9.41.02 and 9.41.03
are prohibited.
9.41.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. There shall be no minimum lot size in the P-F zone.
9.41.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.41.07 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.41.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.41.09 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.41-2
9.41.10 SIGNS. Signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 9.61
and Table 9-6 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet)
B. Temporary construction signs
C. One monument sign for each use located on the site up to 16 square feet per
sign face. The maximum height of the sign shall be five feet with 32 square feet
of permitted sign area.
D. Wall signs not to exceed 50 square feet in area for each use located on the site.
The aggregate amount of signage shall not exceed 1 square foot for each lineal foot
of street frontage.
9.41.11 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.41.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. All development in the P-F zone shall comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.

9.42-1
Chapter 9.42
OPEN SPACE, PARKS AND RECREATION (O) ZONE
Sections:
9.42.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.42.02 PERMITTED USES
9.42.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.42.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.42.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.42.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.42.07 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.42.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.42.09 PARKING
9.42.10 SIGNS
9.42.11 LANDSCAPING
9.42.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.42.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. This district is intended primarily for application
to those areas of the City where it is necessary and desirable to: provide permanent
open spaces, whether public or private, which are necessary to safeguard the health,
safety and welfare of the people; provide spaces for the location and preservation of
public facilities such as parks, playgrounds and other public uses or private uses of a
similar nature; and, reserve, in a substantially undeveloped state, the areas planned
for future urban use where, because of locations lacking public services and
facilities or because need for such urban expansion is not immediate, it is necessary
to prevent uses or structures from being developed which might be inappropriate or
premature to their eventual zoning classification.
9.42.02 PERMITTED USES. The uses as shown in Table 9-1 and all others determined to
be similar to these uses pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted.
9.42.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The uses as shown
in Table 9-1 as conditional and all others determined to be similar to these uses
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 are permitted and subject to securing a CUP in
accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Chapter 9.70 of this
Ordinance.
9.42.04 PROHIBITED USES. All others uses not permitted by Section 9.42.02 and 9.42.03
are prohibited.
9.42.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. None required.
9.42.06 YARDS AND SETBACKS. See Table 9-2.
9.42-2
9.42.07 HEIGHT LIMITS. See Table 9-2.
9.42.08 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. See Table 9-2.
9.42.09 PARKING. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.60 of this Ordinance.
9.42.10 SIGNS. Signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 9.61
and Table 9-6 of this Ordinance.
A. Temporary real estate signs (not to exceed 8 square feet)
B. Temporary construction signs
C. One monument sign for each public facility/institution up to 16 square feet per
sign face. The maximum height of sign shall be five feet with 32 square feet of
permitted sign area.
D. Wall signs not to exceed 50 square feet in area.
The aggregate amount of signage shall not exceed 1 square foot for each lineal foot
of street frontage.
9.42.11 LANDSCAPING. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance.
9.42.12 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
A. All development in the O zone shall comply with the interpretations and
provisions of Chapter 9.73 of this Ordinance.

9.52-1
Chapter 9.52
CLUSTER (C-L) COMBINING DISTRICT
Sections:
9.52.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.52.02 PERMITTED USES
9.52.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.52.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.52.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.52.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.52.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.52.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.52.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.52.10 PARKING
9.52.11 SIGNS
9.52.12 LANDSCAPING
9.52.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES)
9.52.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.52.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of the Cluster (CL) Combining District
is to promote development of imaginative well designed residential and commercial
developments which may have special setback, design or other features to preserve
open space, promote desirable and/or affordable housing, preserve agricultural
lands, and maximize the use of shared public and private recreational facilities. The
regulations of the CL District shall be in addition to the Base District with which the
CL District is combined.
9.52.02 PERMITTED USES. Uses permitted by the Base District with which the CL
District is combined.
9.52.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. Conditional uses
permitted by the Base District with which the CL District is combined.
9.52.04 PROHIBITED USES. Uses prohibited by the Base District with which the CL
District is combined.
9.52.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. The minimum lot size in the Base District with which the
CL District is combined.
9.52.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. None, except the overall project
density shall not exceed the overall density as established by the General Plan Land
Use category applicable to the area in which the property is located.
9.52.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. Per the requirements of the Base District and Design
District with which the CL District is combined.
9.52-2
9.52.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. Per the requirements of the Base District with which the CL
District is combined.
9.52.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. Per the requirements of the
Base District with which the CL District is combined.
9.52.10 PARKING. Per the requirements of the Base District with which the CL District is
combined and pursuant to Chapter 9.60.
9.52.11 SIGNS. Per the requirements of the Base District with which the CL District is
combined.
9.52.12 LANDSCAPING. Per the requirements of the Base District with which the CL
District is combined and pursuant to Chapter 9.63.
9.52.13 FENCES (INCLUDING WALLS AND HEDGES). Per the requirements of the
Base District with which the CL District is combined.
9.52.14 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. No
use shall be established, no development shall occur, and no building or grading
permit shall be issued for any use or development in the CL District until an
application for site development plan review has been submitted to and approved by
the Community Development Director in accordance with the procedures set out in
Section 9.75.02, or submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the procedures set out in Section 9.75.03 when submitted in
conjunction with an application for a change of zone classification or with a
tentative subdivision map.
A. APPLICATION CONTENTS
An application for a site development plan review shall include the following:
1. Name(s) and address(es) of applicant(s)
2. Name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s)
3. APN(s) (Assessors Parcel Number)
4. A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the Community
Development Director which includes the following:
a) Topography of the lot(s)
b) Proposed street system and parking areas
c) Lot design
d) Location of all buildings
9.52-3
e) Location of all proposed use areas
f) Proposed setbacks
g) Areas to be reserved for parks, schools, or other public or quasi-public
facilities
h) Proposed landscaping
i) Water distribution and supply
j) Sewage disposal system
k) Drainage system
l) North arrow
5. Number of dwelling units per acre
6. Proposed method of ownership and maintenance of commonly held open
spaces, if any
7. A narrative description of the development including an explanation of the
proposed deviations from the regulations otherwise applicable to the
property.
8. Phasing or development schedule
B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS
Development in the CL District shall comply with the following standards:
1. All development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the
General Plan and with the General Plan Land Use designation applicable to
the area where the proposed project is located.
2. Development within the CL District shall be demonstratively superior to the
development that could occur under the Base District regulations applicable
to the property. In making this determination, the following factors shall be
considered:
a). The provisions of open space
b). Overall enhancement of the community environment
c). Compatibility to other uses existing in the surrounding area
9.52-4
3. All development within the CL District shall be consistent with the
Guidelines established in the applicable Design District in which the
property is located.
C. TIME LIMIT ON APPROVAL:
1. If development approved in accordance with this Chapter has not
commenced within two (2) years of approval, the approval shall become
null and void and of no effect, unless an extension of time has been granted
by the Community Development Director, upon the written request for an
extension anytime before the expiration of the two (2) year period. This
provision shall not apply to any applications approved in conjunction with a
tentative parcel map or a tentative tract map. In such case, the expiration
period shall coincide with that of the approved tentative parcel map or the
tentative tract map as applicable.
D. MINOR PLAN MODIFICATIONS
The Community Development Director may approve minor plan modifications
to an approved CL site development plan in accordance with the procedures set
out in Chapter 9.72, if the Community Development Director determines that
the modifications do not constitute a substantial change in the approved project.
E. PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION
Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or modified
pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of this Ordinance.

9.53-1
Chapter 9.53
PRECISE DEVELOPMENT (P-D) COMBINING DISTRICT/
PERMIT REVIEW GUIDELINES
Sections:
9.53.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.53.02 PERMITTED USES
9.53.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
9.53.04 PROHIBITED USES
9.53.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE
9.53.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT
9.53.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS
9.53.08 HEIGHT LIMITS
9.53.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES
9.53.10 PARKING
9.53.11 SIGNS
9.53.12 LANDSCAPING
9.53.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.53.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of the Precise Development (P-D)
district is to designate areas with unique site characteristics, sensitive environmental
conditions, areas surrounded by sensitive land use or other conditions not otherwise
addressed elsewhere herein to ensure that developments in such areas are
compatible with those constraints. All development in the P-D combining district
shall be subject to Site Development Plan Review. The P-D district may be
combined with any Base Zone or other Combining Zone. All P-D regulations will
be in addition to those of the zone with which the P-D district is combined. The
purpose of this Chapter shall also be used to describe the content and format for
discretionary permits to be considered by the Planning Commission processed under
Chapter 9.75 of this Code.
9.53.02 PERMITTED USES. Uses permitted by the Base Zone, or other Combining Zone
with which the P-D district is combined.
9.53.03 USES PERMITTED WITH A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. Conditional uses
permitted by the Base Zone with which the P-D district is combined.
9.53.04 PROHIBITED USES. Uses prohibited by the Base Zone with which the P-D
district is combined
9.53.05 MINIMUM LOT SIZE. Per the Base Zone requirements with which the P-D
district is combined.
9.53.06 MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT. Per the requirements of the
Base Zone with which the P-D district is combined.
9.53-2
9.53.07 YARDS AND SETBACKS. Per the requirements of the base district with which
the P-D district is combined.
9.53.08 HEIGHT LIMITS. Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D
district is combined.
9.53.09 MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES. Per the requirements of the
base district with which the P-D district is combined.
9.53.10 PARKING. Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is
combined.
9.53.11 SIGNS. Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D district is
combined.
9.53.12 LANDSCAPING. Per the requirements of the base district with which the P-D
district is combined.
9.53.13 SPECIAL REVIEW PROCEDURES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. No
use shall be established, no development shall occur or grading permit shall be
issued for any use or development in the P-D district until an application has been
submitted to and approved by the Community Development Director in accordance
with the procedures set out in Chapter 9.75.03 of this Ordinance.
A. APPLICATION CONTENTS:
An application for site development review shall include the following:
1. Name(s) & address(es) of applicant(s)
2. Name(s) & address(es) of property owner(s)
3. APN (Assessor Parcel Number(s)).
4. Legal description of property
5. A site development plan drawn at the scale specified by the Community
Development Director, which includes the following information:
a) Topography and proposed grading
b) Proposed development in relationship to all previously approved and
projected P-D site development plans.
c) The width, location, and names of all surrounding streets
d) The location, uses and setbacks on adjacent properties.
9.53-3
e) The location, dimension and ground floor area, and uses of all existing
and proposed buildings and structures on the subject property.
f) Proposed landscaping
g) Streets and parking areas
h) Existing and proposed signs, including location, size and height
i) Proposed dedications and improvements in accordance with applicable
subdivision improvement standards for the area.
j) Location, height, and materials of walls and fences
k) Other specified uses of the property
1) North Arrow
m) Existing and proposed driveways and curb cuts.
n) Existing and proposed utility connections (locations of utility
connections).
6. A narrative description of the proposed development including the
following:
a) Acreage and square footage of the property (net).
b) Height, ground floor area, and total area of each building.
c) Number of dwelling units in each building
d) Building coverage expressed as a percent of the total area of the
property.
e) Area of land devoted to landscaping and/or open space usable for
recreation purposes and it's percentage of the total land area.
f) Method of sewage disposal
g) Method of water supply, domestic and fire
h) Proposed on-site drainage facilities
i) Methods of floor control, where appropriate
B. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Development in the P-D district shall comply with the following standards:
9.53-4
1. All development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the
General Plan and with the uses and density and intensity standards of the
General Plan Land Use category applicable to the area in which the property
is located.
2. All development shall comply with any conditions deemed necessary or
appropriate by the Community Development Director or Planning
Commission to promote the public health, safety and welfare.
C. TIME LIMIT ON APPROVAL
If development approved in accordance with this chapter has not commenced
within two (2) years of the approval, the approval shall become null and void
and of no effect, unless an extension has been requested and granted by the
Community Development Director. All requests for extensions must be in
written form and must be received by the Community Development Director.
This provision shall also apply to any applications approved in conjunction with
a tentative parcel map or a tentative tract map. In such case, the expiration
period shall coincide with that of the approved tentative parcel map or the
tentative tract map, as applicable.
D. TEMPORARY USES
Not withstanding other provisions of this Chapter, when a P-D district has been
established the Community Development Director is authorized to approve a
temporary use of the property consistent with the uses authorized by the Base
Zone within which the P-D district is combined. However, this temporary use
may not involve construction of any permanent buildings or structures and is
subject to the following conditions:
1. Such temporary use shall not affect the public health, safety and welfare as
determined by the Community Development Director.
2. The Planning Director shall have authority to defer the filing of a formal
P-D plan for a temporary use.
3. Authorization for a temporary use shall be evidenced by a temporary use
permit approved by the Community Development Director in accordance
with the procedures set out in Section 9.75.02 of this Ordinance.
4. Such temporary use permit shall be revoked by the Community
Development Director at any time if in the exercise of his/her reasonable
discretion it can be determined that continued temporary use of such
property without the safeguards provided by an approved P-D site
development plan would be harmful to the public health, safety and welfare.
5. No temporary use permit shall ever be considered a permanent right of legal
non-conforming use.
9.53-5
6. Prior to the approval (or disapproval) of a formal site development plan for
permanent improvements, the temporary use permit shall become null and
void and the premises shall be completely vacated and restored to it's
original condition if approval is not granted.
E. MINOR PLAN MODIFICATIONS:
The Community Development Director may approve minor plan modifications
to an approved P-D site development plan in accordance with the procedures set
out in Section 9.75.02 of this Ordinance, but only if the Community
Development Director can determine that the requested modification(s) do not
constitute a substantial change in the approved project.
F. PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATIONS
Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or modified
pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of this Ordinance.

9.60-1
Chapter 9.60
OFF STREET PARKING STANDARDS
Sections:
9.60.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.60.02 REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
9.60.03 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
9.60.04 HANDICAPPED PARKING
9.60.05 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
9.60.06 LOCATION OF PARKING
9.60.07 JOINT USE OF PARKING AREAS
9.60.08 PARKING AREA DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.60.09 OFF-STREET PARKING PLOT PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL
9.60.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote parking
for the safety and convenience of the residents of the City of Avenal by requiring
adequate and well-designed parking areas. Parking required by this Chapter shall be
provided prior to the occupancy of a new building or structure is erected, the
enlargement or intensification of a structure, or when use is established, changed or
expanded. Projects which involve an increase in intensity of use shall comply with
these standards for the expansion or intensification. The standards of this Chapter
are minimum standards. The regulations and standards of this Chapter are intended
to achieve the following:
A. To provide accessible, attractive, secure, properly lighted, and well-maintained
and screened off-street parking facilities.
B. To reduce traffic congestion and hazards.
C. To protect neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic
generated by adjacent nonresidential land use districts.
D. To assure the maneuverability of emergency vehicles.
E. To provide appropriately designated parking facilities in proportion to the needs
generated by varying types of land use.
F. The Redevelopment Agency’s guidelines for parking are applicable to the
redevelopment area only and are separate and distinct from this Zoning
Ordinance.
9.60.02 REQUIRED PARKING SPACES. Uses permitted by this Ordinance shall provide
off-street parking spaces according to Table 9-5.
9.60-2
9.60.03 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS.
A. All parking spaces shall comply with City adopted improvement standards in
the Municipal Code;
B. Up to 30% of the spaces in a parking facility with 10 or more spaces may be
designed and designated for compact cars
C. Parking structures may be subject to dimensional adjustments based on
utilization (i.e.: public or private garage with or without an attendant), but in no
case shall the stall width be less than 8 feet. Reductions in design standards shall
be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
D. All parking spaces shall be clearly marked.
E. Parking spaces which require backing onto a street or road right-of-way are
prohibited except in the case of driveways for single family and duplex
residential dwellings which are adjacent to streets that permit direct access.
9.60.04 HANDICAPPED PARKING. Handicapped parking spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 2.71 of Title 24 of the California Administrative Code.
Handicapped parking requirements herein shall be established by the State of
California. Any change in the State's handicapped parking requirements shall
preempt the affected requirements of this Section.
A Handicapped parking for residential uses shall be provided at the rate of 1 space
for each dwelling unit that is designed for occupancy by the handicapped.
B. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided for all uses other than residential
at the following rate:
TOTAL NUMBER OF PARKING
SPACES PROVIDED
NUMBER OF HANDICAPPED
PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
1-40 1
41-80 2
81-120 3
121-160 4
161-300 5
9.60-3
301-400 6
401-500 7
Over 500 7 + 1 for each 200 additional
parking spaces provided
C. Handicapped parking spaces shall be designed in a manner consistent with the
City standard drawings approved by the City Engineer.
D. When less than five parking spaces are provided at structures and uses subject to
these regulations, one space shall be fourteen (14) feet wide and striped to
provide a nine (9) foot parking area and a five (5) foot loading and unloading
area. However, there is no requirement that the space be reserved exclusively or
identified for handicapped use only.
E. Handicapped parking spaces required by this Section shall count toward
fulfillment of off street parking requirements.
9.60.05 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES. For every building or facility which requires
the receipt or distribution of vehicles or merchandise and which are engaged in the
following: manufacturing, storage, warehouse, wholesale or retail store, market,
passenger terminal, theatre, hotel, motel, restaurant, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning
plant, or other similar use, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading shall
be provided and maintained on the same lot in addition to the automobile parking
required by Section 9.60.02.
These provisions establish comprehensive standards to regulate the number, design
and location of off-street loading areas, in a manner which ensures the following:
A. Accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained loading and delivery
facilities;
B. Reduced potential for traffic congestion and hazards;
C. Protection for adjacent parcels and surrounding neighborhoods from the effects
of vehicular noise and traffic generated from the anticipated land use and long
dock activities;
D. Loading and delivery services in proportion to the needs generated by the
proposed land use which are clearly compatible with adjacent parcels and the
surrounding neighborhood.
9.60-4
Every nonresidential land use shall have permanently maintained off-street loading
areas pursuant to the following provisions.
1. Number of Spaces Required. Off-street freight and equipment loading
spaces shall be provided for all offices, hospitals, institutions, hotels, seniors
, group housing, schools, day care centers, and other commercial and
industrial land uses.
The following minimum number of loading spaces shall be provided for
each use:
Commercial, industrial, office, institutional, hospital, hotels and schools:
GROSS FLOOR AREA SPACES REQUIRED
Less than 25,000 sf. of gross
floor area
1
25,001+ sf. of gross floor area 1+ additional as required by
Director
Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the
Community Development Director based upon the requirements for
compatible uses and upon the particular characteristics of the proposed use,
pursuant to Section 9.73.03 (Determination of Similar Use).
2. Design Standards. Off street loading spaces shall be provided in the
following manner:
a. Access. When the lot upon which the loading space is located abuts an
alley, the loading space shall have access from the alley.
b. Dimensions. Required freight and equipment loading spaces shall not be
less than 15 feet in width and 20 feet in length or as determined by the
Community Development Director, with 14 feet of vertical clearance.
c. Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing
adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall
be energy efficient and in scale with the height and use of the structure.
Any illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed away
from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.
d. Location. Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows: 1)
adjacent to, or as close as possible to the main structure; 2) situated to
ensure that all loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case
within adjacent public rights-of-way, or other traffic areas on site; 3)
situated to ensure that all vehicular maneuvers occur on site.
9.60-5
e. Passenger Loading. Passenger loading spaces shall be provided in
addition to any required freight and equipment loading spaces whenever
required by a discretionary or ministerial permit. Loading spaces shall
not be less than 10 feet wide and 20 feet long, shall be located in close
proximity to the structure entrance, and shall not require pedestrians to
cross a driveway, parking aisle, alley or street in order to reach the
structure entrance. Required loading spaces shall not count as required
parking spaces.
f. Screening. All loading areas abutting residentially designated property
shall have architectural screening similar to the primary structure and of
a height that is adequate to screen noise and parking areas. In addition,
along the outer sound wall of the loading area, adequate area shall be
provided to accommodate a permanently maintained and irrigated
landscaped area. The required landscaping shall include trees.
g. Security. All loading facilities shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained with security as a priority to protect safety of users.
h. Striping. Loading and unloading areas shall be striped indicating the
loading spaces and identifying the spaces for loading only. The striping
shall be permanently maintained in a clear and visible manner.
9.60.06 LOCATION OF PARKING.
A. Required residential off-street parking facilities shall be located on the premises
they are intended to serve.
B. Off-street parking for other than residential uses shall be located on the
premises they are intended to serve. Where required parking is provided on a
site other than that of the principal use, the property owner shall file on a form
provided by the City of Avenal Community Development Department with the
Kings County Recorder's Office a covenant approved by the Community
Development Director that provides for the maintenance of the parking facility
as long as the associated principal use is maintained.
C. All parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that all vehicles
may enter an abutting street in a forward direction. The Community
Development Director may approve exceptions for single-family homes and
other residential projects.
D. No parking space shall be located so that a vehicle will maneuver within 20 feet
of a vehicular entrance measured from the face of the curb.
9.60.07 JOINT USE OF PARKING AREAS. If more than one user required to provide
parking spaces in accordance with this Chapter occupies the same or adjacent
buildings, off street parking shall be provided in an amount equal to the total
9.60-6
number of spaces required for the separate uses, provided, however, that upon
written request, the Community Development Director may reduce the number of
spaces required in such cases by up to fifty (50) percent if it can be determined
based on substantial evidence that the combination of uses in the same or adjacent
buildings or premises will, at periods of peak weekly hour use, necessitate provision
of a lower number of parking spaces than if the uses were developed independently.
Parking facilities may be shared if multiple uses cooperatively establish and operate
the facilities and if these uses generate parking demands primarily during hours
when the remaining uses are not in operation. The applicant shall have the burden of
proof for a reduction in the total number of required off-street parking spaces, and
documentation shall be submitted substantiating their reasons for the requested
parking reduction. Public rights of way and/or on street parking shall not be used or
counted to reduce the number of shared on site parking spaces. Shared parking may
only be approved if:
A. A sufficient number of spaces are provided to meet the greater parking demand
of the participating uses.
B. Satisfactory evidence, as deemed so by the Director, has been submitted by the
parties operating the shared parking facility, describing the nature of the uses
and the times when the uses operate as to demonstrate the lack of potential
conflict between them; and
C. Additional documents, covenants, deed restrictions, or other agreements as may
be deemed necessary by the Director are executed to assure that the required
parking spaces provided are maintained and uses with similar hours and parking
requirements as those uses sharing the parking facilities remain for the life of
the commercial/industrial development.
9.60.08 PARKING AREA DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. Off-street
parking areas required to be provided by this Chapter shall be designed and
developed in accordance with Table 9-5 (reference Figure 9.60-2) and the following
standards:
A. All off-street parking areas and ingress and egress to parking areas, including
areas occupied by automobile sales lots, service stations, drive-in
establishments, residential, recreation, entertainment and tourist facilities,
commercial, industrial, institutional, and other high intensity uses, parking areas
shall be surfaced in a manner to achieve a Traffic Index of 4, unless a higher
index is determined to be necessary by the City Engineer.
B. Parking aisles shall comply with the following minimum standards:
ARRANGEMENTS MINIMUM AISLE WIDTH
30 degree, single row 11 feet
45 degree, single or multiple row 14 feet
9.60-7
60 degree, single or multiple row 18 feet
90 degree, single or multiple row 25 feet, except where parking is
perpendicular to and abuts an alley
C. All spaces shall be clearly marked.
D. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed so that each space can function
independently of any other space. Tandem space shall not be permitted.
E. Driveways for residential developments shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in
width with fifteen (15) feet of unobstructed vertical clearance. Driveways for
commercial and industrial developments shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet
in width with a minimum of fifteen (15) feet of vertical clearance.
F. Where a parking facility containing five (5) or more spaces abuts property
zoned for residential use, the parking facility shall be separated from the
abutting property by a solid masonry wall four (4) feet in height, except that
portion of the wall which utilizes a four (4) feet high conformation of vegetation
and earthen berms.
9.60-8
9.60-9
G. For all parking lots containing six (6) or more spaces, at least five (5) percent of
the total parking area shall be landscaped. This landscaping shall be in addition
to any other landscaping required pursuant to Chapter 9.63. Trees shall be
planted and maintained throughout the parking area at a minimum ratio of one
(1) tree per three (3) parking spaces to achieve a 50% shade coverage of the
parking area within 10 years of installation. A landscaped planter of at least
eighty (80) square feet shall be provided at least every ten parking spaces.
Minimum tree size shall be twenty-five (15) gallon container (or three (3)
inches trunk diameter). Landscaping materials and trees shall be selected from a
list of approved trees as may be established by the Community Development
Director.
H. Where a parking facility containing five (5) or more spaces includes diagonal
and/or perpendicular parking spaces that abut a public street or road, an
ornamental fence, wall, vegetation and/or earth berm of not more than four (4)
feet in height shall be erected between the parking facility and the street so as to
eliminate headlight glare.
I. Lights used to illuminate parking areas shall be directed away from any adjacent
properties and/or streets.
J. Where parking areas adjoin a public right-of-way, a 10 foot landscaped planting
strip shall be established and continuously maintained between the public rightof-
way and parking area. Any planting, sign, or other structure within safety
sight-distance of a driveway shall not be higher than 30 inches in height or
lower than 60 inches (in the case of tree canopies) similar to defined site
triangles.
K. All areas in parking lots not used for driveways, maneuvering areas, parking
spaces or walks shall be permanently landscaped with suitable materials and
permanently maintained.
L. A permanent automatic irrigation system shall be installed and permanently
maintained in all landscaped areas. The system shall employ state of the art
water conservation technology, and recognize differing irrigation needs of
various plant materials.
M. The landscaping plan shall be provided consistent with Chapter 9.63 and shall
include a variety of plant materials, with an emphasis on drought tolerant
species, for the appropriate climate zone. This Plan shall be subject to approval
by the Community Development Director.
N. To increase parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of 3 feet of the parking
stall depth may be landscaped in lieu of asphalt while maintaining the required
parking dimensions.
9.60-10
O. All parking structures shall be subject to approval by the Community
Development Director, and shall have a continuous 10 foot perimeter
landscaped area with trees every 30 lineal feet; points of ingress/egress shall
include a minimum 6 foot wide landscaped island with accent paving in
driveway; landscaping shall be permanently irrigated and maintained; and,
lighting for the above ground deck shall not exceed 4 feet in height.
P. A recreational vehicle may be parked in driveways, or on another paved
surfaces if it does not extend into the public right-of-way provided it does not
constitute a nuisance or safety issue.
Q. Recreational vehicles may be temporarily parked on private or public rights-ofway
in front of residences for not more than 48 continuous hours for the
purposes of loading and unloading.
R. Security. All parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained
with security as a priority to protect the safety of the users.
9.60.09 OFF-STREET PARKING PLOT PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL. No use
shall be established or changed, no development shall occur or be expanded, and no
building or grading permit or business license for any use or development shall be
issued until an application for off-street parking plot plan review has been submitted
to and approved by the Community Development Director.
A. APPLICATION CONTENTS
1. Name and address of applicant
2. Name and address of property owner
3. Assessor's Parcel Number (s)
4. A plot plan drawn (at the scale specified by the Community Development
Director) including the following:
a) Topography and proposed grading specifications.
b) Location of existing buildings and structures which are to remain.
c) Location of proposed buildings and structures.
d) Proposed uses of all buildings and structures.
9.60-11
e) Dimensions of the existing and proposed structures and other
information (e.g. seating capacity) which will allow Community
Development Director to determine the parking needs.
f) Layout proposed parking lot, including location of parking spaces,
internal circulation pattern, and ingress and egress points.
g) Dimensions of parking stalls and aisles.
h) Location of landscaping and irrigation system, including identification
of plant materials to be used.
i) Location of lighting
j) North arrow
B. REVIEW AND APPROVAL
1. Where a discretionary or ministerial approval is required for the use or uses
for which the parking is being provided, the off-street parking plot plan
application shall be reviewed and approved in conjunction with that
discretionary or ministerial approval process.
2. Off-street parking plot plan application shall be reviewed and approved in
accordance with the standards and procedures set out in Section 9.75 of this
Ordinance.
3. No use shall be established or changed, no development shall occur or be
expanded, and no building or grading permit or business license for any use
or development shall be issued until an application for off-street parking
plot plan review has been submitted to and approved by the appropriate
Review Authority.
4. No structures shall be permitted or constructed unless off-street parking
spaces are provided in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
5. The word "use" shall mean both type and intensity of use, and that a change
in use shall be subject to all the requirements of this Chapter.
6. When a structure is enlarged or increased in parking intensity, additional
parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter. Adequate spaces shall be provided for the expanded area, and the
intensification of use. In the D-C land use district an in lieu fee may be
collected in an amount as specified in the CBD Design Zone.
9.60-12
C. PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION
1. Any permit issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or modified
pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of this Ordinance. The Community
Development Director may modify the appeal to PC and CC.

9.61-1
Chapter 9.61
SIGNS
Sections:
9.61.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.61.02 DEFINITIONS
9.61.03 PROCEDURES
9.61.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
9.61.05 EXEMPT SIGNS
9.61.06 PROHIBITED SIGNS
9.61.07 TEMPORARY SIGNS
9.61.08 POLITICAL, CAMPAIGN OR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION SIGNS
9.61.09 NONCONFORMING SIGNS
9.61.10 OFF-SITE SIGNS
9.61.11 SIGN REGULATIONS BY LAND USE CATEGORY
9.61.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the
orderly and attractive construction, placement, and display of signs throughout the
City of Avenal. It is City policy that the primary purpose of signs is identification
and public information. Signs that cause distraction and represent potential safety
hazards, as well as aesthetic problems are prohibited. These general provisions
serve as specific development standards to be applied in addition to any provisions
within each Base or Combining zone.
No signs shall be erected or maintained in any land use district established by this
Ordinance, except those signs specifically enumerated in this Chapter. The number
and area of signs as outlined in this Chapter are intended to be maximum standards.
In addition to the enumerated standards, consideration shall be given to a sign's
relationship to the overall appearance of the subject property as well as the
surrounding community. Compatible design, simplicity, and sign effectiveness are
to be used in establishing guidelines for sign approval, but shall not limit maximum
standards for signs.
9.61.02 DEFINITIONS. As used in this Chapter, the following terms are defined in this
section:
Abandoned Sign. Any display not used for a period of 90 days or more which is
considered a Public Nuisance pursuant to the City of Avenal Municipal Code.
Address Sign. The numeric reference of a structure or use to a street address,
included as a part of a wall or monument sign.
A-Frame Sign. A free standing sign usually hinged at the top, or attached in a
similar manner, and widening at the bottom to form a shape similar to the letter "A".
9.61-2
Such signs are usually designed to be portable, hence they are not considered
permanent signs.
Anchor, Major or Major Tenant. A shopping center tenant, usually the largest or
one of the largest tenants located within the shopping center, which serves to attract
customers to the center through its size, product line, name and reputation. The
term anchor tenant is interchangeable with the term major tenant.
Animated or Moving Sign. Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical
position by any movement or rotation or which gives the physical impression of
such movement or rotation.
Area, Computation of Area. The following methods will be used to compute the
area of sign copy:
A. The area of a sign is to be computed by multiplying the total height by the total
length of all faces of the sign copy, excluding framework or base.
B. Where a two (2) sided sign contains identical copy on each side, the area of the
sign shall include both sides.
C. The area of a freestanding sign which has three or more faces shall be computed
by adding the areas of each face of the sign.
D. The area of a freestanding sign that is an object or statuary shall be computed by
the appropriate mathematical equation for determining total surface of an object.
Awning, Canopy or Marquee Sign. A non-electric sign that is printed on, painted
on, or attached to an awning, canopy or marquee and is only permitted on the
vertical surface or flap.
Banner, Flag, Pennant or Balloon. Any cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar
material used for advertising purposes attached to or pinned on or from any
structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle, including captive balloons and
inflatable signs but not including official flags of the United States, the State of
California, and other states of the nation, counties, municipalities, official flags of
foreign nations and nationally or internationally recognized organizations.
Bench Sign. Copy painted on any portion of a bus stop bench, or other bench
visible from the public right-of-way.
Billboard or Off-Site Sign. A sign structure advertising an establishment,
merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured,
or furnished at the property on which the sign is located.
9.61-3
Building Face and/or Frontage. The length of the single front building elevation in
which the primary entrance to the business is located. If more than 1 business is
located in any single building, then such length shall be limited to that portion
which is occupied by each individual business (see multi-tenant structures and mini
malls).
Changeable Copy Sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of copy through
manual, mechanical, or electrical means including time and temperature.
Civic Event Sign. A temporary sign, other than a commercial sign, posted to
advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal
organization, or similar non-commercial organization.
Commercial Seasonal/Daily Sign. An "open" or "closed" window sign, posted on a
daily or seasonal basis.
Directional Sign. Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way", "entrance", or "exit".
Directory Sign. A sign for listing the tenants or occupants and their suite numbers
of a building or center.
Double Faced Sign. A single structure designed with the intent of providing copy
on both sides.
Eaveline. The bottom of the roof eave or the roof parapet where no eave exists.
Face. The area or display surface used for the message.
Flashing Sign. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign that contains an
intermittent or sequential flashing light source.
Freestanding Sign. A sign which is supported by 1 or more uprights, braces, poles,
or similar structural components that is not attached to a building or buildings.
Future Tenant Identification Sign. A temporary sign which identifies a future use of
a site or building.
Governmental Sign. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of
any governmental function, or required by law, ordinance of other governmental
regulation.
Grand Opening. A promotional activity not exceeding 30 calendar days used by
newly established businesses, within 2 months after occupancy, to inform the public
of their location and service available to the Community. Grand opening does not
mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business.
9.61-4
Height of Sign. The greatest vertical distance measured from the existing planned
grade of the top of the curb or the street frontage to the highest element of the sign.
Holiday Decoration Sign. Temporary signs, in the nature of decorations, clearly
incidental to and customarily associated with holidays.
Identification Sign. A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other identifying
symbol, address, or any combination of the name, symbol and address of a building,
business, development, or establishment on the premises where it is located.
Illegal Sign. Any of the following: a sign erected without first complying with all
ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or
use; a sign that was legally erected but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon
which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, not maintained, or not
used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of not less than 90
days; a sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result
of the adoption of an ordinance, the amortization period for the display provided by
the ordinance rendering the display nonconforming has expired, and conformance
has not been accomplished; a sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe; a
sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways by the
acts of the City or County.
Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial light source for the purpose of lighting
the sign.
Institutional Sign. A sign identifying the premises of a church, school, hospital, rest
home, or similar institutional facility.
Inverted "T" Frame Sign. A free standing sign usually in the form or shape similar
to the letter "T" which is upside down or inverted. Such signs are usually designed
to be portable, hence they are not considered permanent signs.
Kiosk. An off-premise sign used for directing people to the sales office or models
of a residential subdivision project.
Logo Sign. An established trademark or symbol identifying the use of a building.
Monument Sign. An independent structure supported from grade to the bottom of
the sign with the appearance of having a solid base where the total height of which
is at least fifty (50) percent of the overall width of the sign.
Nameplate Sign. Sign, located on the premises, giving the name of address, or both,
of the owner or occupant of a building or premises.
9.61-5
Non-conforming Sign. A legally established sign which fails to conform to the
regulations of this Chapter
Off-site Sign. Any sign which advertises or informs in any manner businesses,
services, goods, persons or events at some location other than upon which the sign is
located. Off-premise sign, billboard, and outdoor advertising structure are
equivalent terms.
On-site Informational Sign. A sign commonly associated with, and not limited to,
information and directions necessary or convenient for visitors coming on the
property, including signs marking entrances and exits, parking areas, circulation
direction, rest rooms, and pick-up and delivery areas.
Open House Sign. A temporary sign posted to indicate a salesperson is available to
represent the property subject to sale, lease or rent.
Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the
bottom edge of the sign face is six (6) feet or more above grade.
Political Sign. A temporary sign directly associated with national, state, or local
elections.
Portable Sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or ground.
Promotional Sign. A sign erected on a temporary basis to promote the sale of new
products, new management, new hours of operation, new service or to promote a
special sale.
Real Estate Sign. An on-site sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a
portion of the premises on which the sign is located.
Roof Sign. A sign erected, constructed, or placed upon, above an eave, or over a
roof of a building, including a mansard roof and which is wholly or partially
supported by such buildings.
Sign. Any object, structure, housing, device, figure, statuary, painting, display
message, placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoor or
indoor, which is designed, constructed, created, engineered, intended or used to
advertise, or to provide data or information in the nature of advertising, for any of
the following purpose: to designate, identify or indicate the name of the business of
the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is located;
or, to advertise the business conducted, services available or rendered, or the goods
produced, sold, or available for sale, upon the property where the advertising
display is erected.
9.61-6
Sign Area. The entire copy face of the sign, including the surface, but excluding
any framing, projections, or molding, and the support structure. Individual channeltype
letters mounted on a building shall be measured by the area enclosed by four
straight lines outlining each word.
Sign Program. A coordinated program of one (1) or more signs for an individual
building or building complexes with multiple tenants. Also Comprehensive Sign
Plan.
Temporary Construction Sign. A temporary sign erected on the premises on which
construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the
names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, or similar
artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or
firms having a role or interest in the structure or project.
Temporary Sign. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time.
Temporary Subdivision Sign. A temporary sign pertaining exclusively to the
development or sale of residential land subdivisions and located within the same
subdivision.
Vehicle Sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked
on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention
to a product sold or an activity or business located on such property.
Wall Sign. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in
such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the
background surface of, the sign and which does not project more than eighteen (18)
inches from such building or structure.
Warning Sign. A sign limited to messages of warning, danger, or caution.
Wind Activated Sign. A sign or object, some or all of which is moved by wind as a
method of attracting attention.
Window Sign. Any sign that is applied or attached to a window or located in such a
manner that it can be seen from the exterior of the structure.
9.61.03 PROCEDURES.
A. Permit Required.
Except as otherwise noted within this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
erect, relocate, or alter electrically or structurally, any sign in the city without
first obtaining a valid sign permit and building permit, if required. No permit is
required for the following signs:
9.61-7
1. Window lettering covering no more than ten percent or three square feet,
whichever is less, of the aggregate window area on a single wall and stating
the name, business type, hours and address of business only;
2. Exempted signs in Section 9.61.05;
3. Temporary subdivision signs subject to the provisions of Section 9.61.07;
4. Signs shall be of professional quality or shall be done by a professional.
B. Approval of Signs.
1. Application for sign permits shall be approved by the Community
Development Director:
C. Review of Sign Application and Issuance of Permit.
1. The Community Development Director shall review the application and
supporting information for the sign permit and notify the applicant if it does
not comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. If the proposed sign is to be located within a shopping center, the provisions
of Section 9.61.04 must be complied with before the Community
Development Director can process a sign permit application.
3. All sign permit applications shall be reviewed by the Community
Development Director. The Community Development Director may
approve, approve with modification, or deny any application subject to the
criteria of this section. Any decision by the Director that the applicant
believes to be in error may be appealed to the Planning Commission in
conformance with Section 9.75.03. Any decision by the Planning
Commission may be appealed to the City Council. Any appeal must be filed
in writing, together with any fee established by resolution of the City
Council, within fourteen days after the decision is made. The Community
Development Director and/or Commission shall apply all the following
criteria as the basis for action.
a) The sign is consistent with this Chapter;
b) The sign does not constitute a detriment to public health, safety and
welfare;
c) Size, shape, color and placement of the sign is compatible with and
bears a harmonious relationship to the building and/or site which it
identifies;
9.61-8
d) Both the location of the proposed sign and the design of its visual
elements, lettering, colors, decorative motifs, spacing and proportions
are legible under normal viewing conditions prevailing where the sign is
to be installed;
e) The location and design of the proposed sign does not obscure from
view or unduly detract from existing adjacent signs;
f) The location and design of the proposed sign, its size, shape and color
will not detract from or cause depreciation of the value of adjacent
developed properties;
g) The location and design of a proposed sign in a commercial district
which is in close proximity to any residential districts does not have any
adverse effect on the value and character of the adjacent residential
district.
4. Upon a finding by the Community Development Director that the proposed
sign is in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all applicable
City building and electrical codes, the Community Development Director
shall issue a sign permit.
5. Every sign erected in the City shall be subject to inspection by the Building
and Code Enforcement Department for compliance with applicable City
codes and ordinances. Signs shall be of professional quality or shall be done
by a professional.
D. Variances.
1. Variance Purposes. The Planning Commission may grant variances to this
Ordinance in order to prevent unnecessary hardships that would result from
a strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of certain regulations
prescribed by this Chapter. A practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship
may result from the size, shape, or dimensions of a site or the location of
existing structures thereon, from geographic, topographic or other physical
conditions on the site or in the immediate vicinity, or from street locations
or traffic conditions in the immediate vicinity that would affect the signing
of said site or building. Such variances shall be in accordance with the
procedures and findings prescribed in Chapter 9.71.
9.61.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
A. All signs shall be fabricated, constructed, erected or installed and maintained in
such a manner as will comply with all ordinances of the City and the approved
permit.
9.61-9
B. No signs shall project over public right-of-way with the exception of pedestrian
signs in the D-C Zone and as follows:
1. Exceptions to the requirements of limiting a projecting sign may be granted
by the Community Development Director where cases of hardship exist for
structures existing prior to the effective date of this Chapter, or where a
hardship is created by existing development not conforming with current
development standards.
2. Signs may be placed on canopies, architectural features of a building,
awnings and other building appendages (regardless of project over public
right-of-way) upon review and approval of the Community Development
Director, as part of the sign permit process. The proposed sign shall be
subject to review and approval, conditional approval or denial by the
Community Development Director.
C. Illuminated Signs. Lighting for externally illuminated signs shall be so
arranged and maintained so that the light source is not directly visible from a
public right-of-way or adjacent property. Internally illuminated signs shall be
designed with an opaque, semi-opaque, or matte finish background on the sign
face, and shall not exceed 15 foot candles of light per square foot of sign area.
D. Billboards and other nonaccessory signs are prohibited.
E. No portion of a building sign shall exceed the height of the roofline or parapet
wall upon which it is mounted. The horizontal dimension of a building sign
shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of the surface upon which it is mounted.
F. Directional and/or information signs bearing no advertising message and located
on the site may be erected when necessary to facilitate circulation within the
site, facilitate egress and ingress or facilitate a public need, such as
identification of restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features
and facilities.
G. Time and temperature devices, located on private property and bearing no
advertising message shall be approved only through the Conditional Use Permit
procedure. Sign area used for the device shall be deducted from the permitted
sign area for the occupancy. No additional sign area will be granted for the time
and temperature device.
H. Signing for public and quasi-public uses of an education or religious type,
public and private charitable institutions and public uses of an administrative,
recreational, public service or cultural type approved through the conditional
use permit procedure shall be approved as part of the conditional use permit. In
the case of existing uses specified above, signing shall be reviewed and
9.61-10
approved by the Community Development Director.
I. Each commercial use which has direct pedestrian access through an exterior
building wall which is visible from public right-of-way, shall be allowed at least
sixteen square feet of building sign area, regardless of building occupancy
frontage. Commercial uses having a sole access from the interior of any
building or from an enclosed lobby or court shall not be allowed the minimum
building wall sign area referred to in this section.
J. Signs in the form of banners shall be allowed to be displayed a maximum total
of thirty (30) days during a calendar year.
K. Any sign (except those specifically exempt or not requiring a permit) which was
legally erected prior to the effective date of this Chapter and which does not
meet the requirements and standards of this Chapter can remain subject to the
provisions of this Section. Existing businesses may make structural alterations
to their existing nonconforming sign if they do not increase the
nonconformance.
L. If a commercial use vacates its premises due to the cessation of its operation or
relocation, all signs on the premises which do not conform to the provisions of
this Chapter shall be removed within thirty (30) days from notification by the
Community Development Director.
M. Design criteria for signs to be located within a shopping center or a mall type
development shall be approved by the Community Development Director before
any individual building permit application is processed by the Building and
Code Enforcement Department. Such review is to ensure that signs located
within a shopping center be designed to be harmonious and of compatible
design.
N. Signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed lobby or court
of a building or group of buildings and which are not visible from any public
right-of-way shall not be subject to the size or location criteria within this
Chapter. However, signs which require electrical connections or engineered
supports shall be required to obtain a building permit.
O. Variances and exceptions may be granted to the provisions of this Chapter, as
provided in Section 9.71.
P. Signs which do not conform to the provisions of this Chapter and are erected
after its effective date without obtaining the permit required thereby are
declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. All signs declared to be
unlawful by this section and all persons erecting or maintaining them shall be
subject to the terms of Section 9.78 and all amendments thereof. The
Community Development Director shall forthwith take all necessary actions or
9.61-11
proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment pursuant of said
sections of the Avenal Municipal Code. The remedies provided for in this
section are cumulative and nonexclusive.
Q. Murals which contain no advertising copy and which do not function as an
advertisement are subject to review and approval by the City Council.
R. Unless provided otherwise in a validly issued permit, all flag signs must
conform to all of the following requirements:
1. All flag signs must be maintained in clean and good condition and repair.
Any flag sign which is faded, filthy, torn, sagging or otherwise in disrepair
must be removed or replaced.
2. No individual flag sign shall exceed a height of fourteen (14) feet.
3. No individual flag sign shall exceed a width of three (3) feet.
4. No individual flag sign shall exceed forty two (42) square feet in area.
5. No more than four (4) flag signs shall be permitted per business.
9.61.05 EXEMPT SIGNS. The provisions and regulations of this Chapter shall not apply to
the following signs, nor shall the area of such signs be included in the computation
of sign copy allowed for any site or use; nor shall any permit be required for the
erections of such signs:
A. The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter:
1. Window signs not exceeding 3 square feet and limited to business
identification, hours of operation, address, and emergency information
including Use Permit information.
2. Signs within a structure not visible from the outside.
3. Memorial signs and plaques installed by a civic organization recognized by
Council.
4. Official and legal notices issued by a court or governmental agency.
5. Official flags of the United States, State of California, and other flags of
nations, counties, municipalities; official flags of foreign nations, and
nationally or internationally recognized organizations.
6. Identification signs on construction sites. Such signs shall be limited to one
directory or pictorial display sign per street frontage or entrance, up to a
maximum of 2 signs, identifying all contractors and other parties (including
9.61-12
lender, Realtor, subcontractors, etc.). Each sign shall not exceed 32 square
feet in area and 8 feet in height. Each sign shall be removed prior to
issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
7. Political signs, in compliance with this section.
8. Residential real estate signs for residential sales shall be 1 sign per street
frontage not exceeding 4 square feet in area and 6 feet in height, provided it
is unlit and is removed within 15 days after the close of escrow or the rental
or lease has been accomplished. Open House signs, for the purpose of
selling a single house or condominium and not exceeding 4 square feet in
area and 6 feet in height, are permitted for directing prospective buyers to
property offered for sale.
9. Commercial and industrial real estate signs for the initial sale, rental, or
lease of commercial and industrial premises: 1 sign per street frontage not
exceeding 32 square feet in area to advertise the sale, lease or rent of the
premises. No such sign shall exceed a height of 8 feet and shall be removed
upon sale, lease or rental of the premises or 24 months, whichever comes
first. Thereafter, 1 sign per premise not to exceed 16 square feet in size and
5 feet in height is permitted for the sale, lease or rent of the premise.
10. Future tenant identification signs: one wall or freestanding sign may be
placed on vacant or developing property to advertise the future use of an
approved project on the property and where information may be obtained.
Such sign shall be limited to 1 sign per street frontage, and a maximum of
32 square feet in area and 8 feet in overall height. Any such signs shall be
single faced and shall be removed upon the granting of occupancy by the
City.
11. Incidental signs for automobile repair stores, gasoline service stations,
automobile dealers with service repairs, motels and hotels, showing notices
of services provided or required by law, trade affiliations, credit cards
accepted, and the like, attached to the structure of the building; provided that
all of the following conditions exist:
a. The signs number no more than 4.
b. No such sign project beyond the property line.
c. No such sign shall exceed an area per face of 3 square feet.
d. Signs may be double faced.
12. Copy applied to fuel pumps or dispensers such as fuel identification, station
logo, and other signs required by State or Federal law.
9.61-13
13. Agricultural signs, either wall or freestanding types, non-illuminated, and
not exceeding 4 square feet for lots 2 acres or less and 16 square feet for lots
greater than 2 acres, identifying only the agricultural products grown on the
premises. The number of signs shall be 1 per street frontage or a maximum
of 2, with wall signs to be located below the roofline and freestanding signs
no higher than 8 feet.
14. Directional signs to aid vehicle or pedestrian traffic provided that such signs
are located on site, have a maximum area which does not exceed 3 square
feet, have a maximum overall height of 4 feet above grade, and are mounted
on a monument or decorative pole. Such signs may be located in the
required setback provided that a minimum distance of 5 feet from any
property line is maintained. Maximum height of any sign within the
required sight triangle at an intersection is 30 inches.
15. Traffic regulations: traffic or other signs of governmental agencies, signs
required by law or contract with a governmental agency, railroad crossing
signs, legal notices, and such temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs
as may be authorized by the City Council.
16. Warning signs: Signs of public utility companies, law enforcement or
public agencies indicating danger or which serve as an aid to public safety
or which show the location of underground facilities or of public telephones.
17. Holiday signs: Decorations to celebrate nationally recognized holidays and
local celebrations.
18. Public notices and announcements authorized by courts or public officials.
19. Flag signs of City: Flag signs owned, installed, maintained or
utilized by the City of Avenal.
9.61.06 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
A. The following signs are prohibited (reference Figure 9.61-1):
1. Abandoned Signs and Nonconforming signs and sign structures associated
with an activity, business, project or service which has not been sold,
produced, provided or conducted on the premises for a period of ninety (90)
days;
2. Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or any other
similar sign, except electronic message boards and Barber poles;
3. Banners and pennants, except as may be approved as part of a Specific Plan,
or Combining District;
9.61-14
4. Bench Signs;
5. Chalkboards or blackboards;
6. Changeable Copy Signs and electronic message boards, except as allowed
with movie theaters, arenas, stadiums, or auto malls in the appropriate land
use district;
7. Advertising signs which include any of the words "Stop", "Look" or
"Listen" or any other word, phrase, symbol, lights, motion, sound, fumes,
mist or other effluent that may interfere with, mislead or confuse the driving
public;
8. Permanent sale or come-on signs;
9.61-15
9.61-16
9. Portable signs or "A" frame signs;
10. Roof signs;
11. Signs on public property, except for traffic regulatory, informational signs,
signs required by a government agency, and model home tour signs;
12. Signs painted on roofs or fences;
13. Balloons or other inflatable devices or signs designed to attract attention;
14. Signs so located as to prevent free ingress and egress from any door,
window or fire escape;
15. Signs erected at or near the intersections of public and/or private rights-ofway
in such a manner as to create a safety hazard by obstructing clear view
of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Signs which by color, wording, design,
location or illumination resemble or conflict with any traffic control device;
16. Signs containing statements, words or characters of an obscene, indecent or
immoral character such as will offend public morals or decency;
17. Signs emitting sound;
18. Murals which contain advertising copy or which function as an
advertisement;
19. Any advertising device attached to a fence, pole, building or vehicle not
specifically authorized by this Chapter.
9.61.07 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
A. Temporary window signs may be permitted on the inside of windows facing out
which do not cover more than 25% of the individual window surface for a
period not to exceed 30 days use during any 60 day period; no permit required.
B. Special event signs and civic event signs may be approved by the Community
Development Director for a limited period of time as a means of publicizing
special events such as grand openings, carnivals, parades, and charitable events.
Such special event signs shall be limited to the following provisions:
1. Special event signs shall be limited to 30 days per event from the date of
erection or date of the permit, whichever occurs first.
2. Special event signs shall not include promotional sales signs.
9.61-17
3. Special event signs may include balloons, inflatable devices, search lights,
beacons, pennants and streamers.
9.61.08 POLITICAL SIGNS. Political or campaign signs shall be erected in accordance
with the following provisions (no permit required):
A. Any such sign shall be erected no earlier than eighty-eight (88) days prior to the
election and shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after such election.
Candidates successful in a primary election are subject to the same provisions
and shall remove signs fifteen (15) days following the primary election and may
erect signs not earlier than eighty-eight (88) days prior to the general election.
B. 1. Each candidate is allowed one political sign per parcel. On a residential site,
the sign may be a maximum of sixteen (16) square feet in area and erected
to a maximum height of six feet. On commercial or vacant sites, the sign
may be a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet in area and erected to a
maximum height of six feet except as provided in subsection (D) of this
section.
2. For the purpose of this provision, "residential site" means a lot or parcel
which has a residential use or structure built on it and "commercial site"
means a lot or parcel which has a commercial use or site on it. Residential
or commercial sites are not intended to reflect the zoning of the property.
C. Political or campaign signs may not be attached to trees, fence posts or utility
poles except on private property where written permission from the property
owners has been obtained.
D. Portable or temporary "A"-frame signs are prohibited. V-shaped signs (two
surfaces with two edges connected and the other two edges spread apart so that
the faces read from different directions) are permitted subject to the criteria that
they are supported with a maximum of three posts placed with an interior angle
of not more than ninety (90) degrees.
E. No political or campaign signs shall be attached and erected on public property
or within the public right-of-way and shall not obstruct sight line visibility at
intersections.
F. In cases where political or campaign signs are not removed within the specified
time period, the City Community Development Department shall cause to be
removed those signs which remain and the cost and expense of such activity
shall be paid by the candidate.
9.61-18
9.61.09 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
A. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all signs in the incorporated City
not otherwise regulated by State or Federal law. Except as otherwise provided in
this Chapter, any sign lawfully in use on the effective date of this Chapter but
made nonconforming thereby may continue to be used until such a time that
substantial improvements are made to said sign (defined as exceeding 25
percent of the assessed valuation) and the sign is not:
1. Structurally altered so as to extend its useful life.
2. Expanded, moved or relocated.
B. Nonconforming signs in existence beyond what provisions are provided for in
Section 9.61.09.A, are hereby declared illegal signs and a public nuisance and
shall be abated as provided for in Chapter 9.78 (Enforcement and Penalties) of
this Chapter.
C. A requirement for a nonconforming sign to be removed or altered so as to
comply with the requirements of this Ordinance may be imposed as a condition
on the approval of a subdivision, conditional use permit, variance, or other
discretionary development approval. In addition, ministerial approval may also
require removal or alteration of the non-conforming sign as a condition of
approval when in conjunction with a substantial improvement of said property.
D. Sign copy and sign faces may be changed on nonconforming signs when there is
no change in use of the site or when only a portion of a multiple tenant sign is
being changed.
E. Legal nonconforming wall signs shall not prevent the installation of conforming
freestanding signs, nor shall legal nonconforming freestanding signs prevent the
installation of conforming wall signs.
F. Non-conforming Signs shall be made to conform with this Chapter when there
is an improvement or expansion of 25 percent of the assessed valuation of the
site on which the sign is located.
G. The following signs shall be removed or made to conform with the provisions of
this ordinance within thirty (30) days of notification by the Community
Development Director:
1. Portable signs.
2. Banners.
9.61-19
9.61.10 OFF-SITE SIGNS.
A. Off-site Residential Subdivision Directional Signs
The following shall regulate and establish a standardized program of off-site
residential subdivision directional Kiosk Signs for the City. For the purposes of
this subsection, a residential subdivision is defined as a housing project within a
recorded tract where 5 or more structures or dwelling units are concurrently
undergoing construction.
1. No Kiosk Sign structure shall be located less than 300 feet from an existing
or previously approved Kiosk Site, except in the case of signs on different
corners of an intersection.
2. The placement of each Kiosk Structure shall be reviewed and approved by
the Community Development Director.
3. All Kiosk Signs shall be placed on private property with written consent of
the property owner or on City right-of-way pursuant to a City encroachment
permit.
4. A Kiosk Sign location plan shall be prepared, showing the site of each
Kiosk direction sign, and shall be approved by the Community Development
Director prior to the issuance of a sign permit.
a. There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards,
or appurtenances, added to the Kiosk Signs as originally approved, no
other non-permitted directional signs, such as posters or trailer signs
may be used.
b. All nonconforming subdivision Kiosk Directional Signs associated with
the Kiosk in question must be removed prior to the placement of
directional Kiosk Sign(s).
c. Kiosk Signs shall be removed when the subdivision is sold out. The
entity administering the program will be responsible for removal of
panels and structures no longer needed.
B. Off-Site Signs on Public Property
Private advertising signs may be placed on structures in the public right-of-way,
such as bus shelters, if there is a licensing agreement approved by the City
Council authorizing such off-site signs on public property. An application for a
sign permit must be approved prior to the construction of off-site signs on
public property and the applicant and the owner of the sign shall comply with
the provisions of this title regarding sign construction and maintenance
9.61-20
standards.
9.61.11 SIGN REGULATIONS BY LAND USE CATEGORY.
Table 9-6 identifies the signs permitted in each of the land use districts. In addition
to Table 9-6, all signs must be in compliance with all other provisions of this
Chapter pertaining to signs.

9.62-1
Chapter 9.62
ANTENNA AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Sections:
9.62.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.62.02 DEFINITIONS
9.62.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
9.62.04 SATELLITE DISH REQUIREMENTS
9.62.05 SATELLITE & ANTENNA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
9.62.06 LIMITATION
9.62.07 PERMIT REVOCATION & MODIFICATION
9.62.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. This Chapter establishes standards for the
appropriate siting and change in location of any telecommunications antenna and
related facility, including, but not limited to antennas for wireless
telecommunications facilities and amateur radio installations. These standards are
adopted to promote the following objectives:
A. Protect against the potentially adverse effects of telecommunications antenna
and facility installation;
B. Protect against visual blight which may result from unregulated installation of
antennas and other telecommunications facilities;
C. Protect the environmental resources of Avenal;
D. Insure that a competitive and broad range of telecommunications services and
high quality telecommunications infrastructure are provided; and,
E. Create and preserve telecommunications facilities that will serve as an
important and effective part of Avenal’s emergency response network.
9.62.02 DEFINITIONS. This Chapter establishes standards for the appropriate siting and
change in location of any telecommunications antenna and related facility,
including, but not limited to antennas for wireless telecommunications facilities and
amateur radio installations. These standards are adopted to promote the following
objectives:
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT STRUCTURE: A
building or cabinet-like structure located adjacent to, or in the immediate vicinity of
a wireless telecommunications tower or antenna to house equipment incidental to
the receiving or transmitting of wireless broadcasts, cellular telephone calls, voice
messaging and paging services.
9.62-2
CO-LOCATION OF TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNAS (CO-LOCATION):
The siting of two or more providers’ wireless Communication antennas on the same
telecommunication tower.
GEOGRAPHIC ANTENNA COVERAGE AREA: The general vicinity within
which an antenna serves the transmission requirements of a cellular or other
broadcasting network.
TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA: A structure intended to radiate and/or
receive a source of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) and accessory
equipment related to broadcast services, private radio services, pagers, beepers, data
and common carriers (as regulated by the FCC) including AM, FM, two-way radio,
fixed point microwave, commercial satellite, cellular and PCS communication
antennas.
TOWER, MONOPOLE: A slender self-supporting tower used to support
telecommunications equipment.
9.62.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. This Chapter establishes standards for the
appropriate siting and change in location of any telecommunications antenna and
related facility, including, but not limited to antennas for wireless
telecommunications facilities and amateur radio installations.
A. Use Guidelines and Dimensional Requirements:
1. Location.
a) Co-location of Telecommunication Antennas shall be required,
whenever possible. For towers up to one hundred fifty (150) feet in
height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designated to
accommodate at least two providers; higher towers, up to two hundred
(200) feet, at least three providers.
b) All co-located (and multiple user) Telecommunications Antenna shall
be designed to promote facility and site sharing. To this end,
telecommunication towers and necessary appurtenances, including but
not limited to parking areas, access roads, utilities, and equipment
buildings shall be shared by site users when in determination of the
Community Development Director, as appropriate, will minimize the
overall visual impact to the community. Each telecommunications
carrier applicant shall provide a letter to the Community Development
Director stating willingness to allow other carriers to Co-Locate on
their facilities wherever feasible or a written explanation why the
subject facility is not a candidate for Co-Location.
c) An existing use or structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
siting of an antenna or tower on that lot. To establish compliance with
9.62-3
setback and other zoning requirements, the dimensions of the entire
lots shall determine if an antenna or tower may be located there.
d) The minimum distance between wireless communication facilities
shall be at least one half mile radius from any other wireless
communication facility in the geographic antenna coverage area.
2. Height.
a) Maximum tower height, including antenna and other attachments, shall
not exceed two hundred (200) feet, measured vertically from the predisturbance
ground level at the center of the tower.
b) In no case shall a wireless communication facility, tower or antenna
exceed the minimum height necessary to accomplish the purpose it is
intended to serve.
3. Permitted Structures.
Monopoles shall be the only type of telecommunication towers permitted
in Avenal. Neither guyed towers nor lattice type towers shall be
permitted.
4. Setbacks.
a) Telecommunication towers shall be set back from each bordering
property line or right of way a minimum distance equal to one-half
(1/2) of the tower's height measured vertically from ground level at the
center of the tower to its highest point.
b) Accessory equipment structures or component cabinets shall be set
back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all property lines and rights of
way.
5. General Aesthetics.
a) Towers and/or antennas shall be constructed and maintained to
minimize visual obtrusiveness in color or finish.
b) Support buildings and related structures at tower sites shall be of such
design, materials and colors to blend with surrounding structures.
c) Outdoor storage of equipment or related items shall be prohibited on
tower sites.
9.62-4
d) Electrical and telephone lines extended to serve a wireless
communication facility shall be installed underground.
e) Sound emissions, such as alarm bells, buzzers and the like, shall not be
permitted.
f)Backup generators will be permitted if they meet the requirements of
this section.
6. Fencing.
All towers and their accessory equipment structures for any wireless
communications facility shall be enclosed by chain link fencing, not less
than six (6) feet in height. Such fences may be equipped with anticlimbing
devices. The gate into the fenced area shall be located so that it
is not easily visible from a street or adjacent property.
7. Screening/Landscaping (Buffer).
a) The base of a telecommunications tower, to a minimum height of ten
feet above average grade at the tower base, shall not be visible from
any public right-of-way.
b) Screening is required along all exterior sides of the fence described
above excluding the gate. Screening shall be a minimum width of
twenty (20) feet with two (2) rows of planting material placed ten (10)
feet on center, that are a minimum of five (5) feet in height when
planted, and that are expected to reach a height of eight (10) feet
within three (3) years. Suitable plant types shall be those
recommended by the City of Avenal tree list to ten (10) feet.
8. Lighting.
a) Telecommunication towers shall be lighted only if specifically
required by the FAA, in which case, FAA minimum lighting
requirements shall be applied.
b) When lighting is required by FAA, strobe lights shall be avoided
unless specifically required by FAA. When strobe lights are required
on telecommunication towers, a dual lighting system of white strobes
for daytime lighting and a red flashing light atop the tower for
nighttime lighting shall be used.
c) Except for lighting described in (b) above, all lighting at a wireless
telecommunications facility shall be shielded from view of adjacent
properties.
9.62-5
9. Signage
Wireless communication facilities shall not display signage, logos
symbols or any messages of a commercial or non-commercial nature on
towers, support structures or the fence-securing tower. A sign, not visible
from a public right-of-way or adjacent residences, shall be posted on the
fence gate identifying the current owner of the tower, emergency contact
person or agency, and applicable contact numbers.
B. Application Requirements
The following shall be submitted at the time of application.
1. Documentation prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered
in the State of California stating that it is technically or practically
impossible to provide a reasonable level of service by co-locating the
tower or antenna on an existing structure.
Technical documentation shall include a map of the search area, all
potential co-location sites stating why each is unsuitable, and the total
number of towers the service provider currently owns and plans to
construct within the geographic antenna coverage area or within the next
two years.
The applicant must submit, in writing, a declaration from owners of all
technically feasible co-location sites that they are unwilling to negotiate
space or evidence that the applicant has tried, in good faith to negotiate
reasonable terms for co-location and failed.
2. A scaled site plan, scaled elevation view, and supporting drawings,
calculations and other documentation, prepared and sealed by appropriate
licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all
improvements including topography, tower height requirements, setbacks,
access driveways or easements, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent
uses and any other information necessary to assess compliance with this
ordinance and compatibility with surrounding uses.
3. Documentation that FCC's minimum lighting standards have been applied.
4. No telecommunications antenna or related facility shall be sited or
operated in such a manner that it poses, either by itself or in combination
with other such facilities, a potential threat to public health. To that end,
any telecommunications antenna and related facilities operating alone or
in conjunction with other telecommunications facilities shall not generate
9.62-6
electromagnetic frequency (EMF) radiation in excess of the standards for
permissible human exposure to EMF as established by the California
Public Utility Commission (CPUC) General Order 159, the Federal
Communications Act of 1996, and/or including any other standards
adopted by the FCC that may come henceforth, be adopted or amended.
A Radio Frequency Radiation (RFR) Report from a licensed Radio
Frequency Engineer and a copy of the most recent EMF and RFR reports
and certifications required by the FCC shall be provided by the carrier at
the time any application required by this article is submitted to the
Community Development Director, which documents the proposed
facility's anticipated RFR levels.
Documentation that the proposed tower, antennas and equipment comply
with all applicable FCC regulations to protect the public from unnecessary
exposure to electromagnetic radiation, documentation shall be provided
that power density levels do not exceed those permitted by FCC.
5. In addition, all broadcast radio and television facilities and wireless
telecommunications facilities where 3 or more telecommunications
antenna or facilities are co-located on the same structure or on a parcel or
on a separate parcel of land within 300 feet of another telecommunications
antenna or facilities antenna shall prepare and submit an annual RFR
monitoring report and a copy of any RFR reports or certifications required
by the CPUC and FCC. The report shall address the cumulative field
measurements of radio frequency emissions of all antennas installed at the
subject site or location. The report shall quantify the radio frequency
emissions and compare the results with either the most current American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards, or other standards adopted
by the FCC or CPUC. Said report shall be subject to review and approval
of the Community Development Director and shall clearly identify the
cumulative field measurements and compare these measurements to the
most current ANSI, PCC and CPUC Standards for consistency with the
accepted standards. If the City finds that the wireless telecommunications
facilities service providers do not meet these standards, the service
providers shall bring the entire site into compliance with said standards, or
be subject to review before the Planning Commission at a public hearing
where the operation permit may be modified or revoked.
Documentation, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered
in California that the proposed tower and attached antennas do not exceed
the minimum height necessary to accomplish the purpose for which they
are constructed.
6. A notarized statement by the owner or CEO of the Tower specifying the
number of co-location sites the owner will make available on the proposed
9.62-7
tower and a declaration that such sites will be negotiated in good faith at
reasonable terms to other service providers.
7. Documentation, prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered
in California, to demonstrate that the telecommunication tower has
sufficient structural integrity for its intended uses. All towers and attached
antennas shall be capable of withstanding winds of at least 150 miles per
hour, and an earthquake in Zone No. 4.
8. If the proposed tower or antenna is to be located on lands owned by a
party other than the applicant or the City, a copy of the lease agreement
shall be with the property owner.
9. Documentation consisting of a certificate of insurance verifying a general
liability coverage of at least $1,000,000.00 at no cost to the City of
Avenal. The certificate shall contain a requirement that the insurance
company shall notify the City thirty (30) days prior to the cancellation,
modification, or failure to renew the insurance coverage required.
10. A copy of the approved National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
(NEPA) compliance report for all towers, antennas, accessory structures or
equipment proposed for the site.
11. A memo of understanding regarding removal of abandoned antennas and
towers. Any tower or antenna that is not operated for 180 continuous days
in a 12-month period shall be considered abandoned. The owner of such
antenna (s) or tower shall be responsible for its removal within ninety (90)
days of receipt of such notification by the City. Failure to remove
abandoned equipment will result in its removal by the City at the owner's
expense.
C. Review Process
The Community Development Director will use the following criteria in the
review of an application for any wireless telecommunication antenna, tower or
accessory structure.
1. The use is a public necessity.
2. The facility will not materially endanger the public health or safety if
located where proposed and developed according to the plan submitted.
3. The required conditions, specifications, and actions described in this
ordinance have been met.
4. The value of adjoining property will not be reduced.
9.62-8
5. The location and character of the facility will be in harmony with the area
in which it is to be located.
6. Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare this Ordinance or any part
thereof to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the remaining
provisions of this Ordinance nor the Zoning Ordinance of the City of
Avenal which shall remain in full force and effect.
9.62.04 SATELLITE DISH REQUIREMENTS. All satellite dish antennae shall comply
with the following standards:
A. Prior to installation of a satellite dish antenna in excess of 36", all appropriate
permits must be obtained from the Building and Code Enforcement
Department of the City of Avenal.
B. Satellite dish antennae shall be considered as accessory structures and as such
shall comply with all height and setback requirements for buildings in the
zone in which they are located.
C. All satellite dish antennae shall be located on the back half of the lot as
ground mounted units only, unless said dish is less than 36" diameter. All
ground-mounted dishes shall have trees and landscaping to screen the dish
from adjacent properties. Under no circumstance shall the height of the dish
exceed the height of the roof of the primary structure.
D. Satellite dishes less than 36" in diameter and mounted on structures shall not
be visible from public right-of-way and shall be located on the back half of the
lot.
E. Antennae may be ground mounted, roof mounted or above ground pole
mounted and shall be located on the back half of the lot and comply with the
height restrictions as set forth in this ordinance.
F. In Commercial and Industrial Zones, all roof-mounted antennae and satellite
dishes shall be located on a flat portion of the roof with parapets and/or an
architecturally matching screening plan.
G. No commercial advertising of any kind shall be allowed on satellite dish
antennae.
9.62.05 SATELLITE AND ANTENNA DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS. All satellite
dish and antennae shall comply with the following standards:
A. The Community Development Director and/or Planning Commission may add
any conditions to a permit necessary to achieve the compatibility of a satellite
dish antenna with its neighborhood.
9.62-9
B. All satellite dish antennae located in residential and commercial districts shall
be located to minimize the visual impact on surrounding residential properties
and from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties by use of screens,
fences and/or landscaping without impending the efficiency of the dish, to the
approval of the Community Development Director or Planning Commission.
C. Satellite dish antennae shall be painted to blend with their surroundings and
shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish, or reflective.
D. Prior to installation of a satellite dish antenna, all appropriate permits must be
obtained from the Building and Code Enforcement Department.
E. All proposals for roof-mounted antennae shall be designed by a registered
architect, or civil or structural engineer.
F. The installation of all satellite dish antennae shall be subject to the design of
footings, anchorage, and fasteners by a California registered architect, civil or
structural engineer, to meet the current City of Avenal Uniform Building
Code.
G. The electrical system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the
City of Avenal’s current National Electrical Code.
H. All electrical wiring associated with antennae shall be installed underground.
I. A satellite dish antennae shall be maintained in a safe and aesthetically
acceptable condition for the duration of the time it exists on the property.
9.62.06 LIMITATION. Certain parcels of land in the City may not be able to accommodate
satellite dish antennae because of unique terrain problems and/or adverse effects on
the surrounding neighborhood. In such instances, the Community Development
Director may withhold approval to construct, install and/or maintain a satellite dish
antenna. Decisions may be appealed pursuant to Section 9.75.
9.62.07 PERMIT REVOCATION & MODIFICATION. Any permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of this Ordinance.

9.63-1
Chapter 9.63
LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
Sections:
9.63.01 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
9.63.02 TREES
9.63.03 SHRUBS
9.63.04 MOUNDING
9.63.05 PARKING LOTS
9.63.06 TURF
9.63.07 IRRIGATION PLANS
9.63.01 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
a. All areas within a required setback shall contain living ground cover or a
combination of living and non-living ground coverings (non-living to be a
maximum of twenty (20) percent). Parking shall not be allowed within the
front or street side setback in any zone including mobile home space setbacks,
and shall be fully landscaped as set forth herein. All plants within required
setbacks to be of species suited to Sunset Western Garden Book Climate
Zones 8 and 9. The use of low water varieties, grouped by similar water
usage is required.
1) Definition. “Living ground cover” means low-growing plants or shrubs
that after being planted will grow together to form a solid cover in one
year or less. To achieve desired coverage, low growing groundcover
plants taken from flats shall be planted a maximum of twelve (12) inches
on center. Low growing, shrub type groundcovers in one-gallon cans shall
be planted a maximum of two feet on center. Spacing may be increased to
three feet on center for fast growing plants as approved by the Community
Development Director.
In areas susceptible to foot traffic, the use of long-lived low growing
shrubs and groundcovers such as Dwarf Coyote Bush, Lantana and
Junipers are preferred. Other groundcovers that do not last as long, such
as Baby Tears, Gazania, African Daisy, and annual or perennial flowers
shall be limited to fifteen (15) percent of the total living groundcover area.
2) Definition. “Nonliving ground cover” means forest humus or walk-on
bark, rock and other similar materials. Use shall require permission of the
Community Development Director.
9.63-2
3) All soil surfaces are to be covered by plant materials or nonliving
groundcovers as defined in this section. At least two inches of nonliving
materials shall be applied to all planting areas except turf.
b. Islands of a minimum area of eighty square feet shall be established at a
maximum separation of ten continuous parking stalls. The islands shall be
landscaped with ground covers and with a minimum of one fifteen (15) gallon
tree planted in each island. Actual numbers of trees will be based on the size
of the project as determined by the Community Development Director.
c. All landscaping as required in this Chapter shall be reviewed by the
Community Development Director as to the type, density of planting and size
of plants intended for use. All landscaped areas shall be permanently
maintained by the property owner.
d. All landscaped areas in commercial, industrial, and multi-family projects shall
be surrounded with six-inch high concrete curbing, unless waived by the
Community Development Director.
e. All landscaping on public property and parks shall conform to standards
adopted by the Avenal Parks and Recreation Department.
f. Buffer planting shall occur along freeways and major arterials in order to
visually screen uses and provide noise reduction. The landscaping shall be in
addition to screening requirements set forth in this Chapter.
9.63.02 TREES
a. Spacing of trees to be variable depending on type and eventual size, but that
there be a general minimum standard of one fifteen (15) gallon tree for each
twenty feet of frontage of a required landscaped setback, exclusive of
vehicular site lines.
b. Trees to be used in parking lots to be of a type that will form a full head on a
single trunk, i.e., Chinese Elm, Chinese Pistache, Golden Rain, Valley Oak or
other approved species. All trees planted within public right-of-way shall be
consistent with the City Street Tree Master Plan.
c. Where trees are planted in paved areas which are unprotected by curbs they
shall have a protective tree grate or equivalent device. Tree grates shall be
cast iron with a natural finish. A deep root-directing device shall also be used.
d. Landscaping setback areas, (excluding driveway approaches, maneuvering
areas, and public sidewalks) shall be landscaped. Within this area, trees shall
not be planted more than twenty (20) feet apart, and shall not be planted
within five (5) feet of any curb, sidewalk or driveway unless a root directing
9.63-3
device is used. NO plant that will grow to a height of more than eighteen (18)
inches shall be planted in the street right-of-way or with sight triangles unless
approved as a street tree consistent with the City Street Tree Master Plan.
e. Tree planters located in parking areas shall be sufficiently large and protected
so that a parked car does not extend into the minimum four foot by four foot
tree planting area which shall be landscaped with groundcover, shrubs and/or
climbing plants.
9.63.03 SHRUBS
a. At least seventy-five (75) percent of shrubs planted shall be of five-gallon
minimum size. One-gallon plants may be used if planted with approved low
water-using varieties.
b. Shrubs within a required setback shall be spaced in such a way so that at
maturity the plants will provide eight (80) percent ground coverage.
9.63.04 MOUNDING
a. Mounding or low growing shrub areas along street frontages may be used to
screen parking areas and shall not exceed a 1:7 slope and shrubs shall be lowgrowing
varieties with a mature height of four feet or less. Steeper slopes
may be allowed if irrigated by drip systems.
b. Mounding shall not be required for landscape areas which are ten feet, or less,
in width.
c. Mounds shall be compacted prior to planting to prevent excessive settlement.
d. Black plastic shall not be used under wood chips on mounds, or slopes in
general.
e. Turf on mounds requires slope rates of 1:10 or less. Mounds with
groundcovers require slope rates of 1:5 or less.
f. Mounds may not be used within site triangles, or in areas that will create
hazards to pedestrians or motorists.
9.63.05 PARKING LOTS
a. Trees shall be planted in all parking lots at a 1:3 ratio of trees to parking stalls.
b. Such tree planters shall contain approved trees on twenty (20) foot centers or
in such a manner as to have 50% shade coverage of the parking lot in ten
years.
9.63-4
c. Shrubs and trees to be arranged in such a way as to avoid damage from the
front of parked cars extending into the planter areas.
d. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated.
9.63.06 TURF
a. Turf shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the total landscape area and use
low water-using varieties. Public parks, golf courses, cemeteries, schools,
properties within a historic district, and residential office conversions are to be
reviewed for exemptions on a project by project basis.
b. No turf will be allowed.
i. In traffic medians on arterials or freeways;
ii. Parkways or planting areas narrower than five feet;
iii. Storm drainage ponds with slopes in excess of 1:6;
iv. On mounds or slopes exceeding 1:10;
v. Exceptions to turf in parkways may be granted by the Community
Development Director in cases where pedestrian access is necessary
across parkways.
9.63.07 IRRIGATION PLANS
a. Irrigation plans shall be required to be submitted along with landscape plans.
Irrigation plans must show an irrigation conformance calculation with a ten
percent safety margin. If the landscape and irrigation plan is required as the
result of a request for building permit, the landscape and irrigation plans shall
be submitted as a part of the building plans.
b. Water efficient systems (drip, mini-spray, bubbler type, etc., shall be used
whenever feasible.
c. All irrigation systems shall be equipped with an automatic controller capable
of dual or multiple programming. Controllers must have multiple cycle
capabilities and a flexible calendar program.
d. Separate valves shall be installed based on water use of planting and
exposures on irrigation systems with seven or more valves. Turf areas should
be on separate valve from non-turf areas on all irrigation systems regardless of
size.
e. Sprinkler heads must have matched precipitation rates within each control
valve.
9.63-5
f. Sprinkler head spacing shall be designed for head-to-head coverage and
placed at a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the diameter of throw.
g. Overhead sprays shall not throw water onto hardscaped or other non-planted,
or bare ground areas, including sidewalks between landscaped areas.
h. All sprinklers must be designed and installed to clear all plant material at
maturity and obstacles in its throw zone.
i. Serviceable check valves or separate valves according to water zones are
required where elevation differential may cause low head drainage.
j. Drip or bubbler irrigation systems are required on all trees and shrubs
regardless if planted alone, in groundcover or turf areas.
k. Automatic rain shut-off devices shall be required on all irrigation systems
with seven or more valves.
9.63.02 This Chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of this
Ordinance.

Chapter 9.64
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE DESIGN AND INSTALLATION
Sections:
9.64.01 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
9.64.02 APPLICABILITY
9.64.03 PERMITS AND FEES
9.64.04 AUTHORIZATION TO DESIGN A LANDSCAPE
9.64.05 DEFINITIONS
9.64.06 IMPEMENTATION
9.64.07 LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
9.64.08 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET
9.64.09 SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT
9.64.10 GRADING PLAN
9.64.11 LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN
9.64.12 IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN
9.64.13 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
9.64.14 IRRIGATION SCHEDULING
9.64.15 LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE
9.64.16 IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY AND IRRIGATION WATER
ANALYSIS (NEW AND REHABILITATED LANDSCPAES)
9.64.17 IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY
9.64.18 RECYCLED WATER
9.64.19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
9.64.20 PUBLIC EDUCATION
9.64.21 IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY AND IRRIGATION WATER
ANALYSIS (EXISTING LANDSCPAES)
9.64.22 WATER WASTE PREVENTION
9.64.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of these regulations is to establish
standards and procedures for landscape designs and installations which are publicly
and privately owned and maintained. The intent of these regulations is to develop
guidelines for landscapes which utilize reasonable amounts of water and maintain
design freedom. To this end, the regulations call for reduced water consumption,
responsible landscape design, water efficient landscape irrigation practices and
responsible landscape maintenance. These regulations are hereby incorporated by
this reference into the City's existing procedures for checking landscape and irrigation
plans as part of the building permit process.
9.64-1
9.64.02 APPLICABILITY. After January 1, 2012, these regulations shall be applicable to all
of the following landscape projects:
A. New construction and rehabilitation landscapes for public agency projects and
private development projects with a landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500
square feet requiring a building or landscape permit.
B. New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer installed in
single family and multi-family projects with a landscape area equal to or greater
than 2,500 square feet requiring a building or landscaping permit.
C. New construction landscapes which are homeowner provided and/or homeowner
hired in single family and multi-family residential projects with a total project
landscape area equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet requiring a building or
landscape permit.
D. Existing landscapes are limited to 9.64.21 and 9.64.22.
E. New cemeteries are limited to Sections 9.64.08, 9.64.11, and 9.64.16.
F. Projects that are exempt from this ordinance are the following:
1. Register local, state or federal historical sites;
2. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation
system; Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent
irrigation system; or
3. Plant collections as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the
public
Additionally, the Community Development Director may exempt any project from
specific regulation due to specific conditions associated with the project so long as
the project is in substantial compliance with the regulations.
9.64.03 PERMITS AND FEES. A landscape permit shall be required for all landscape
projects as outlined in Section 9.64.02. Fees for landscape permits shall be set by
City Council resolution.
9.64.04 AUTHORIZATION TO DESIGN A LANDSCAPE.
A. Landscape Architect. Must hold a professional license to practice landscape
architecture. May perform professional services for the purpose of landscape
preservation, development and enhancement, such as consultation, investigation,
reconnaissance, research, planning, design, preparation of drawings, construction
documents and specifications, and responsible construction observation.
(Business and Professions Code, Section 5615)
9.64-2
B. Architect. Must hold a professional license to practice architecture. May offer,
perform, or be in responsible control of professional services which require the
skills of an architect in the planning of sites. (Business and Professions Code,
Section 5500.1 and 5641.3)
C. Professional Engineers. Must hold professional registration to practice
engineering. May perform professional services as defined under Business and
Professions Code, Section 5615, as long as the work is incidental to an
engineering project. (Business and Professions Code, Section 5615, 5641.3 and
6701 et seq.)
D. Landscape Contractors. Must hold a C-27 Landscaping Contractor’s license. May
design systems and facilities for work to be performed and supervised by that
contractor. (Business and Professions Code, Section 5641.4 and 7027.5 and
California Code of Regulations , Title 16, Division 8, Section 832.27)
E. Nurserypersons. Must hold a license to sell nursery stock. May prepare planting
plans or drawings as an adjunct to merchandizing nursery stock and related
products. (Business and Professions Code, Section 5641.2 and Food and
Agriculture Code, Section 6721 et seq.)
F. Unlicensed Persons. The unlicensed persons noted below may perform services
as described:
1. Landscape/Garden Designers, etc. May prepare plans, drawings and
specifications for the selection, placement or use of plants for single family
dwellings; may prepare drawings for the conceptual design and placement of
tangible objects and landscape features; may NOT prepare construction
documents, details or specification for tangible landscape objects or landscape
features; and may NOT prepare grading and drainage plans for the alteration
of sites.
2. Personal Property Owners (Home Owners). May prepare any plans, drawings
or specifications for any one or two family dwelling property owned by that
person.
3. Golf course Architect. May engage in the practice of, or offer to practice as, a
golf course architect. May perform professional services such as consultation,
investigation, reconnaissance, research, design, preparation of drawings and
specifications and responsible supervision, where the dominant purpose of
such service is the design of a golf course, in accordance with accepted
professional standards of public health and safety.
4. Irrigation Consultants. May engage in the practice of, or offer to practice as
an irrigation consultant. May perform consultation, investigation,
9.64-3
reconnaissance, research, design, preparation of drawings and specifications
and responsible supervision, where the dominant purpose of such service is
the design of landscape irrigation, in accordance with accepted professional
standards of public health and safety.
(The applicable statues which govern the above unlicensed categories are Business
and Professions Code, Section 5641, 5641.1, 5641.5, and 5641.6)
9.64.05 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in
this chapter are defined as follows:
APPLIED WATER. The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.
AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER. An automatic timing device used to remotely
control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule
irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather based) or soil moisture data.
AMENDMENT. Any material added to the soil to alter the pH or improve the physical
properties of the soil.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVISE. A safety device used to prevent pollution or
contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. The document required under Section 9.64.13.
CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER. A person certified to design irrigation systems by an
accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the
US Environmental Protection Agency’s Water Sense irrigation designer certification program
and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.
CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR. A person certified to perform landscape
irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other
program such as the US Environmental Protection Agency’s Water Sense irrigation designer
certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.
CHECK VALVE or ANTI-DRAIN VALVE. A valve located under a sprinkler head or other
location in the irrigation system to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler
heads when the sprinkler is off.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS. Community apartment projects, condominium
projects, planned developments and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.
CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62). The number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to
gallons per square foot per year.
9.64-4
CONTROLLER. An automatic timing device with enclosure, which signals remote control
irrigation valves to open and close on a pre-set program.
CYCLE. The complete operation of an irrigation controller station.
DRIP IRRIGATION. Any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices
with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically
designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT. A project where the site is internationally altered
to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
EMITTER. A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the
soil.
ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE. The point at which plants in the landscape have developed
significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years
of growth.
ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS. The first year after installing the plant in the
landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically,
most plants are established after one or two years or growth.
ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU). The total water used for the landscape as
described in Section 9.64.08.
ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF). A factor of 0.7 that, when applied to reference
evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon
the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. A combined plant mix with a sitewide
average or 0.5 is the basis of the plant factor portion of this calculation. For purposes of the
ETAF, the average irrigation efficiency is 0.71. Therefore, the ET Adjustment Factor is (0.7) =
(0.5/0.71). ETAF for a Special Landscape Area shall not exceed 1.0. ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated
landscapes is 0.8.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION or ETo. A standard measurement of environmental parameters
which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month or year and is an
estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four to seven inch tall, cool-season grass
that is well-watered. Evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the Maximum
Applied Water Allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. The
Kettleman ETo is 60.18 inches per year (per www.cimis.water.ca.gov ETo zone map dated
1999).
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE. The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and
other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.
9.64-5
FLOW RATE. The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices
measured in gallons per minute (gpm), gallons per hour or cubic feet per second.
GRADING. The earthwork performed to alter the natural contours of an area to be planted.
HARDSCAPES. Any durable material (pervious and non-pervious), such as paving (decks and
patios) and hard surfaces which are part of the calculated total landscape area.
HOMEOWNER-PROVIDED LANDSCAPING. Any landscaping either installed by a private
individual for a single family residence or installed by a licensed contractor hired by a
homeowner. A homeowner, for purposes of this ordinance, is a person who occupies the
dwelling he or she owns. This excludes speculative homes which are not owner-occupied
dwellings.
HYDROZONE. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A
hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM. A complete connection of system components, including the water
source, the water distribution network, and the necessary irrigation equipment.
INFILTRATION RATE. The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per
unit of time (E.g. inches per hour).
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES. Species of plants not historically found in California spread
outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species
may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. “Noxious weeds” means
any weed designated by the Weed Control Regulation in the Weed Control Act and identified on
a Regional District noxious week control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the
California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.
IRRIGATION AUDIT. An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system
conducted by a Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not
limited to, inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission
uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow and preparation of an
irrigation schedule.
IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (IE). The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used
divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and
estimates or irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum average
irrigation efficiency for purposes of this ordinance is 0.71. Greater irrigation efficiency can be
expected from well-designed and maintained systems.
IRRIGATION SURVEY. An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an
irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test and
written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.
9.64-6
IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS. Any analysis of water use data based on meter
readings and billing data.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person who holds a license to practice landscape architect in
the State of California per Business and Professionals Code, Section 5615.
LANDSCAPE AREA. All the planting areas, turf areas and water features in a landscape design
plan subject to the Maximum Applied Water Allowance calculation. The landscape area does
not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks,
patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated
areas designated for non-development (e.g. open space and existing native vegetation).
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A person licensed by the state of California to design,
construct, maintain, repair, install or subcontract the development of landscape systems.
LANDSCAPED DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE. The documents required under Section
9.64.07.
LANDSCAPE PROJECT. Total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for
the purposes of this ordinance, meeting requirements under Section 9.64.07.
LATERAL LINE. The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers
from the valve.
LOCAL AGENCY. The City of Avenal that is responsible for adoption and implementing the
ordinance. The City of Avenal is also responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance
including, but not limited to, approval of a building or landscape permit for a project.
LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION. The application of irrigation water at low pressure through a
system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines and bubblers.
Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly
at or near the root zone of plants.
MAIN LINE. The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or
outlet.
MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA). The upper limit of annual applied
water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 9.64.08. It is based upon the
area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor and the size of the landscape area.
The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance.
Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to
edible plants, such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are
subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0.
9.64-7
MICROCLIMATE. The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of
the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density or proximity
to reflective surfaces.
MINED-LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS. Any surface mining operation with a
reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.
MULCH. Any organic materials such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, sawdust or organic
mineral materials such as rocks, gravel and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil
surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeks, moderating soil
temperature and preventing soil erosion.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of this ordinance, a new building with a landscape or
other new landscape such as a park, playground or greenbelt without an associated building.
OPERATING PRESSURE. The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed
by the manufacturer to operate.
OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS. Systems that deliver water through the
air (e.g. spray heads and rotors).
OVERSPRAY. Irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
PERMIT. The authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or
rehabilitated landscapes.
PERVIOUS. Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and
into the underlying soil.
PLANT FACTOR or PLANT WATER USE FACTOR. A factor, when multiplied by ETo,
estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this ordinance, the plant factor
range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is
0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in
this ordinance are derived from the Department of Water Resources 2000 publication, “Water
Use Classification of Landscape Species.”
POINT OF CONNECTION. The point at which an irrigation system connects (P.O.C.) into the
public water system. This is usually near the point at which the meter is located or will be
installed.
PRECIPITATION RATE. The rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.
PROJECT APPLICANT. The individual or entity submitting a Landscape Documentation
package required under Section 9.64.07 to request a building or landscape permit from the City.
A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.
9.64-8
RAIN SENSOR or RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE. A component which automatically
suspends an irrigation event when it rains.
RECORD DRAWING or AS BUILT. A set of reproducible drawings which show significant
changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked
up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.
RECREATIONAL AREA. Areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields and golf
courses where turf provides a playing surface.
RECYCLING WATER, RECLAIMED WATER or TREATED SEWAGE EFFLUENT
WATER. Treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as
landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.
REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE. Any re-landscaping project that requires a building or
landscape permit and meets the requirements of Section 9.64.02 and the modified landscape area
is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.
REMOTE CONTROL VALVE. A valve (R.C.V.) in an irrigation system which is activated by
an automatic electric controller via an electric control wire.
RIGHT-OF-WAY. Area directly adjacent to and property for use by public agencies.
RUNOFF. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows
from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a
rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR. An instrument for measuring the moisture content of the soil and
capable of interruption of the irrigation cycle sensor when excessive or inadequate moisture is
detected.
SOIL TEXTURE. The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt and clay.
SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA). An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible
plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water and areas
dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses and where turf provides a
playing surface.
SPRINKLER HEAD. A device which delivers water through a nozzle.
STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is
not flowing.
STATION. An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.
9.64-9
SWING JOINT. An irrigation component provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the
emissions device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent
equipment damage.
TURF. A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass,
perennial ryegrass, red fescue and tall fescue are cool season grasses. Bermudagras,
Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysiagrass and Buffalo grass are warmseason
grasses.
TOTAL LANDSCAPE AREA. The real property parcel area less the building footprint,
driveways, walkways and parking areas. Landscape areas include water bodies (i.e., fountains,
swimming pools, planting areas, ponds and hardscape as defined above) and natural areas.
VALVE. A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES. A plant species identified as having a low plant
factor.
WATER FEATURE. A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational
function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas and
swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is
included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for
onsite wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and
used solely for water treatment or stromwater retention are not water features and therefore are
not subject to the water budget calculation.
WATERING WINDOW. The time of day irrigation is allowed.
WUCOLS. The Water use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of
California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources and the Bureau of
Reclamation, 2000.
9.64.06 IMPEMENTATION. To assure that the intent of these regulations is carried out, the
applicant for a building or landscape permit is required to submit to the building
department, a Landscape Documentation Package as described in Section 9.64.07 for
review and approval by the Building Official.
During the installation of the approved landscape plan, it is the responsibility of the
Community Development Department (Public Works Department for landscape
improvements constructed within public property or street ways) to inspect the
project to confirm that the landscaping for the project was installed in accordance
with the approved plans. The landscape designer shall certify that the project is in
compliance with these regulations by signing and submitting a completed Certificate
of Completion. The Community Development Director, Director of Public Works, or
their designated representative, may authorize the deferral of landscape completion
9.64-10
for good and valid reasons subject to the posting of appropriate security with the City.
The City may establish and administer penalties to the project applicant for
noncompliance with this ordinance to the extent permitted by law. The amount of
these penalties shall be set by City Council resolution.
9.64.07 LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
Prior to construction of all new or rehabilitated landscapes, the following Landscape
Documentation Package shall be submitted to the building department for plan check
review and approval as part of an application for a building or landscape permit for
projects indentified in Section 9.64.02. All landscape plans and specifications shall
be prepared and signed by a licensed landscape architect, a licensed landscape
contractor or any other person authorized landscape designer shall be inserted next to
their signature on such plans.
The Landscape Documentation Package shall include the following elements:
A. Project Information:
1. Date
2. Project applicant
3. Project address (if available, parcel or lot number(s))
4. Total landscape area (square feet)
5. Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated public, private, cemetery, homeownerinstalled)
6. Water supply type (e.g., public well, private well, recycled)
7. Project applicant and property owner contact information
8. Landscape Documentation Package submittal checklist, see Appendix “A”
9. Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the
requirements of the Water Efficient Landscape Design and Installation
Ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package.”
B. Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet:
1. Hydrozone information table
2. Water budget calculations
a. Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)
b. Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU)
C. Soil Management Report
D. Grading Plan
E. Landscape Design Plan
F. Irrigation Design Plan
9.64-11
G. Landscape improvement plans shall be drawn on sheets no larger than thirty (30)
inches by forty-two (42) inches and no smaller than eighteen (18) inches by
twenty-four (24) inches at a scale which shows sufficient detail to clearly interpret
the plans, preferably not less than one inch equals thirty (30) feet.
9.64.08 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET.
A. A project applicant shall complete the following Water Efficient Landscape
Worksheets as identified in Appendix “B”:
1. A hydrozone information table (see Appendix “B”, Section “A”) for the
landscape project; and
2. A water budget calculation (see Appendix “B,” Section “B”) for the landscape
project.
B. Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:
1. Plant types shall be grouped so as to have zoned landscape areas that utilize a
similar water requirement. The cumulative effect of this zoning shall be to
create a moderate water consuming landscape. The zone types shall be
designated low, moderate or high water use with reference to water
consumptiveness. The plant factor value used shall be taken from WUCOLS
(a copy of this can be obtained form the City Public Works Department). The
plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0/4 to 0/6 for
moderate water use plants and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.
2. All water use features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone, and
temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.
3. All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as
described below.
4. The ETAF for special landscape areas shall not excess 1.0.
C. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA) shall be calculated using the
following equation: MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)] (ETo for
Kettleman is 60.18 inches per year (per www.cimis.water.ca.gov ETo zone map
dated 1999)).
The following calculations below are hypothetical to demonstrate proper use of the
equations and do not represent an existing and/or planned landscape project:
1. Example MAWA calculation: A hypothetical landscape project in Avenal with an
irrigated landscape area of 50,000 square feet without any Special Landscape Area
(SLA = 0, no edible plants, recreation areas or use or recycled water). To calculate
MAWA, the annual evapotranspiration (ETo) value for Kettleman is 60.18 inches
(per www.cimis.water.ca.gov ETo zone map dated 1999).
MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]
MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)
9.64-12
ETo = Annual Evapotranspiration (inches per year)
0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons)
0.7 = ET Adjusted Factor (ETAF)
LA = Landscape Area including SLA (square feet)
0.3 = Additional Water Allowance for SLA
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)
MAWA = (62.5 inches)(0.62)[(0.7 x 50,000 square feet) + (0.3 x 0)] = 1,356,250
gallons per year
To convert from gallons per year to hundred-cubic-feet per year:
= 1,356,250/748 = 1,813 hundred-cubic-feet per year (100 cubic feet = 748 gallons)
2. In this next hypothetical example, the landscape project in Avenal has the same ETo
of 62.5 inches per year (per www.cimiswaterca.gov ETo zone map dated 1999).and a
total landscape area of 50,000 square feet. Within the 50,000 square foot project,
there is now a 2,000 square foot area planted with edible plants. This 2,000 square
foot is considered to be a Special Landscape Area (SLA).
MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]
MAWA = (62.5 inches) (0.62) [(0.7 x 50,000 square feet) + (0.3 x 2,000 square feet)]
= 38.75 x [35,000 + 600] gallons per year = 38.75 x 35,600 gallons per year = 1,
379,500 gallons per year or 1,844 hundred-cubic-feet per year
D. Estimated Total Water Use shall be calculated using the equation below. The sum
of the estimated total water use calculated for all hydrozones shall not exceed
MAWA.
ETWU = (ETo)(0.62) PFxHA + SLA
IE
Where:
ETWU= Estimated Total Water Use per year (gallons)
ETo = Annual Evapotranspiration (inches)
PF = Plant Factor from WUCOLS
HA = Hydrozone Area [high, medium and low water use areas] (square
feet)
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)
0.62 = Conversion Factor
IE = Irrigation Efficiency (minimum 0.71)
1. Example ETWU calculation: Landscape area is 50,000 square feet; plant water use
type, plant factor and hydrozone area are shown in the table below. The ETo value is
62.5 inches per year. There are no special landscape areas (recreational area, area
permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants, and area irrigated with recycled
water in this example.
9.64-13
Hydrozone Plant Water use
Type(s)
Plant Factor
(PF)*
Hydrozone Area
(HA)
(square feet)
PF x HA
(square
feet)
1 High 0.8 7,000 5,600
2 High 0.7 10,000 7,000
3 Medium 0.5 16,000 8,000
4 Low 0.3 7,000 2,100
5 Low .02 10,000 2,000
Sum 24,700
*Plant Factor from WUCOLS
ETWU = (62.5)(0.62) 24,700 + 0
0.71
= 1,348,035 gallons per year
Compare ETWU with MAWA: For this example, MAWA = (62.5)(0.62) [(0.7 x
50,000) + (0.3 x 0)] = 1,356,250 gallons per year. The ETWU (1,348,035 gallons per
year) is less than MAWA (1,356,250 gallons per year). In this example, the water
budget complies with the MAWA.
2. Example EETWU calculation: Total landscape area is 50,000 square feet, 2,000 square
feet of which is planted with edible plants. The edible plant area is considered a
Special Landscape Area (SLA). The evapotranspiration value is 62.5 inches per year.
The plant type, plant factor and hydrozone area is shown in the table below.
Hydrozone Plant Water use
Type(s)
Plant Factor
(PF)*
Hydrozone Area
(HA)
(square feet)
PF x HA
(square
feet)
1 High 0.8 7,000 5,600
2 High 0.7 9,000 6,300
3 Medium 0.5 15,000 7,500
4 Low 0.3 7,000 2,100
5 Low .02 10,000 2,000
Sum 23,500
6 SLA 1.0 2,000 2,000
*Plant Factor from WUCOLS
ETWU = (62.5)(0.62) 23,500 + 2,000
0.71
= 1,360,047 gallons per year
9.64-14
Compare ETWU with MAWA: For this example, MAWA = (62.5)(0.62) [(0.7 x
50,000) + (0.3 x 2,000)] = 38.75 x [35,000 + 600] = 38.75 x 35,600 = 1,379,500 gallons
per year. The ETWU (1,360,047 gallons per year) is less than MAWA (1,379,500
gallons per year). For this example, the water budget complies with the MAWA.
9.64.09 SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy
plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed, after determination by the
Community Development Director, the Public Works Director or their designated
representative, that conditions warrant such testing.
A. Conditions which warrant the preparation of soil tests include, without limitation:
1. Serve grading that removes substantial topsoil and exposes subsurface soil
layers for new landscaping:
2. Suspected pervious land use conditions which could retard or complicate
desirable plant growth conditions.
Samples of the onsite soil shall be taken after completion of rough grading work and
all ancillary work that may cause compaction of the planting areas. The samples shall
be submitted to a certified soil testing laboratory for analysis. The soil samples shall
be taken to account for every two acres or less of landscape area and their locations
shall be noted on the approved site plan. All soil samples showing adverse rates of
compaction shall receive mitigation recommendations in the Soil Management Report
issued by the testing laboratory.
B. The Soil Management Report must provide the following information:
1. Soil texture;
2. Infiltration rate determined by laboratory testing or soil texture infiltration rate
table;
3. Ph;
4. Total soluble salts;
5. Sodium;
6. Percent organic material; and
7. Recommendations.
C. The project applicant shall comply with one of the following:
1. If significant mass grading is not planned, the Soil Analysis Report shall be
submitted to the city as part of the Landscape Documentation Package;
2. If significant mass grading is planned, the Soil Analysis Report shall be
submitted to the city as part of the Certificate of completion;
3. The Soil Analysis Report shall be made available in a timely manner to the
professionals preparing the Landscape Design Plans and Irrigation Design
9.64-15
Plans to make necessary adjustments to the design plans.
4. The project applicant shall submit documentation verifying implementation of
Soil Analysis Report recommendations to the City with Certificate of
Completion.
9.64.10 GRADING PLAN. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be
designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff and water waste. A Grading Plan shall be
submitted to the Building Official as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.
A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other agency permits
satisfies this requirement.
A. The project applicant shall submit a Landscape Grading Plan that includes
finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:
1. Height of graded slopes;
2. Drainage patterns;
3. Pad elevations;
4. Finish grade; and
5. Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
B. To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project
applicants:
1. Grad so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines
and does not drain onto non-permeable hardscapes;
2. Avoid disruption of natural drainage patters and undisturbed soil; and
3. Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
The Grading Design Plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied
with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Design and Installation Ordinance
and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design” and
bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law.
9.64.11 LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN. For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be
carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A Landscape
Design Plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the
Landscape Document Package:
A. Plant Material:
1. Any plant may be selected for the landscape providing the Estimated Total
Water Use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum Applied Water
Allowance. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly
recommended:
9.64-15
a. Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;
b. Selection of water conserving plant and turf species;
c. Selection of plants based on disease and pest resistance;
d. Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading
guidelines; and
e. Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists.
2. Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use with the
exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in
Section 9.64.12.B.4.
3. Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their
adaptability to the climatic, geologic and topographical condition of the
project site. To encourage the efficient use of water, the following is highly
recommended:
a. Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account
temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude and varying degrees of
continental and marine influence on local climate;
b. Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size,
invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure
(e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); and
c. Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer
shade and winter solar gain.
4. Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25 percent where the toe of the
slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where 25 percent means 1
foot of vertical elevation change for every 4 feet of horizontal length (rise
divided by run x 100 = slope percent).
5. A Landscape Design Plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire
safety and prevention. Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable
mulches.
6. The architectural guidelines of a Common Interest Development (which
includes community apartment projects, condominiums, planned
developments and stock cooperatives) shall not prohibit or include conditions
that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.
B. Water Features:
1. Reticulating water systems shall be used for water features.
2. Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water
features.
9.64-16
3. Surface area of water feature shall be included in the high water use
hydrozone area for the Water Budget Calculation.
4. Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
C. Mulch and Amendments:
1. A minimum two inch (2”) layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil
surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
groundcovers or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.
2. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.
3. The mulching portion of the see/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications
shall meet the mulching requirement.
4. Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the
soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section
9.64.07).
D. The Landscape Design Plan, at a minimum, shall:
1. Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter or other method;
2. Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water or mixed water use.
Temporarily irrigate areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water
use hydrozone for the water budget calculations;
3. Identify recreational areas;
4. Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;
5. Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;
6. Identify type of mulch and application depth;
7. Identify soil amendments, types and quantity;
8. Identify type and surface area of water features;
9. Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);
10. Indentify location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best
management practices that encourage onsite retention and infiltration of
stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the
landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited to:
a. Infiltration beds, swales and basins that allow water to collect and soak
into the ground;
b. Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess
flow and filter pollutants; and
c. Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or
porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff.
11. Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catching technologies (e.g., rain
gardens, cisterns, etc.);
12. Contain the following statement, “ I have complied with the criteria of the
Water Efficient Landscape Design and Installation Ordinance and applied
9.64-17
them for the efficient use of water in the Landscape design Plan”; and
13. Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape
contractor or any other person authorized to design a landscape.
9.64.12 IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system
shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturer’s
recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned
and designed to allow for proper installation, management and maintenance. An
Irrigation Design Plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted to the
Building Official as part of the Landscape Documentation Package.
A. System:
1. Dedicated landscape water meters are highly recommended on landscape
areas smaller than 5,000 square feet to facilitate water management.
2. Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil
moisture sensor data shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation
systems.
3. The irrigation system shall be designed to ensure that the dynamic pressure at
each emission devise is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure
range for optimal performance.
a. If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of
the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure
regulators, booster pumps or other devices shall be installed to meet the
required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
b. Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of
the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These
pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If
the measurements are not available at the design stage the measurements
shall be conducted at installation.
4. Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.) either integral or auxiliary that suspend or
alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be
required on all irrigation systems as appropriate for local climatic conditions,
Irrigation should avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.
5. Manual shut-off valves (such as gate valve, ball valve or butterfly valve) shall
be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply,
to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or
routine repair.
6. Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply
from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to
the applicable City Standards and Specifications for additional backflow
prevention requirements.
7. High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions created by
system damage or malfunction are recommended.
9.64-18
8. The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage,
overspray or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto nontargeted
areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes,
roadways or structures.
9. Relevant information from the Soil Management Plan, such as soil type and
infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.
10. The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the
Landscape Design Plan.
11. The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum,
the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 9.64.08 regarding the
Maximum Applied Water Allowance.
12. It is highly recommended that the project applicant inquire with the City about
peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water
restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.
13. In mulched planning areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to
maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
14. Sprinkler head and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation
rates , unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.
15. Head to head coverage is recommendations. However, sprinkler spacing shall
be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the
manufacturer’s recommendations.
16. Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers
subject to damage that are adjacent to high traffic areas.
17. Check valves or anti-drain valves are required for all irrigation systems.
18. Narrow or irregularly shaped areas, including turf, less than seven (7) feet in
width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or low
volume irrigation system.
19. Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any nonpermeable
surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from nonpermeable
surfaces may include drip, drip line or other low flow non-spray
technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of
the setback may be mulch, gravel or other porous material. These restrictions
may be modified if:
a. The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff
occurs; or
b. The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to
drain entirely to landscaping; or
c. The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology as
part of the Landscape Documentation Package and clearly demonstrates
strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 9.64.12.
Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the
irrigation audit.
9.64-19
20. Slopes greater than 25 percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system
with a precipitation rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may
be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or
technology as part of the Landscape Documentation Package and clearly
demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and
erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.
B. Hydrozone:
1. Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure,
soil conditions and plant materials with similar water use.
2. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is
appropriate for the plan type within that hydrozone.
3. Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs,
groundcovers and turf.
4. Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use or
moderate and high water use may be allowed if:
a. Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant
water uses and their plant factor; or
b. The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.
5. Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be
permitted.
6. On the Landscape Design Plan and Irrigation Design Plan, hydrozone areas
shall be designated by number, letter or other designation. On the Irrigation
Design Plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve and assign a number
to each valve. Use this valve number in the hydrozone information table (see
Appendix “B,” Section “A”). This table can also assist with the irrigation
audit and programming the controller.
7. The Irrigation Design Plan, at a minimum, shall contain:
a. Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
b. Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system,
including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads,
moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure
regulators and backflow prevention devices;
c. Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;
d. Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour) and
design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;
e. Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 9.64.18.
f. The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the Water
Efficient Landscape Design and installation Ordinance and applied them
accordingly for the efficient use of water in the Irrigation Design Plan”;
and
9.64-20
g. The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation
designer, licensed landscape contractor or any other person authorized to
design an irrigation system.
9.64.13 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
A. The Certification of Completion (see Appendix “C”) shall include the following
six elements:
1. Project information sheet that contains:
a. Date;
b. Project name;
c. Project applicant name, telephone and mailing address;
d. Project address and location; and
e. Property owner name, telephone and mailing address.
2. Certification by either the signer of the Landscape Design Plan, the signer of
the Irrigation Design Plan or the licensed landscaper contractor that the
landscape project has been installed per the approved Landscape
Documentation Package.
a. Where there have been significant changes made in the field during
construction, these “as-built” or record drawing shall be included with the
certification.
3. Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section
9.64.14).
4. Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 9.64.15).
5. Irrigation audit report (see Section 9.64.16).
6. Soil analysis report, if not submitted with Landscape Documentation Package
and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations
(see Section 9.64.09).
B. The project applicant shall:
1. Submit the signed Certificate of Completion to the Building Official for
review;
2. Ensure that copies of the approved Certificate of Completion are submitted to
the city and property owner or his or her designee.
C. The City shall:
1. Receive the signed Certificate of Completion from the project applicant;
2. Approve or deny the Certificate of Completion. If the Certificate of
completion is denied, the Building Official shall provide information to the
9.64-21
project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal or other assistance.
9.64.14 IRRIGATION SCHEDULING. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules
shall be developed, managed and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water
required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following
criteria:
A. Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.
B. Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 6:00 a.m. & 10:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. & 10:00 p.m. during daylight savings time unless weather conditions prevent
it. Operation of irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed
for auditing and system maintenance.
C. For implementation of the Irrigation Schedule, particular attention must be paid to
irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate and current reference
evapotranspiration so that applied water meets the Estimated Total Water use.
Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to Maximum Applied Water
Allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic
irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS)
or soil moisture sensor data.
D. Parameters used to set the automotive controller shall be developed and submitted
for each of the following:
1. The plant establishment period;
2. The established landscape; and
3. Temporarily irrigated areas.
E. Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that
apply;
1. Irrigation intervals (days between irrigation);
2. Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);
3. Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;
4. Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;
5. Application rate setting;
6. Root depth setting;
7. Plant typesetting;
8. Soil type;
9. Slope factor setting;
10. Shade factor setting; and
11. Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.
9.15 LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE.
9.64-22
Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular
maintenance schedule shall be submitted to the Community Development Department
with the Certificate of Completion.
A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine
inspection, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components,
aerating and dethatching turf areas, replenishing mulch, fertilizing, pruning, weeding
in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of
the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and
system maintenance.
Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed
components or their equivalents.
A project applicant is encouraged to implement sustainable or environmentally
friendly practices for overall landscape maintenance.
9.64.16 IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY AND IRRIGATION WATER
ANALYSIS (NEW AND REHABILITATED LANDSCPAES). All landscape
irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. For
new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after January 1, 2012,
as described in Section 9.64.02, the following apply:
A. The project applicant shall submit an Irrigation Audit Report with the Certificate
of Completion to the City that may include, but is not limited to, inspection,
system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or
runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.
B. The city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to,
irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for
compliance with the Maximum Applied Water Allowance.
9.64.17 IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY. For the purpose of determining Maximum Applied
Water Allowance, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.71. Irrigation
systems shall be designed, maintained and managed to meet or exceed an average
landscape irrigation efficiency of 0.71.
9.64.18 RECYCLED WATER. Irrigation systems and decorative water features shall use
recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the City stating that
recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will
not be available for the foreseeable future.
All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance
with all applicable local and state laws.
9.64-23
Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET
adjustment factor for special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.
9.64.19 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. Stormwater management practices minimize
runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water
quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and
grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase onsite retention and
infiltration are encouraged.
Project applicants shall refer to the City or Regional Water Quality Control Board for
information on any applicable stormwater ordinance and stormwater management
plans.
Rain gardens, cisterns and other landscape features and practices that increase
rainwater capture and create opportunities for infiltration and/or onsite storage are
recommended.
9.64.20 PUBLIC EDUCATION.
A. Publications: Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of
water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation
management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.
1. Developers/builders shall provide information to owners of new, single-family
residential homes regarding the design, installation, management and
maintenance of water efficient landscapes.
B. Model Homes: All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written
information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described
in their ordinance.
1. Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient
landscape featuring elements such as hydozones, irrigation equipment and
others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme.
2. Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing and
maintaining water efficient landscapes.
9.64.21 IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY AND IRRIGATION WATER
ANALYSIS (EXISTING LANDSCPAES). This section shall apply to all existing
landscapes that were installed before January 1, 2012 and are over one acre in size.
A. For all landscapes in 9.64.21 that have a water meter, the City shall administer
program that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses,
irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide
recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that
9.64-24
does not exceed the Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing
landscapes. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance for existing landscapes
shall be calculated as:
MAWA = (0.8)(ETo)(LA)(0.62).
B. For all landscapes in 9.64.21 that do not have a water meter, the City shall
administer program that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and
irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary
in order to prevent water waste.
All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation
auditor.
9.64.22 WATER WASTE PREVENTION. The city shall prevent water waste resulting from
inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target
landscape due to low head drainage, overspray or other similar conditions where
water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots
or structures. Penalties for violations of those prohibitions shall be established by
City Council resolution.
Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:
B. The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or
C. The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain
entirely to landscaping.
9.64-25
Appendix “A”
Landscape Documentation Package Submittal Checklist
1. City of Avenal Building Permit Application Form
2. Four (4) complete sets of drawing and documentation
3. Project information
4. Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet
5. Soil Management Report
6. Landscape Design Plan
7. Irrigation Design Plan
8. Grading Plan
9. All documents are signed per the Landscape Ordinance requirements
10. A Plan Review deposit (amount per the Fee Schedule)
11. This “Landscape Documentation Package Submittal Checklist”
9.64-26
Appendix “B”
Sample Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET
This Worksheet is filled out by the project applicant and is a requirement of the Landscape
Documentation Package.
Please complete all sections (A and B) of the worksheet.
SECTION A. HYDROZONE INFORMATION TABLE
Please complete the hydrozone table(s) for each hydrozone. Use as many tables as necessary to
provide the square footage of landscape area per hydrozone.
Hydrozone* Zone or
Value
Irrigation Method** Area (Sq.
Ft.)
% of Landscape
Area
Total 100%
Appendix “B” (continued)
*Hydrozone **Irrigation Method
HW = High Water Use Plants MS = Micro-spray
MW = Moderate Water Use Plants S = Spray
LW = Low Water Use Plants R = Rotor
B = Bubbler
D = Drip
O = Other
SECTION B. WATER BUDGET CALCULATIONS
Section B1. Maximum Applied Water Allowance (MAWA)
The project’s Maximum Applied Water Allowance shall be calculated using this equation:
MAWA = (ETo)(0.62)[(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)]
Where:
MAWA = Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)
ETo = Annual Evapotranspiration (for Kettleman is 60.18 inches per year)
0.7 = ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF)
LA = Landscaped Area includes Special landscape Area (square feet)
0.62 = Conversion factor (to gallons per square foot)
SLA = Portion of the landscape area identified as Special Landscape Area (square feet)
0.3 = the additional ET adjustment Factor for Special Landscape Area (1.0 - .07 = 0.3)
Maximum Applied Water Allowance = gallons per year
Show calculations:
Section B2. Estimated Total Water Use (ETWU)
The project’s Estimated Total Water Use is calculated using the following formula:
ETWU = (ETo)(0.62) PFxHA + SLA
IE
Where:
ETWU= Estimated total water use per year (gallons per year)
ETo = Annual Evapotranspiration (for Kettleman 60.18 inches per year)
PF = Plan Factor from WUCOLS (see Definitions)
HA = Hydrozone Area (high, medium and low water use areas) (square feet)
SLA = Special Landscape Area (square feet)
0.62 = Conversion Factor (to gallons per square foot)
IE = Irrigation Efficiency (minimum 0.71)
Hydrozone Table for Calculating ETWU
Please complete the hydrozone table(s). Use as many tables as necessary.
Hydrozone Plant Water Use
Type(s)
Plant Factor
(PF)
Area (HA)
(square feet)
PF x HA
(square
feet)
Sum
SLA
Estimated Total Water Use = gallons
Show calculations:
Appendix “C”
Sample Certificate of Completion
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
This certificate is filled out by the project applicant upon completion of the landscape project.
PART 1. PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET
Date
Project Name
Name of Project Applicant Telephone No.
Fax no.
Title Email Address
Company Street Address
City State Zip Code
Project Address and Location:
Street Address Parcel, tract, or lot number, if available
City Latitude/Longitude (optional)
State Zip Code
Property Owner or his/her designee:
Name Telephone
Fax No.
Title Email Address
Company Street Address
City State Zip Code
Property Owner:
“I/we certify that I/we have received copies of all the documents within the Landscape
Documentation Package and the Certificate of Completion and that it is our responsibility to see
that the project is maintained in accordance with the Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance
Schedule.”
Property Owner Signature Date
Please answer the questions below:
1. Date the Landscape Documentation Package was submitted to the City .
2. Date the Landscape Documentation Package was approved by the City .
3. Date that a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet (including the Water Budget
Calculation) was submitted to the City .
PART2. CERTIFICATION OF INSTALLATION ACCORDING TO THE LANDSCAPE
DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE
“I/we certify that, based upon periodic site observation, the work has been substantially
completed in accordance with the ordinance and that the landscape planting and irrigation
installation conform with the criteria and specifications of the approved Landscape
Documentation Package.”
Signature* Date
Name (Print) Telephone No.
Name of Project Applicant Fax No.
Email Address
License no. or certification No.
Company Street Address
City State Zip Code
*Signer of the landscape design plan, signer of the irrigation plan, or a licensed landscape
contractor.
PART 3. IRRIGATION SCHEDULING
Attached parameters for setting the irrigation schedule on controller per ordinance Section
9.64.14.
PART 4. SCHEDULE OF LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE
Attached schedule of Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance per ordinance Section 9.64.15.
PART 5. LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDIT REPORT
Attach Landscape Irrigation Audit Report per ordinance Section 9.64.16.
PART 6. SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT
Attach soil analysis report if not previously submitted with the Landscape Documentation
Package per ordinance Section 9.64.09.
Attached documentation verifying implementation of recommendations from soil analysis report
per ordinance Section 9.64.09.

Chapter 9.69
MOBILE MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES
9.69.01 – Definitions.
9.69.02 – Mobile Marijuana Dispensaries Prohibited.
9.69.03 – Marijuana Delivery Prohibited.
9.69.04 – Excluded Operations.
9.69.05 – Public Nuisance Declared.
9.69.06 – Violations.
9.69.01 – Definitions.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, the following words and phrases shall, for the
purposes of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as
follows:
A. “Mobile marijuana dispensary” means any clinic, cooperative, club,
business or group which transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or
delivery, of medical marijuana to a person.
B. “Person” means any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or
other organization. The term “person” shall include any owner, manager,
proprietor, employee, volunteer or salesperson.
C. “Operation” means any effort to locate, operate, own, lease, supply or
allow to be operated a mobile marijuana dispensary, or to aid, abet or assist in the
operation of a mobile marijuana dispensary.
9.69.02 – Mobile Marijuana Dispensaries Prohibited.
Mobile marijuana dispensaries are prohibited within the City of Avenal. No
person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated or aide, abet or
assist in the operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the City.
9.69.03 – Marijuana Delivery Prohibited.
A. No Person shall deliver marijuana to any location within the City from a
mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana
dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose.
B. No Person shall deliver any marijuana-infused product such as tinctures,
baked goods or other consumable products, to any location within the City from a
mobile marijuana dispensary, regardless of where the mobile marijuana
dispensary is located, or engage in any operation for this purpose.
9.69-1
9.69.04 – Public Nuisance Declared.
Operation of any mobile marijuana dispensary within the City in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated
pursuant to all available remedies.
9.69.05 – Violations.
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced by any applicable law.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, a violation of this Chapter is not
subject to criminal penalties.
9.69-2

9.70-1
Chapter 9.70
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Sections:
9.70.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.70.02 APPLICATION CONTENTS
9.70.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
9.70.04 BASIS FOR APPROVAL
9.70.05 TERMS AND CONDITIONS
9.70.06 PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION
9.70.07 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT TO RUN WITH THE LAND
9.70.08 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE
9.70.09 MAPPING
9.70.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish
procedures and general standards for the review and approval of Conditional
Use Permits authorized by various Sections of this Ordinance. Whenever a use
is listed in any Section of this Ordinance as a use permitted subject to securing a
CUP, it shall be approved only if it is consistent with the General Plan and meets
all requirements of this Ordinance and subject to any conditions deemed
appropriate by the decision making authority.
Conditional Use Permits are unique and their effect on the surrounding
environment can not be determined in advance of the use being proposed for a
particular location. At the time of application, a review of the location, design,
configuration, and potential impact of the proposed use shall be conducted by
comparing the use of the established development standards and design
guidelines. This review shall determine whether the proposed use should be
permitted by weighing the public need for and the benefit to be derived from the
use against the impact which it may cause.
9.70.02 APPLICATION CONTENTS. An application for a CUP shall include the
following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s).
C. Assessor's parcel number(s).
D. A site development plan (3 copies) drawn at the scale specified by the
Community Development Director, which includes the following
information:
9.70-2
1. Location of all existing buildings, structures, and improvements on the
property.
2. Location, size, height, and proposed use of all proposed buildings,
structures, and improvements on the property.
3. Existing and proposed streets and highways bordering and within the
boundaries of the property.
4. Location (and dimensions) of existing and proposed parking areas,
lighting, signs, walls or fences.
5. Proposed landscaping.
6. North arrow.
E. Elevations of proposed buildings or structures related to the CUP.
F. A narrative description of the proposed use of development including:
1. Description of the nature of the proposed use or development.
2. Identification of the applicable zoning district or districts and the Section
of this Ordinance under which the CUP is requested.
3. Reasons applicant feels justified in the granting of the CUP.
G. Application processing fees as adopted by the City Council.
9.70.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES. Verification: the Community
Development Director City Manager shall verify the accuracy and completeness
of the application. The date of verification shall be noted on the application.
Such verification shall be made within ten (10) days of the filing of such
application. Formal Acceptance: if the application is found to be accurate and
complete, it shall be formally accepted. The date of formal acceptance shall be
noted on the application. Acceptance of the application shall not constitute an
indication of approval. The application for a CUP shall be reviewed and
approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the procedures set out in Chapter 9.75 of this Ordinance.
9.70.04 BASIS FOR APPROVAL (FINDINGS). Following a hearing, the Commission
shall record the decision in writing and shall receipt therein the findings upon
which the decision is based. The Commission may approve and/or modify a
CUP application in whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if all of the
following findings are made:
9.70-3
A. The proposed use is conditionally permitted within, and would not impair
the integrity and character of the subject land use district and complies with
all of the applicable provisions of this Zoning Ordinance;
B. The proposed use is consistent with the goals and policies in the General
Plan;
C. The approval of the CUP for the proposed use is in compliance with the
requirements of the California Environmental Act (CEQA), this Ordinance,
and other applicable codes and ordinances;
D. There will be no potentially significant negative impacts upon
environmental quality and natural resources that could not be properly
mitigated and monitored;
E. The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use
are compatible with the existing and future land uses within the general area
in which the proposed use is to be located and will not create significant
noise, traffic, or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable or
detrimental to other permitted uses in the vicinity or adverse to the public
interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City;
F. The subject site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of
the use being proposed;
G. There are adequate provisions for public access, water, sanitation, and
public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed use would not be
detrimental to public health and safety; and,
H. The proposed use meets the minimum requirements of this Ordinance
applicable to the use and complies with all other applicable laws,
ordinances, and regulations of the City of Avenal and the State of
California.
9.70.05 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
A. Any CUP may include such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate or
necessary by the decision making authority to make the findings specified in
this Section. If no terms or conditions are specified, the use permit shall be
considered unconditional and valid for a five year period.
B. Within 1 year of CUP approval, commencement of construction shall have
occurred or the CUP shall become null and void. In addition, if after
commencement of construction, work is discontinued for a period of one
year, then the CUP shall become null and void. Projects may be built in
phases if preapproved by the review authority. If a project is built in
9.70-4
preapproved phases, each subsequent phase shall have a timeline as
determined reasonable by the Planning Commission.
C. All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or modify a
condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly
noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to
Section 9.75.
D. The Commission may, upon an application being filed 30 days prior to
expiration and for good cause, grant a time extension not to exceed 12
months. Upon granting of an extension, the Commission shall ensure that
the CUP complies with all current Development Code provisions.
9.70.06 PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION. The Commission may hold
a hearing to revoke or modify a CUP granted pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 9.75. Ten days prior to the hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing
to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which such CUP was granted.
Notice shall be deemed delivered 2 days after being mailed, first class postage
paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the County, and/or the
project applicant.
A CUP may be revoked or modified by the Commission if any one (1) of the
following findings can be made:
A. That circumstances have changed so that one (1) or more of the findings
contained in Section 9.70.04 (Basis for Approval) can no longer be made;
B. That the CUP was obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
C. That the use for which the CUP was granted has ceased or was suspended
for 6 or more consecutive calendar months;
D. That one (1) or more of the conditions of the CUP have not been met;
E. That the use is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation; and,
F. That the use permitted by the CUP is detrimental to the public health, safety
or welfare and constitutes a nuisance.
G. That the applicant and/or its successor has violated a law, rule and/or
regulation that results in the applicant and/or its successor being unfit to
pursue the use which has been granted.
9.70.07 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT TO RUN WITH THE LAND. A CUP granted
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter shall continue to be valid upon change
of ownership of the site, the business, the service, use, or structure which was
9.70-5
the subject of the permit application.
9.70.08 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE. A permit may include a condition to provide
performance security in a manner similar to the requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance for the faithful performance of any or all conditions of approval.
9.70.09 MAPPING. Within thirty (30) days after the granting of a CUP the City
Manager shall indicate on the zone map the lots affected by such CUP. Such
indication shall show the file number of such permit.

9.71-1
Chapter 9.71
VARIANCES
Sections:
9.71.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.71.02 APPLICATION CONTENTS
9.71.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
9.71.04 BASIS FOR APPROVAL
9.71.05 TERMS AND CONDITIONS
9.71.06 VARIANCE REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION
9.71.07 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING
AMENDMENTS ACT
9.71.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. Where special physical circumstances exist
limiting the development of a particular property in accordance with development
standards of a zoning district, relief from the development standards may be
secured by the granting of a variance from those standards. The granting or denial
of a variance will be based on whether the particular circumstances conform to the
standards of this Chapter. Under no circumstances will a variance for permitted or
conditionally permitted uses be considered or granted.
9.71.02 APPLICATION CONTENTS. An application for a variance shall include the
following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s).
C. Assessor's parcel number(s)
D. Site development plan drawn at a scale specified by the Community
Development Director, which includes the following information:
1. Location of all existing buildings, structures, and improvements on the
property.
2. Location of all proposed buildings, structures, and improvements on the
property.
3. North arrow.
E. Elevations of all buildings or structures related to the variance sought.
F. A narrative description of the proposed use or development, including:
9.71-2
1. Description of the nature of the proposed use or development.
2. Identification of the applicable zoning district or districts and Section(s)
of this Ordinance containing the standards from which variance is
sought.
3. Explanation of the variance sought.
4. Reasons applicant feels justified in the granting of the variance.
G. Applicable application processing fees as established by the City Council.
9.71.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES. The City Manager or his/her
designee shall investigate the facts bearing on each case to provide the
information necessary for action consistent with the intent and purpose of this
chapter. If the application is found to be accurate and complete, it shall be
formally accepted. The date of formal acceptance shall be noted on the
application. Acceptance of the application shall not constitute an indication of
approval. The application for a variance shall be reviewed and approved,
conditionally approved, or denied by the Planning Commission in accordance
with the procedures set out in Chapter 9.75.03 of this Ordinance.
9.71.04 BASIS FOR APPROVAL. The Planning Commission may approve or
conditionally approve an application for a variance if it finds all of the
following:
A. Special circumstances exist applicable to the subject property, including size,
shape, topography, location, or surroundings, such that the strict application of
the Zoning Ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other
property in the vicinity and in the same zoning district or districts.
B. The granting of the variance does not constitute a grant of special privileges
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zoning
districts in which such property is located.
C. The granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the vicinity.
D. The use for which the variance is applied shall be consistent with the underlying
zone.
9.71.05 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
A. Any variance granted may include such terms and conditions as deemed
necessary or appropriate by the decision making authority to effect the
purpose of the Chapter. If no additional terms or conditions are specified,
9.71-3
the variance shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite
period.
B. If the development for which a variance has been approved pursuant to this
Chapter has not commenced, or permits for each development have not been
issued, within one (1) year of the granting of the variance, the variance shall
become null and void and of no effect, unless an extension has been granted
by the decision making authority, upon the written request for an extension
before the expiration of the one (1) year period. This provision shall not
apply to applications approved in conjunction with another discretionary
permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that of the
associated permit.
C. All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to modify
a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly
noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to
Section 9.75.
9.71.06 VARIANCE REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION. Any variance issued
pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or modified pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of
this Ordinance.
9.71.07 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING
AMENDMENTS ACT.
A. Purpose
It is the policy of the City of Avenal, pursuant to the Fair Housing Amendments
Act of 1988, to provide people with disabilities, reasonable accommodation in
rules, policies, practices and procedures that may be necessary to ensure equal
access to housing. The purpose of these provisions is to provide a process for
making requests for reasonable accommodation to land use and zoning
decisions and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development and use of
housing for people with disabilities. In these regulations, “use of housing”
includes, but is not limited to, housing related services and the use and
enjoyment of the property.
B. Definitions
Act. The Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988.
Applicant. The individual making the request for reasonable accommodation
pursuant to these Regulations.
Code. The municipal zoning code or ordinance which sets forth the
jurisdiction’s land use and zoning regulations.
9.71-4
Department(s). The department(s) within the jurisdiction responsible for
administering requests for reasonable accommodation pursuant to these
Regulations.
Designee or Appeals Designee. The person(s), commission or other group of
persons designated to make determinations on fair housing accommodation
requests pursuant to these Regulations.
Disability. Any person who has a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more major life activities; anyone who is regarded as
having such impairment or, anyone who has a record of such impairment.
People who are currently using illegal substances are not covered under the Act,
unless they have a separate disability.
C. Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process
At all counters where application is made for a permit, license or other
authorization for the siting, funding, development or use of housing, notice in
the form set forth in Appendix A shall be prominently displayed advising
applicants that they may request a reasonable accommodation of existing rules,
policies, practices and procedures. Forms for requesting an accommodation
shall be available in all departments where decisions are made regulating the
siting, funding, development and use of housing.
D. Requesting Reasonable Accommodation
1. In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability,
any person may request a reasonable accommodation in the rules, policies,
practices and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development or use
of housing by completing the “Fair Housing Accommodation Request” form
(Appendix B) and filing it with the Department.
2. If an individual needs assistance in making the request for reasonable
accommodation, the department shall provide the assistance necessary to
ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant.
3. A request for reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and/or
procedures may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be
necessary to ensure equal access to housing; at the outset or during the
approval process.
E. Review of Requests for Reasonable Accommodation
1. When a request for reasonable accommodation is filed with the Department,
it is referred to the designee for review and consideration. The designee
9.71-5
shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days of the date of the
application and may grant the reasonable accommodation request or deny
the request. See Notice of Decision on Fair Housing Accommodation
Request form (Appendix C) for designee’s use.
2. If necessary to reach a decision on the request for reasonable
accommodation, the designee may request further information from the
applicant consistent with the Act, specifying in detail what information is
required.
3. Not more than thirty (30) days after receiving a written request for
reasonable accommodation, the designee shall issue a written decision on
the request; provided that, in the event that the designee requests further
information pursuant to the above paragraph, the running of this period shall
be stopped until the applicant responds to the request.
F. Factors for Considering Requests for Reasonable Accommodation
The designee shall consider the following criteria when deciding whether a
requested accommodation is reasonable:
? Is the housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable
accommodation, to be used by an individual protected under the Act?
? Is the request for accommodation necessary to make specific housing
available to an individual protected under the Act?
? Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the jurisdiction?
? Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental
alteration in the nature of a program?
G. Written Decision on the Request for Reasonable Accommodation
1. The designee’s written decision on the request for reasonable
accommodation shall explain in detail the basis of the decision, including
the designee’s findings on the criteria set forth in Sec. F above. All written
decisions shall give notice of the right to appeal and to request reasonable
accommodation in the appeals process as set forth below. The designee’s
Notice of Decision shall be sent to the applicant be certified mail.
2. If the designee fails to render a written decision on the request for
reasonable accommodation within the time period allotted by Sec. E, above,
the request shall be deemed granted.
9.71-6
H. Appeals
1. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the designee’s written decision, the
applicant may appeal an adverse decision by filing the Appeal of Denial of
Fair Housing Accommodation Request form (Appendix D).
2. An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by
which an appeal will be conducted. If an applicant needs assistance in filing
an appeal, the Department shall provide the assistance that is necessary to
ensure that the appeal process is accessible to the applicant.
3. All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal.
4. Nothing in these Regulations shall preclude an aggrieved individual from
seeking any other state or federal remedy available.

9.72-1
Chapter 9.72
ZONE MODIFICATIONS
Sections:
9.72.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.72.02 APPLICATION CONTENTS
9.72.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES
9.72.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION
9.72.05 BASIS FOR APPROVAL
9.72.06 TERMS AND CONDITIONS
9.72.07 ZONE MODIFICATION REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION
9.72.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to provide
limited administrative relief from the application of development requirements
specified in this Ordinance where the granting of the modification would
promote uniform development or relieve an unreasonable hardship, but would
not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property or
residents in the area. A zone modification shall not be granted where the relief
sought should more appropriately be sought through the variance procedure.
9.72.02 APPLICATION CONTENTS. An application for a modification shall include
the following:
A. Name and address of applicant.
B. Name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s).
C. Assessor's parcel number(s)
D. Legal description of the property.
E. Site development plan drawn at a scale specified by the Community
Development Director, which includes the following information:
1. Location of all existing buildings, structures, and improvements on the
property.
2. Location of all proposed buildings, structures, and improvements on the
property.
3. North arrow.
F. Elevations of all buildings or structures related to the variance sought.
9.72-2
G. A narrative description of the proposed use or development, including:
1. Description of the nature of the proposed use or development.
2. Identification of the applicable zoning district or districts and Section(s)
of this Ordinance containing the standards from which variance is
sought.
3. Explanation of the variance sought.
4. Reasons applicant feels justified in the granting of the variance.
H Applicable application processing fees as established by the City Council.
9.72.03 REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES. Applications which meet the
criteria specified in 9.72.04 are permitted under the provisions of this chapter.
All other applications for a modification shall be reviewed and approved,
conditionally approved, or denied by the Planning Commission in accordance
with the procedures set out in Section 9.75.03 of this Ordinance.
9.72.04 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION. The
Community Development Director may approve a reduction of up to 10 percent
for any setback, height, or other dimension.
9.72.05 BASIS FOR APPROVAL. The Community Development Director may
approve or conditionally approve an application for modification if it finds all of
the following:
A. The modification does not exceed the limits specified in Section 9.72.04.
B. The granting of the modification will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare or to property or residents in the vicinity.
C. Either of the following:
1. The modification would promote uniformity in development on the lot
or in the area.
2. The modification would alleviate an unreasonable hardship on the
property owner or applicant by the strict application of the requirements
of this Chapter.
9.72-3
9.72.06 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
A. Any zone modification granted may include such terms and conditions as
deemed necessary or appropriate by the decision making authority to affect the
purpose of this Chapter. If no additional terms or conditions are specified, the
zone modification shall be considered unconditional and valid for an indefinite
period.
B. If the development for which a zone modification has been approved pursuant
to this Chapter has not commenced, or permits for such development have not
been issued, within one (1) year of the granting of the zone modification, the
zone modification shall become null and void and of no effect, unless an
extension has been granted by the decision making authority upon the written
request for an extension before the expiration of the one (1) year period. This
provision shall not apply to applications approved in conjunction with another
discretionary permit. In such cases, the expiration period shall coincide with that
of the associated permit.
C. All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to modify a
condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at a properly
noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed pursuant to Section 9
.75.
9.72.07 ZONE MODIFICATION REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION. Any zone
modification issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked or modified
pursuant to Section 9.75.05 of this Ordinance.

9.73-1
Chapter 9.73
INTERPRETATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sections:
9.73.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
9.73.02 BOUNDARIES OF ZONING DISTRICTS
9.73.03 DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USE
9.73.04 CITY REVIEW OF PUBLIC UTILITY USES
9.73.05 INTERPRETATION OF MINIMUM LOT SIZES
9.73.06 DETERMINATION OF ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
9.73.07 FRONT-YARD SETBACK EXCEPTION
9.73.08 LESS RESTRICTIVE USES PROHIBITED
9.73.09 LOCATION OF DWELLINGS
9.73.10 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS
9.73.11 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES
9.73.12 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
9.73.13 THROUGH LOTS
9.73.14 YARD ENCROACHMENTS
9.73.15 FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES
9.73.16 BUILDING ACROSS PROPERTY LINES
9.73.17 RESIDENTIAL GARAGE CAPACITY
9.73.18 STREET DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
9.73.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish
guidelines for the interpretations of this Ordinance and to enumerate miscellaneous
requirements applicable generally to the matters included in this Chapter.
9.73.02 BOUNDARIES OF ZONING DISTRICTS. Where uncertainty exists as to the
Official Zoning Maps, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street,
highway, and alley lines or lot lines, such lines, shall be construed as extending
to the centerline of such street, highway, or alley.
B. In unsubdivided property or where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the
location of district boundary, unless specified by dimensions, shall be
determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
C. In case any uncertainty exists, the Community Development Director shall
determine the location of district boundaries.
D. Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the
regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to the vacated or
abandoned street or alley.
9.73-2
E. Where any private right-of-way or easement of any railroad, railway, canal,
transportation, or pubic utility company is vacated or abandoned, the
regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply to the centerline of such
vacated or abandoned property, unless said right-of-way or easement has been
previously zoned.
9.73.03 DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USE. When a property owner or applicant,
proposes or contemplates a use of property not expressly authorized as a permitted
use or as a conditional use by the regulations of the applicable zoning district or
districts, he/she may apply for a determination of similar use in accordance with the
procedures set out in this Section.
A. Application Contents:
An application for similar use shall be in writing on forms provided by
the Community Development Director and shall include the following:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Description of the proposed or contemplated use.
3. Identification of the zoning district or districts in which the use is proposed
or contemplated.
4. Identification of the use or uses listed as permitted uses or conditional uses
that most nearly resemble the proposed or contemplated use.
5. Explanation of why the property owner, applicant, or potential applicant
feels the proposed or contemplated use meets the criteria in Section
9.73.03.E for determination of similar use.
B. Time of Application:
An application for similar use may be submitted in conjunction with an
application for a ministerial or discretionary permit described in this Chapter or
at any other time as may be convenient to the applicant.
C. Determination of Similar Use by the Community Development Director:
Where an application for similar use is submitted in conjunction with an
application for a ministerial permit or if a proposed or contemplated use is
asserted to be similar to a permitted use in the applicable zoning district or
districts where no permit application is submitted, the Community
Development Director shall make the determination of similar use. Such
determination shall be made in accordance with the following procedures:
9.73-3
1. The determination shall be made in conjunction with the ministerial or
discretionary decision on the application submitted in accordance with the
procedures set out in Section 9.75.02 or 9.75.03 or, where no ministerial or
discretionary permit is involved, within forty-five (45) calendar days of
submission of the application.
2. Written notice of such determination shall be given by mail within a timely
manner after the date of the determination to the applicant and any person
filing a written request for notice of the determination.
3. The decision of the Community Development Director shall be final on the
expiration of seven (7) calendar days from and including the date of mailing
of notice of the decision, as required by paragraph 2, unless a notice of
appeal is filed with the Community Development Director pursuant to
Chapter 9.75 within such time.
D. Appeal:
The determination of similar use by the Community Development Director shall
be subject to appeal to the Planning Commission:
1. The applicant for the determination may appeal from the decision of the
Community Development Director on the application for determination of
similar use by filing a written notice of appeal with the Community
Development Director prior to the time the decision becomes final.
2. The Planning Commission may affirm or modify the determination of
similar use by the Community Development Director.
E. Basis for Determination of Similar Use:
The determination of similar use shall constitute a ministerial action. In making
a determination of similar use, the Community Development Director, or
Planning Commission, acting on an appeal shall determine that a proposed or
contemplated use is similar to a use or uses expressly authorized in the
applicable zoning district or districts if the proposed or contemplated use meets
the following criteria:
1. The use resembles or is of the same basic nature as a use or uses expressly
authorized in the applicable zoning district or districts in terms of the
following:
a. The activities involved in, or equipment or materials employed in the
use.
9.73-4
b. The effects of the use on the surrounding area, such as traffic impacts,
noise, dust, odors, vibrations, and appearance.
2. The use is consistent with the stated purpose of the applicable district or
districts.
9.73.04 CITY REVIEW OF PUBLIC UTILITY USES. The provisions of this Ordinance
shall not be construed to apply to the construction, installation, operation, and
maintenance of public utility distribution and transmission lines, towers, and poles
and underground facilities for providing gas, water, electricity, or telephone and
telegraph services by public utility companies under the jurisdiction of the CPUC;
provided, however, before any right-of-way for transmission lines is acquired for
regional or interstate facilities, the proposed route shall be submitted for
Community Development Director review and recommendations.
9.73.05 INTERPRETATIONS OF MINIMUM LOT SIZES. For the purpose of
complying with the minimum lot size and minimum lot area per dwelling unit
requirements, and other provisions of this Chapter, the lot sizes or lot areas shall
be net lot area and based on fractions or multiples of one acre equal to 43,560
square feet.
9.73.06 DETERMINATION OF ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES. If any
question arises as whether any particular uses or structure is accessory to the
primary use or structure in question, it shall be resolved based on the definitions of
accessory building or structure or accessory use found in Section 9.03.02 of this
Ordinance and the following criteria:
A. Nature and size of the primary use or structure
B. Nature and size of the accessory use or structure
C. Relationship of the accessory use or structure to the primary use or structure.
9.73.07 FRONT-YARD SETBACK EXCEPTION (SETBACK AVERAGING).
Minimum 15 feet of the average of the adjacent (4) four lots.
9.73.08 LESS RESTRICTIVE USES PROHIBITED. The express enumeration and
authorization in this Ordinance of a particular class of building, structure, premises,
or use in a designated zoning district shall be deemed a prohibition of such
building, structure, premises, or use in all zoning districts of more restrictive
classification, except as otherwise specified.
9.73.09 LOCATION OF DWELLINGS. Except where otherwise provided for in this
Ordinance, every dwelling shall face or have frontage upon a Street or permanent
means of access to a Street by way of a public or private easement or passageway
other than the alley.
9.73-5
9.73.10 HEIGHT OF BUILDINGS. No penthouse or roof structures for the housing of
elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment, towers, steeples,
roof signs, or other structures shall exceed the height limit provided in this
Ordinance.
9.73.11 HEIGHT OF STRUCTURES. Radio and television masts, flagpoles, chimneys,
and smokestacks shall extend not more than five (5) feet above the height limit
specified in this Ordinance, unless otherwise exempt.
9.73.12 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS. The following regulations shall apply to the location
of accessory buildings unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
A. Accessory buildings on a reverse corner lot shall be set back to the front yard
depth on the lot to the rear.
B. No accessory buildings or structures shall be located within a required front,
side or rear yard setback (exception: carports and garages only, are permitted
within 10 feet of the rear).
C. Accessory buildings may be considered a part of the main building if connected
by a common wall of not less than five (5) feet in length, or if not more than
twenty (20) feet from the main building and connected thereto by a roof of not
less than five (5) feet in width.
9.73.13 THROUGH LOTS. On through lots, either line separating the lot from a public
thoroughfare may be designated by the owner as the front yard; however, the rearyard
setback shall be the same as the front yard setback required on adjacent lots.
9.73.14 YARD ENCROACHMENTS. Where yards are required by this Chapter, those
yards shall not be less in depth or width than the minimum dimension specified for
any part, and they shall be at every point open and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as follows:
A. Cornices, canopies, eaves, or other similar architectural features not providing
additional floor space within the building may extend into a required front,
side, or rear yard no more than 30 inches.
B. Open, unenclosed, covered porches, platforms, or landing places or other
structures which are open on two or more sides which do not extend above the
level of the first floor of the building may extend into any front yard not more
than six (6) feet, provided, however, that an open work railing, not more than
thirty-six (36) inches in height, be installed or constructed on any such porch,
platform, or landing place. No variance may be granted for enclosure of these
porches, platforms or landings.
9.73-6
C. Stairwells and connected platforms or landings extending above the level of the
first floor of a building may protrude into a required front yard no more than six
(6) feet.
9.73.15 FENCES, WALLS AND HEDGES.
A. In all Residential zones, no fence, wall, or hedge located in the rear or side yard
shall exceed a height of six (6) feet. Seven (7) feet is allowed with permission
of the Community Development Director.
B. In all Residential zones, no fence, wall, or hedge located in the required front
yard shall exceed a height of three and one half (3-½) feet. Chain link fences
are not permitted.
C. Maximum fence, wall, or hedge height shall be measured from the finished
interior grade. That portion of a wall or fence functioning as a retaining wall
shall not be counted in determining overall fence or wall height.
D. In the Residential and Commercial zones, no barbed or concertina wire shall be
used or maintained as part or on any fence, wall, or hedge located along the
front, side, or rear lines of any lot, or within three (3) feet of said lines, and no
sharp wire or points shall project at the top of any fence or wall less than six (6)
feet in height.
9.73.16 BUILDING ACROSS PROPERTY LINES. Provided legal parcels of record are
owned by the same property owner (s), a building or buildings that establish the
main use may be developed across property lines to merge the properties into one
parcel for the determination of property development standards. A lot merger or lot
line adjustment shall be required as a condition of approval.
9.73.17 RESIDENTIAL GARAGE CAPACITY. The capacity of single-family residential
garages, whether attached or detached to the main dwelling unit, shall not be less
than two cars and shall not exceed three (3) automobiles with the exception of
garages in the R-E zone.
9.73.18 STREET DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED. Because of
changes that may occur in the local neighborhood due to increases in vehicular
traffic generated by facilities requiring site plan review, and upon the principle that
such developments should be required to provide street dedications and
improvements as near as practicable in proportion to such increased vehicular
traffic but should not be required to provide such street facilities for non-related
traffic, the following dedications and improvements may be deemed necessary by
the City Manager and may be required by him/her as a condition to the approval of
any site plan.
A. When the development borders or is traversed by an existing street:
9.73-7
1. Minor Streets, Local Streets and Cul-De-Sacs. Dedicate all necessary
rights-of-way to widen the street to its ultimate width as shown on any
master or precise plan of streets and highways, install curbs, gutters,
drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights, and required
utilities, and grade and improve from the curb to the existing pavements;
2. Major and Collector Streets. Dedicate all necessary rights-of-way to
widen the street to its ultimate width as established on any precise plan,
precise plan of streets and highways, or where the ultimate right-of-way
lines are otherwise determinable and the grades have been established or
can be determined, install curbs, gutters, drainage facilities, sidewalks,
street trees, signs, street lights, and required utilities, and grade and
improve the shoulder and one traffic lane abutting the development. In no
case shall a person be required to dedicate or improve the right-of-way for
a distance in excess of thirty (30) feet as measured from said ultimate right
-of-way lines; and
3. Major Thoroughfares (Expressways, Freeways and State Highways). Set
back all facilities the required distance from the ultimate property line as
shown on any master of precise plan of streets and highways and install
curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs, street lights,
and required utilities. No other dedication or improvements shall be
required.
B. Frontage and Other New Roads. All frontage roads or new roads of any class
made necessary by the development shall be dedicated and fully graded and
improved with curbs, gutters, drainage, sidewalks, street trees, street signs,
street lights, required utilities, grading and paving; provided, however, where
the street involved is indicated as an eventual major street or major
thoroughfare upon any master or precise plan of streets and highways, the
amount of grading and paving shall not exceed that required by such existing
streets. Where a frontage road is provided and improved, the improvements
will not be required.
C. Standards. All improvements shall be to City standards as adopted.

9.74-1
Chapter 9.74
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, USES, LOTS, AND SIGNS
Sections:
9.74.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.74.02 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
9.74.03 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES
9.74.04 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND
9.74.05 NONCONFORMING LOTS
9.74.06 DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS
9.74.07 EXISTING CONDITIONAL USES
9.74.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. This section is intended to limit the number and
extent of nonconforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement, reestablishment
after abandonment, and restoration and destruction. Within the zoning districts
established by this Ordinance, or as subsequently amended, there exist structures,
uses, lots, and signs which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or
amended but which would be prohibited or restricted under the conditions of this
Ordinance or future amendments. The City Council of Avenal declares that
nonconforming structures, uses, lots, and signs are incompatible with permitted uses
in the zoning districts involved and such nonconforming uses, lots, and signs shall
not be enlarged, expanded, or extended. Such nonconforming structures, uses, lots
and signs shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
by this Ordinance.
9.74.02 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
A. A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged in area, space, or volume that
will result in an increase in the degree of nonconformity.
9.74.03 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES.
A. Any nonconforming use may be maintained and continued provided there is no
increase or enlargement of the area, space, volume occupied, use or trips
generated by the facility to such nonconforming use, except as otherwise
provided in this Ordinance. Keeping of household pets/animals may not be
maintained and continued contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
B. Any part of a permanent building, structure, or land occupied by a
nonconforming use that is changed to or replaced by a use conforming to the
provisions of this Ordinance shall not thereafter be used or occupied by a
nonconforming use.
9.74-2
C. Any part of a building, structure, or land occupied by a nonconforming use that
has been abandoned for a period of one (1) year or more shall not again be used
or occupied for a nonconforming use.
D. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be
changed to a similar or less intense nonconforming use.
E. Whenever a nonconforming non-residential use or structure shall be destroyed
by fire or other calamity, by an act of God, or by the public enemy to the extent
of less than sixty (60) percent, the structure may be restored and the
nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that restoration is started within
six (6) months and diligently pursued to completion. The use must also have a
pre-inspection before utilities can be turned out. Whenever a nonconforming
use or structure is so destroyed or damaged to the extent of sixty (60) percent, or
more, or is razed, either voluntarily or as required by law, the structure shall not
be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in
which it is located, and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed. However,
this does not apply to residential structures which can be rebuilt in all zones if
they burn more than sixty percent (60%). The extent of damage to any structure
or use shall be as determined by the building official.
9.74.04 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
A. A nonconforming use of land shall not be expanded or extended in any way.
B. A nonconforming use of land shall not be changed to or replaced by any other
use except a use that complies with the regulations of the zoning district in
which the subject property lies.
C. Any nonconforming use of land that has been abandoned for a period of one (1)
year or more shall not be reestablished.
D. Any nonconforming uses of land where no main building has been established
or a nonconforming use occupying a structure having an assessed valuation of
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); or a nonconforming sign or
outdoor advertising structure; or a nonconforming sign intruding into the public
right-of-way shall be completely removed upon the effective date of the
ordinance certified in this Section and shall be discontinued within three (3)
years of the effective date of this Section.
1. Other nonconforming uses and structures shall be completely removed or
altered and converted to a conforming status in accordance with the following
schedule:
Type of Construction (Uniform Building Code, 1961 Edition): Type I and II;
time period, forty (40) years;
9.74-3
Type of Construction (Uniform Building Code, 1961 Edition): Type II and
IV; time period, thirty (30) years;
Type of Construction (Uniform Building Code, 1961 Edition): Type V; time
period, twenty-five (25) years;
Fences, hedges and walls: time period, six (6) months.
2. When such nonconforming use is removed, at or before the end of the
specified time period, every future use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this title. Repairs necessary to maintain a nonconforming use,
and minor alterations not exceeding an assessed valuation of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) shall not be construed as lengthening the allowed time
period for compliance.
3. The time period shall begin on the date the use first became nonconforming
on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
Whenever a use or structure becomes nonconforming because of a change of
zoning district boundaries or a change of regulations for the district in which
the site is located, the period of time prescribed shall be computed from the
effective date of the change of district or regulations.
4. Records and Notification of Nonconforming Uses and Structures. Within six
(6) months after the effective date of said ordinance and amendments thereto,
the responsible official shall compile a list and description of all structures or
uses which shall have become nonconforming by the adoption of said
ordinance or amendments. This list shall be recorded in the office of the
Kings County recorder.
5. Within one (1) year after the effective date of said ordinance or amendments
thereto, the Community Development Director shall notify in writing the
owners of all nonconforming structures or uses of the nonconforming status of
their property and the date when such structure or use shall be removed or
made conforming by said owners, if such removal for conformance is required
by the provisions of this title.
6. Continuing Nonconforming Uses or Structures. Nothing in this title shall be
construed to exempt a use or structure which became nonconforming under
the provisions of a previous ordinance and which continues to be
nonconforming under the provisions of this title. Such continuing
nonconforming uses or structures shall be discontinued or eliminated within
the schedule and under the provisions of the ordinance in force when they first
became nonconforming or within the schedule and under the provisions of this
title from the date of its enactment, whichever is more restrictive.
9.74-4
7. Nonconforming Yards. Existing structures which are nonconforming solely
because of the lack of required yards but which are within sixty (60) percent
of conformance shall be exempted from this section and shall be exempted
from making alterations to improve the existing structure, but shall otherwise
be subject to the provisions governing nonconforming structures.
E. The exploration for or development or production of oil, gas, or other
hydrocarbon substances shall not be considered nonconforming uses of land.
9.74.05 NONCONFORMING LOTS. Any lot which was legally recorded prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance may be used in conformance with the uses
permitted by the zoning district in which it is located, provided that all other Zoning
Ordinance and General Plan requirements are met.
9.74.06 DETERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING STATUS. Where there is doubt
regarding the legal nonconforming status of structures, uses of structures, uses of
land, parcel size, or signs, documentation shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director to establish legal nonconforming status.
9.74.07 EXISTING CONDITIONAL USES. Any existing structure or use which is a
conditional use in the district in which it is located shall be considered as a
permitted use for the purposes of this title; provided, however, that any expansion,
alteration or change of such use or structure shall be subject to approval of the
Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions prescribed in Chapter 9.70.

9.75-1
Chapter 9.75
PERMIT PROCEDURES
Sections:
9.75.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.75.02 MINISTERIAL PERMITS ISSUED BY THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR
9.75.03 DISCRETIONARY PERMIT DECISIONS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION
9.75.04 DISCRETIONARY PERMIT DECISIONS BY THE CITY COUNCIL
9.75.05 PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION
9.75.06 TIME LIMITATIONS ON CHALLENGES
9.75.07 BUILDING PERMITS
9.75.07.01 ISSUANCE-CERTIFICATE REQUIRED
9.75.07.02 FILING FEES
9.75.07.03 FORM OF APPLICATIONS
9.75.07.04 PUBLIC HEARINGS
9.75.07.05 LEGAL PROCEDURE
9.75.07.06 VIOLATION-PENALTY
9.75.08 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES PROHIBITED
9.75.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish review
and approval procedures for ministerial and discretionary permits provided for by
this Ordinance. Application contents and development standards and conditions for
the approval of permits are contained in the appropriate Chapter of this Ordinance.
9.75.02 MINISTERIAL PERMITS ISSUED BY THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
DIRECTOR. The ministerial permits specified in this Ordinance for review
pursuant to this Section shall be issued by the Community Development Director
upon submission of an application containing the information specified in applicable
Sections of this Ordinance and a determination by the Community Development
Director that the proposed use or development meets the development standards and
conditions specified in the applicable Section or Sections of this Ordinance. These
permits include all uses listed in Tables 9-1 and 9-3 as permitted uses or temporary
uses requiring a site plan review, not requiring a discretionary action or a change in
use of existing structures.
A. Application and Approval shall include the following:
1. An applicant for a ministerial permit pursuant to this Section shall submit an
application to the Community Development Director in the format described
in this ordinance, unless the Community Development Director waives any
of the information requirements. The application shall be accompanied with
any fee established by the City Council pursuant to Section 9.77.03.
9.75-2
2. The Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in writing
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or
that additional information is needed to complete the application.
3. Within thirty (30) calendar days of determining the application is complete,
and that the project or approach meets the development standards and
conditions specified in the applicable Section or Sections of this Ordinance,
or other applicable ordinances, the Community Development Director shall
issue the permit; or deny the permit if he/she determines that the proposed
use or development does not meet the standards and conditions specified in
the applicable Section or Sections of this Ordinance.
B. Appeal:
If the Community Development Director denies a permit pursuant to this
Section, the applicant may appeal such action to the Planning Commission.
1. The applicant may file with the Community Development Director a notice
of appeal to the action of the Community Development Director indicating
the basis of appeal within seven (7) calendar days of such action. The appeal
shall be accompanied with the fee established by the City Council pursuant
to Section 9.77.03.
2. The Planning Commission shall consider the appeal within forty five (45)
days of the filing of such appeal. No public hearing or notice shall be
required.
3. The Planning Commission may reverse or affirm the action of the
Community Development Director. The action of the Commission shall
constitute a ministerial action and shall be based solely on whether or not
the proposed use or development meets the development standards and
conditions specified in or established pursuant to the applicable Section or
Sections of this Ordinance.
4. The decision of the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 9.75.02.B.3
may be appealed to the City Council pursuant to Section 9.75.05.
9.75.03 DISCRETIONARY PERMIT DECISIONS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
The permits specified in this Section may be issued by the Planning Commission
following submission of an application containing the information specified in the
applicable Section of this Ordinance and a properly noticed public hearing. The
decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the City
Council:
A. Variances (Chapter 9.71)
9.75-3
B. Zone Modifications when filed in conjunction with an application for a permit
to be heard by the Planning Commission (Chapter 9.72).
C. Extensions of Time
D. Tentative Tract Maps
E. Appeals of Ministerial Decisions by the Community Development Director
F. Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 9.70)
G. Precise Development Plan (9.54)
1. Application and Approval
a) An applicant for a discretionary permit pursuant to this Section shall
submit an application in the format described in 9.55.13 to the
Community Development Director. The application shall contain all the
information specified for the application by the applicable Section of
this Ordinance, unless the Community Development Director waives
any of the information requirements. The application shall be
accompanied with the fee established by the City Council pursuant to
Section 9.77.03.
b) The Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in
writing within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt that the application is
complete or that additional information is needed to complete the
application.
c) Upon acceptance of the application as complete and completion of an
environmental document, if required, a public hearing shall be set in
accordance with this Chapter.
2. Notice of Hearing:
a) When an application has been submitted in accordance with this
Chapter, the Community Development Director shall set the application
for a public hearing.
b) At least ten (10) days before the date of any public hearing, the date,
time, place of the hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature
and location of the application shall be given by the following methods:
i) Publishing such notice once in a newspaper of general circulation.
ii) Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to the property owner,
the applicant, to each member of the City Council, to each member
9.75-4
of the Planning Commission, to the owners of all property within
three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property
which is subject of the application, and to any person who has filed a
written request for such notice. For the purposes of this notice,
property owners shall be the last known name and address of the
property owner names, on the last assessment roll of the County. If
the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered
pursuant to this paragraph is greater than one thousand (1,000), a
display advertisement of at least one-eighth (1/8) page in at least one
(1) newspaper of general circulation may be published at least ten
(10) days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice.
iii) In lieu of the requirements set forth in Section 9.75.03.2b).ii, notice
may also be given by posting notices not more than three hundred
(300) feet apart along each street upon which the subject property
abuts for a distance of not less than three hundred (300) feet in each
direction from the exterior limits of the subject property.
c) Public Hearing
A public hearing shall be held before the Planning Commission at a time
and place in accordance with the public notice. The Planning
Commission may establish its own rules for the conduct of such
hearings. Evidence shall be offered or presented, and the name and
address of each witness shall be recorded and made a part of the
permanent files. Any hearing may be continued provided that prior to
adjournment or recess the presiding officer shall announce the time and
place to which the hearing will be continued.
3. Decision:
a) The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, or deny
any application following the close of the public hearing on the matter or
within thirty-five (35) days thereafter by resolution, or later as may be
practicable. Such resolution shall include findings in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance. The decision shall be final, subject to
appeal in accordance with this Chapter.
b) Written notice of such decision shall be given by mail within seven (7)
calendar days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any
person filing a written request for notice of the decision.
c) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final on expiration of
fourteen (14) calendar days from and including the date of the decision,
unless a notice of appeal is filed with the Community Development
Director within such time.
9.75-5
d) All conditions of approval shall be final, and a request to delete or to
modify a condition to make it less restrictive shall only be considered at
a properly noticed public hearing, unless said conditions are appealed
pursuant to Section 9.75.04.D.
4. Appeal:
a) Any decision of the Planning Commission pursuant to this Section shall
be subject to appeal to the City Council.
b) The applicant or any other person aggrieved may appeal from such
decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the Community
Development Director prior to the time the decision becomes final. The
Community Development Director shall furnish forms of notice of
appeal. The appeal shall be accompanied with the fee established by the
City Council pursuant to Section 9.77.03.
c) Notice of the hearing on appeal shall be given in the manner and time
provided in Section 9.75.06. Notice of the hearing on appeal shall also
be given not less than ten (10) days before such hearing to each person
entitled to notice of the preceding decision.
d) The City Council may reserve, affirm wholly or partly, modify, or attach
other or additional conditions to the decision appealed form.
e) A decision of the City Council on any such appeal shall be final on
adoption of an order or resolution containing its determination, and no
notice thereof need be given.
5. Permit Issued:
No permit shall be issued prior to the expiration of any appeal period.
9.75.04 DISCRETIONARY PERMIT DECISIONS BY THE CITY COUNCIL. The
discretionary permits specified in this Ordinance for review pursuant to this Section
may be issued by the City Council following submission of an application
containing the information specified in the applicable Section of this Ordinance,
review and recommendation by the Planning Commission and a properly noticed
public hearing. These permits include:
A. Amendments to this Ordinance (Chapter 9.76)
B. Application for Change of Zone Classification (Chapter 9.76)
C. Specific Plans
9.75-6
D. CL Site Development Plan Review (Section 17.52) when filed in conjunction
with an application for change of zone classification or with a tentative
subdivision map.
E. CUP’s, variances, and zone modifications when filed in conjunction with an
application for a change in zone classification or for a tentative subdivision map
(Chapter 9.70, 9.71, and 9.72).
F. Appeal of Planning Commission Decisions (Section 9.75.03(G(4)).
9.75.05 PERMIT REVOCATION AND MODIFICATION. Any permit, CUP, variance, or
zone modification issued pursuant to this Chapter may be modified or revoked by
the official or decision making body that originally approved the permit by the same
procedure under which the permit was issued for any of the following causes:
A. That any term or condition of the permit, CUP, variance, or zone modification
has not been complied with.
B. That the property or portion thereof subject to the permit, CUP, variance, or
zone modification is used or maintained in violation of any statute, ordinance,
law, or regulation.
C. That the use for which the permit, CUP, variance, or zone modification was
granted has been so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety
or as to constitute a nuisance.
D. That changes in technology or in the type or amount of development in the
vicinity of the use or other good cause warrants modification of the conditions
of operation or imposition of additional conditions of operation to assure that
the use remains compatible with existing and potential uses of other property
within the general area in which the use is located.
E. That the applicant and/or its successor has violated a law, rule and/or regulation
that results in the applicant and/or its successor being unfit to pursue the use
which has been granted.
9.75.06 TIME LIMITATIONS ON CHALLENGES. Any action or proceeding to attack,
review, set aside, void, or annul any decision made pursuant to this Chapter, or
concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made
prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any
condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action
or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision
and the legislative body is served within sixty (60) days after the date of the
decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or
any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of that decision or of these
9.75-7
proceedings, acts, or determinations.
9.75.07 BUILDING PERMITS.
9.75.07.01 ISSUANCE-CERTIFICATE REQUIRED. Before a building permit shall be issued
for any such building or structure, the City Manager shall secure a certificate that:
A. The proposed building is in conformity with the site plan and conditions
approved by the City Manager.
B. All required on-site (outside the City right-of-way) improvements shall have
been completed. If the off-site improvements have not been completed, the
permittee shall have entered into an agreement with the City to complete such
work within six (6) months from the date of the issuance of the permit. The
City Manager may extend the completion date for such off-site improvements
one additional six (6) month period upon the written request of the permittee
upon a showing of good cause therefore. Such an agreement shall be secured
either by cash deposited with the City, a cash deposit in an irrevocable escrow
approved by the City Manager, or other financial security approved by the City
Manager as the equivalent thereof. Such security shall be in the amount of one
hundred (100) percent of the estimated costs of completion, such costs to be
determined by the City Manager. In the event such work is not completed
within the period provided, or any extension thereof, the City shall be
authorized to take all necessary action to enforce the agreement, including the
use of security, to cause the completion of all required improvements. Moneys
deposited with the City or in escrow may be partially released to the depositor
by the City Manager during the progress of the work so long as the same ratio
of security is maintained on deposit to secure all uncompleted work; and
C. All of the required dedications have been given.
9.75.07.02 FILING FEES. Filing fees shall be paid by the applicant to the City to defray the
expenses of postage, posting, advertising and processing applications according to
the several procedures provided in this chapter in such amounts as the council may
fix by resolution.
9.75.07.03 FORM OF APPLICATIONS. The commission shall prescribe the form of all
applications provided for in this chapter, which forms shall, among other things,
indicate the accompanying data to be furnished by the applicant so as to assure the
fullest practicable presentation of the facts for the proper consideration of the matter
involved in each case and for a permanent record thereof. Each application
provided for in this chapter shall be signed by one (1) or more owners or lessees of
the property in respect to which the application is filed. In all cases, such
applications shall be provided at the City Hall.
9.75.07.04 PUBLIC HEARINGS. The commission may establish its own rules for the conduct
of public hearings, and the member of the commission presiding at such hearings
9.75-8
shall have the power to administer oaths to any person testifying. The commission
may for any reason, when it deems such action necessary or desirable, continue any
hearing to a certain date, time and place, and the public announcement of such date,
time and place of the hearing to be continued shall, for all purposes, be sufficient
notice thereof to all persons.
9.75.07.05 LEGAL PROCEDURE. Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed,
altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, and any use of land, buildings or premises established, conducted, operated
or maintained contrary to the provision of this chapter shall be hereby declared to
be unlawful; and the City Attorney, at the request of the Planning Commission,
shall immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal
and the enjoining thereof in the manner prescribed by law. The remedies provided
herein shall be cumulative.
9.75.07.06 VIOLATION PENALTY. Any person, firm or corporation, whether principal,
agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00), or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, unless otherwise provided. Such person, firm or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued
by such person, fine or corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided.
9.75.08 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES PROHIBITED. No Person shall cause
or permit the establishment, development, construction, maintenance, operation or
enlargement of a medical marijuana dispensary, within the City of Avenal, nor shall
any development application be accepted, filed, processed, issued or approved for
such a medical marijuana dispensary.

9.76-1
Chapter 9.76
AMENDMENTS TO THIS ORDINANCE
Sections:
9.76.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.76.02 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS BY THE CITY
9.76.03 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS BY AN INTERESTED PERSON
9.76.04 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
9.76.05 PUBLIC HEARING
9.76.06 DECISION
9.76.07 TIME LIMITATIONS CHALLENGES
9.76.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish
procedures for the amendment of this Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Maps.
Amendments to this Ordinance may be initiated by the City Council on its own
motion or by the application of any interested person.
9.76.02 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS BY THE CITY. The Planning Commission,
City Council, or property owner directly affected may at any time and in any form
deemed appropriate by the Commission/Council initiate an amendment to any
portion of this Ordinance. An amendment may be any of the following types:
A. An amendment to the text of this Ordinance not changing regulations or
standards affecting the use of any property.
B. An amendment to the text of this Ordinance changing regulations or standards
affecting the use of property.
C. Amendment to the Official Zoning Maps reclassifying property from one
district to another, including applying a combining district to, or removing a
combining (overlay) district from, said property.
9.76.03 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS BY AN INTERESTED PERSON. A property
owner, his/her authorized representative, or any other interested person may initiate
an amendment to the Official Zoning Map to reclassify property from one district to
another by submitting an application and to the Community Development Director.
A. An application for a reclassification of property shall include:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s).
3. Assessor's parcel number(s).
9.76-2
4. A map of the property.
5. Identification of the zoning district reclassification being sought.
6. Signatures or letter of consent from all property owners of record.
The application shall be accompanied with the fee established by the City
Council pursuant to Section 9.77.03.
B. The Community Development Director shall inform the applicant in writing
within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt that the application is complete or that
additional information is needed to complete the application.
9.76.04 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
A. At least ten (10) days before the date of any public hearing on a proposed
amendment to the text of this Ordinance changing regulations or standards
affecting the use of any property or on an amendment to the Official Zoning
Maps reclassifying property from one district to another, notice of hearing,
identity of the hearing body, the nature of the amendment, and identification of
affected properties, shall be given by the following methods:
1. Publishing such notice once in at least one (1) newspaper of general
circulation.
2. Mailing or delivering notice, postage prepaid, to the property owner, the
applicant, to each member of the City Council, to each member of the
Planning Commission, to the owners of all property within three hundred
(300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property which is subject of the
application and to any person who has filed a written request for such
notice. For the purposes of this notice, property owners shall be the last
known name and address of the property owner names on the last
assessment role of the County. If the number of owners to whom notice
would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this paragraph is greater than one
thousand (1,000), a display advertisement of at least one-eighth (1/8) page in
at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation may be published at least
ten (10) days prior to the hearing in lieu of mailed or delivered notice.
3. In lieu of the requirements set forth in Section 17.76.04.A.1, notice may also
be given by posting notices not more than three hundred (300) feet apart
along each street upon which the subject property abuts for a distance of not
less than three hundred (300) feet in each direction from the exterior limits
of the subject property.
B. At least ten (10) days before the date of any public hearing on a proposed
amendment to the text of this Ordinance not changing regulations or standards
affecting the use of any property, notice of the hearing, including the date, time,
9.76-3
place of the hearing, identity of the hearing body, and the nature of the
amendment, shall be given by publishing such notice once in at least one (1)
newspaper of general circulation.
9.76.05 PUBLIC HEARING. A public hearing shall be held before the City Council at a
time and place in accordance with the public notice. The City Council may establish
rules for the conduct of such hearings. The name and address of each witness shall
be recorded and made a part of the permanent files. Any hearing may be continued
provided that prior to adjournment or recess, the City Council shall announce the
time and place to which the hearing will be continued. The Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing on the Zoning Ordinance amendment and then make a
recommendation to City Council. A public hearing shall then be held before the
City Council at a time and place in accordance with the public notice.
9.76.06 DECISION.
A. The City Council may approve by ordinance or deny by order the proposed
amendment following the close of the public hearing within thirty-five (35) days
thereafter by ordinance. The decision shall be final.
B. Where the amendment was initiated by an interested person pursuant to Section
9.76.03, written notice of the decision shall be given by mail within seven (7)
days after the date of the decision to the applicant and any person filing a
written request for notice of the decision.
9.76.07 TIME LIMITATIONS AND CHALLENGES. Any action or proceeding to attack,
review, set aside, void, or annul any decisions made pursuant to this Chapter, or
concerning any of the proceedings, acts, or determinations taken, done, or made
prior to such decision, or to determine the reasonableness, legality, validity, or any
condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action
or proceeding is commenced within thirty (30) days after the date of decision, and
the legislative body is served within sixty (60) days after the date of the decision.
Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such action or proceeding or any defense
of invalidity or unreasonableness of that decision or of these proceedings, acts, or
determinations.
9.76.08 BASIS FOR APPROVAL. The Planning Commission and City Council may
approve an application for a Change to the Zoning Ordinance if it finds all of
the following:
a) The change is required to achieve the purpose of the zoning ordinance as
prescribed in Section 9.01.03.
b) The change is consistent with the purposes and intended application of the
proposed zone classification.
9.76-4
c) The change of zone is consistent with the Land Use Element of the City of
Avenal General Plan.

9.77-1
Chapter 9.77
ADMINISTRATION
Sections:
9.77.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION
9.77.02 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR DELEGATION
9.77.03 FEES
9.77.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish
general rules for the administration of this Ordinance.
9.77.02 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR DELEGATION. The Community
Development Director may delegate any responsibility or authority charged to
him/her by any Section of this Chapter to any employee of the City of Avenal
Community Development Department, any employee of any Department of the City
of Avenal, a committee of employees of the City of Avenal, or the Planning
Commission. Any employee or employees so designated may act on behalf of the
Community Development Director in a matter or proceeding specified in this
Ordinance.
9.77.03 FEES. The City Council by resolution may establish a reasonable fee for processing
any application specified in this Ordinance, provided the fee does not exceed the
estimated actual cost of processing such application. The City Council shall adopt
and may periodically revise a schedule of fees for processing such applications.

9.78-1
Chapter 9.78
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sections:
9.78.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.78.02 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATION
9.78.03 APPARENT VIOLATIONS
9.78.04 REQUIREMENTS TO INVESTIGATE
9.78.05 INSPECTION
9.78.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION
9.78.07 MISDEMEANOR
9.78.08 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF
9.78.09 ABATEMENT PROCEEDING
9.78.10 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT CONDITIONS
9.78.11 VALIDITY AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS
9.78.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to establish
provisions for enforcement of this Ordinance. The steps in the process are outlined
as well as the penalties involved. This Section puts all persons on notice as to the
proceedings and penalties involved if any provision of this Ordinance is violated.
9.78.02 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATION. Whenever a violation of this
Ordinance occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint with the Community Development Department stating fully the causes
and basis thereof. In a timely manner the complaint shall be recorded, investigated,
and such action thereon as provided by this Ordinance taken as deemed appropriate.
9.78.03 APPARENT VIOLATIONS. If any City Official believes there is a violation of this
Ordinance, the official shall report such violation to the Code Enforcement Officer
or Responsible Official.
9.78.04 REQUIREMENTS TO INVESTIGATE. If a complaint has been filed, a violation
reported or observed, the Public Works Director or Community Development
Director may initiate an inspection.
9.78.05 INSPECTION. The Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer or Responsible
Official may upon the presentation of proper credentials to the occupant or owner
enter any premises, building, or structure at any reasonable time for the purpose of
investigating and inspecting said premises, building, or structure to determine if the
same are being used in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. If
admission or entry is refused, the Code Enforcement Officer, Building Official or
Responsible Officer may apply to obtain an inspection warrant.
9.78-2
9.78.06 NOTICE OF VIOLATION. If, as a result of an inspection, the Code Enforcement
Officer, Building Official, Community Development Director or Responsible
Official determine there is a violation of this Ordinance, the Responsible Official
shall give a ten (10) day written notice to the party violating this Ordinance. The
Notice of Violation may be served by certified mail, registered mail, or by any
method approved for service process, as set forth and described by the Code of Civil
Procedure for the service of process. The notice shall specify that the violation set
forth shall be corrected within said period. The Responsible Official may for good
cause extend the time for compliance if the cited party has submitted a plan for
correcting the notice deficiencies.
9.78.07 MISDEMEANOR.
A. Any person, firm, or corporation that fails to comply with the Notice of
Violation described in Section 9.78.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or
imprisoned for not more than six (6) months in the County Jail, or both. Each
day the violation of this Chapter continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
B. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any
architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates
in, assists, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate
offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, violation of any provision
pertaining to medical marijuana within Title 9 of the Avenal Municipal Code by
any qualified patient or any of their primary caregivers, while acting in such
capacities, shall not be punishable as a misdemeanor
9.78.08 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. The City may seek injunctive relief in Superior Court to
abate any violation of this Ordinance. Injunctive relief may be sought at any time,
including prior to the issuance of compliance with the Notice of Violation if, in the
opinion of the Responsible Official, an alleged violation of this Ordinance may be
injurious to the public health or safety.
9.78.09 ABATEMENT PROCEEDING. Any building or structure, set up, erected,
constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this Ordinance or any use of land, building, or premises conducted,
operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance or contrary to a
permit or variance or the terms and conditions imposed therein shall be, and the
same is hereby declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the District
Attorney shall commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and
enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps
and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant relief as will
abate and remove such buildings, structure or use and restrain and enjoin any
9.78-3
person, firm, or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or
using any such building, structure, or vehicle or using any property contrary to the
provisions of this Ordinance.
9.78.10 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH PERMIT CONDITIONS. Whenever a complaint has
been received or any City official believes that the conditions of a permit, variance,
or other entitlement granted under the provisions of this Ordinance have been
violated, the Responsible Official shall investigate such allegations. If such a
violation, in the opinion of the Community Development Department, has occurred,
a Notice of Violation shall be given in accordance with Section 9.78.06 of this
Chapter. If correction of the violation does not occur within the specified ten (10)
day period, the Responsible Official shall notify the Community Development
Director. The Community Development Director shall, upon receipt of such notice,
initiate revocation proceedings in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.75.05
of this Ordinance.
9.78.11 VALIDITY AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. All Departments, officials, and
public employees of the City of Avenal and where applicable the County of Kings,
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the
provisions of this Ordinance and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings,
or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance; and any such permit or
license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be null and
void. Further, no permit or license shall be issued for any use permitted by the
provisions of this Ordinance, on a parcel of land, wherein it is known by the
Departments, officials, or employees of the City of Avenal that a violation of this
Ordinance exists.

9.79-1
Chapter 9.79
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE, CODE ENFORCEMENT
AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:
9.79.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION
9.79.02 DEFINITIONS
9.79.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT
9.79.04 VIOLATIONS
9.79.05 EXEMPTIONS
9.79.06 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPED PROPERTIES
9.79.07 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR UNDEVELOPED OR
VACANT PROPERTIES
9.79.08 COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY
9.79.09 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
9.79.01 PURPOSE & APPLICATION. The purpose of this Chapter is to identify property
maintenance standards, and establish procedures for the prosecution and abatement
of public nuisance conditions to eliminate visual blight, protect the value of adjacent
properties, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community as
a whole.
9.79.02 DEFINITIONS. The words and phrases contained in this Section shall, for the
purposes of this Chapter, be defined as follows, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
City Code Enforcement Officer. The City Code Enforcement officer or a designee.
Commercial Vehicle. Any motorized or non-motorized Vehicle used or maintained
to transport property or goods for profit or persons for hire or compensation.
Inoperative Vehicle. A Vehicle is "inoperative" if it is:
A. Mechanically incapable of being driven; or
B. Prohibited from being operated on a public street or highway pursuant to the
provisions of Vehicle Code Sections 4000, 5202, 24002, or 40001.
On or Adjacent to Real Property. Includes all areas of the real property including
but not limited to the rear side, or front yard areas, parkways, sidewalks, or on
abutting streets in all zones in the City except for items contained within a
receptacle for collection of solid waste pursuant to the City of Avenal Municipal
Code.
9.79-2
Owner, Vehicle. The last registered owner and the legal owner of record.
Parkway. The area between any real property line and the edge of the pavement of
a public Street.
Public Nuisance.
A. Any property that is not maintained pursuant to Section 9.79.06 of this Chapter,
and is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of
the public or the adjoining property.
B. The presence of vacant real property in the City that is not properly secured,
fenced, boarded up, and maintained pursuant to Section 9.79.07 of this Chapter,
and which is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the health, safety, or
welfare of the public or the adjoining property.
C. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or
part thereof, on private or public property not including streets, except as
permitted in Section 9.79.05.
D. The presence of weeds growing upon any parkway, sidewalk or on private
property within the City.
E. The presence of rubbish or trash upon parkway, sidewalk, or private property.
F. The breeding and raising of animals whether for domestic, hobby, food,
scientific or fur-bearing purposes.
Public Property. Land, buildings, structures, or fixtures that are owned by a public
agency. For the purposes of this Chapter, public property does not include streets.
Recreational Vehicle. Any travel trailer, camper, motor home, or trailer (as defined
in State Vehicle Code Sections 242, 243, and 630, respectively), or any camper shell
or boat.
Residential Use. Any property zoned for residential use as established in Chapter
9.02 of this Title. Sidewalks, parkways, and streets adjacent to residential property
shall be considered a residential area for purposes of this Chapter.
Residentially-Developed Property. Any property developed with a conforming
dwelling unit or legal nonconforming dwelling unit.
Responsible Official. City/County Chief Law Enforcement Official, Fire Chief,
Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer or designee.
9.79-3
Responsible Party. The owner, lessee, agent, person, or entity in lawful charge or
possession of the property.
Rubbish. All waste which includes but is not limited to:
A. Animal or human offal, asphalt, inoperative bicycles and parts, boards,
inoperative boats and parts, bottles, boxes, bricks, cans, cartons, cement, cinder
blocks, concrete, containers, crates, dirt, doors, equipment, glass, gravel,
hazardous waste, hoses, lumber, machinery, metal, paint, pallets, paper, pipe,
plaster, rebar, rocks, rubber, sand, siding boards, stucco, tile, windows, wire,
wood, and other similar material.
B. Trimmings, clippings and cuttings from lawns, shrubs and trees, and all dead or
uprooted grass, sod, shrubs, trees, vegetables, dirt, and firewood piles.
C. Rugs, mattresses, furniture, utensils, clothing, toys, appliances, household
supplies and equipment.
D. Vehicle bodies, motors, tires, parts and accessories.
E. Any other similar item and material of residential, commercial or industrial
nature existing in an unusable, inoperative, discarded or abandoned condition.
Street. A public street, drive, right-of-way, avenue, highway, place, alley, lane,
court, or way.
Vacant Real Property. Any vacant parcel of land, building or structure on real
property in all zones in the City where the responsible party has intentionally left
such property vacant and unoccupied for a period of time exceeding 30 calendar
days.
Vehicle. An automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, and any other device by which
any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except
a device moved by human power.
Weeds. Plant material that is noxious or dangerous, and/or dry grass, stubble, brush,
or other flammable material that creates a fire hazard, and/or green weeds that are
one foot in height or greater.
9.79.03 PROHIBITED CONDUCT. Except as provided in Section 9.79.05, it shall be
unlawful for any responsible party having charge or possession of any real property
in the City to:
A. Operate any business activity in the City without a business license registration
certificate and appropriate planning and zoning approval.
9.79-4
B. Operate any business or other activity in the City not consistent with all of the
terms and conditions of all applicable zoning approvals and approved plans
granted by the City. This includes, but is not limited to, business license
registration certificates, Home Occupation Permits and CUP’s.
C. Allow upon any premises under his/her control the placement of any temporary
or permanent signs without appropriate zoning and building permit approval.
D. Keep, store, or maintain on or in front of any real property, or in or on any
Vehicle upon the real property under his/her control any litter, Rubbish or
Weeds, when such material is open to view at Street level from a Parkway,
Street, or adjoining property, or in such a condition as to be detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of such real property or any
adjoining property.
E. Not maintain any parcel of land, building, or structure on real property in
conformance with the standards contained in Section 9.79.06 of this Chapter.
F. Permit any parcel of land, building, or structure on real property to remain a
vacant real property without properly securing and maintaining the property
pursuant to Section 9.79.07 Vacant Property Maintenance Standards of this
Chapter.
G. Allow upon any premises under his/her control the use of any pay telephone that
is used as an instrument for or contributes substantially by its presence to any of
the following conditions:
1. Selling or giving away controlled substances (as defined in Division 10 of
the State Health and Safety Code); soliciting, agreeing to engage in, or
engaging in any act of prostitution; or other criminal activity.
2. Consumption of alcoholic beverages on nearby outdoor public or private
property except where outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages is
specifically authorized pursuant to an Alcoholic Beverage Control license.
H. Allow upon any premises under his/her control any swimming pool, pond, spa,
or other body of water or excavation which is abandoned, unattended, or
unfiltered.
I. Allow the disposal or storage of oil, grease, other petroleum products, noxious
chemical, pesticides, or any gaseous, liquid, or solid waste in such a manner to
constitute a health or fire hazard or degrade the appearance of or detract from
the aesthetic and property values of neighboring properties.
9.79-5
J. Keep, store, or maintain upon any premises under his/her control any
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, except
as permitted by Section 9.79.05.
K. Keep, store, or maintain upon any premises under his/her control any vehicle or
recreational vehicle, except as permitted by Section 9.79.05.
L. Use any parked or stored Vehicle or Recreational Vehicle, operative or not, as
temporary or permanent living space unless exempted pursuant to Section 9
.79.05.
M. Use a garage, shed or accessory structure, or any portion thereof, as a temporary
or permanent living space or as a meeting room.
N. Keep, store, or maintain in any residential zone or on any
residentially-developed property any of the following:
1. Construction and/ or business equipment, supplies, materials, or machinery
of any type or description, including cargo containers;
2. Buses, tow trucks, dump trucks, flatbed trucks, tractors, tractor trailers, truck
trailers, catering trucks (mobile food services);
3. Any other commercial Vehicle over 25-feet long or 8 feet in height or
90-inches wide; or,
4. Portable restroom facilities.
O. Allow accessory structures including but not limited to walls, fences, drainages,
sidewalks, sheds, garages, playhouses, lean-to’s, and wall hedges to fall into a
state of disrepair or deterioration.
P. Abandon or discard any personal property including rubbish as described in
Section 9.79.02 on any public property including a Street. Except when
deposited in an approved City of Avenal refuse container in the manner
prescribed by the City of Avenal Municipal Code.
Q. Breed and/or raise animals for domestic, hobby, food, scientific or fur bearing
purposes.
R. Keep or store any non-operable vehicle in any, street or residential driveway.
9.79.04 VIOLATIONS. A violation of this Chapter is a misdemeanor pursuant to the City
of Avenal Municipal Code and such violation may be established by evidence
obtained by the Chief Law Enforcement Official, Fire Chief, Building Official,
Code Enforcement Officer, or their designees (Responsible Official).
9.79-6
9.79.05 EXEMPTIONS. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Any material currently in use in the course of lawful permitted construction,
demolition or landscaping on the site.
B. Any material contained within a fully enclosed structure or lawfully constructed
solid, opaque wall, or fence, and such material is not in a condition as to be
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of such real
property, the public, or any adjoining property.
C. A mobilehome or recreational vehicle permitted as a temporary dwelling unit
pursuant to Table 9-3 and in compliance with the provisions as set forth in
Section 9.19.01.
D. Nothing in this section shall be construed as authorizing the maintenance of a
public or private nuisance.
9.79.06 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPED PROPERTIES.
All developed real property in the City shall be maintained at a level not less than
the following standards.
A. Address Numerals
Street Address Numerals shall be maintained pursuant to following:
1. For single-family dwelling units, street addresses shall be visible from the
public street and may be displayed either on the front door, on the fascia
adjacent to the main entrance, or on another prominent location. When the
property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a
prominent location visible from the alley.
2. For multi-family dwelling units, street address shall be visible from the
public street and shall be displayed on the complex identification sign. If
there is no complex identification sign, the street address may be displayed
on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance or on another prominent location.
When the property has alley access, address numerals shall be displayed in a
prominent location visible from the alley. Identification of individual units
shall be provided adjacent to the unit entrances.
3. For non-residential properties, street address shall be visible from the public
street and shall be displayed on the freestanding sign as allowed in Chapter
9.61 of this title. If there is no freestanding sign, the street address may be
displayed on the fascia adjacent to the main entrance or on another
prominent location. When the property has alley access, address numerals
shall be displayed in a prominent location visible from the alley.
Identification of individual units shall be provided adjacent to the unit
9.79-7
entrances.
B. Building Exteriors and Roofs
Exterior building surfaces and roofs for all buildings including accessory
buildings and structures shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks,
missing materials, warping and dry rot which either threaten the structural
integrity, or result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially ruined
appearance.
C. Condition of Structures
Structures shall not be partially destroyed, abandoned, unsecured, or permitted
to remain in a state of, except properties with valid current building permits on
file with the City of Avenal Building and Code Enforcement Department, partial
construction for more than 30 days. Buildings or structures shall not be boarded
up for a period in excess of 10 days without a valid demolition or building
permit on file, except in compliance with Section 9.79.07.
D. Drainage
Onsite drainage improvements shall be maintained in order to prevent
deterioration, disrepair, and ineffectiveness.
E. Excavations
Excavations, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, and other holes shall be
properly secured to prevent access by unauthorized persons.
F. Graffiti
All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall be maintained
free of graffiti.
G. Landscaping
All landscaping on the property (existing and new development) shall be
maintained pursuant to Chapter 9.63 of this Ordinance and all landscaping
visible from a public street shall be maintained in a healthy condition free of
dying, dead, diseased, decayed, discarded and/or overgrown vegetation.
H. Lighting
All exterior light fixtures shall be maintained in good working order free of
broken lamps, lens, and light bulbs. Furthermore, the structural integrity of all
supporting poles and mounting fixtures shall be maintained. All insulation and
connections shall be intact and free of exposed wire.
I. Outdoor Drying
9.79-8
In all residential zones or residential developments, the outdoor airing and/or
drying of laundry, clothes, other household linens, or food is permitted only in
rear or side yards, provided that the items are not visible from a public street
excluding alleys.
J. Paint
Painted surfaces on buildings, trash enclosures, walls, retaining walls, fences,
and structures shall be maintained in order to prevent decay, excessive cracking,
peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation.
K. Parking Areas, Sidewalks
Parking areas, private alleys, driveways, sidewalks, and walkways shall be
maintained free of potholes, cracks, breaks, lifting, and other deteriorated
conditions. The parking and storage of Vehicles are subject to the provisions in
Table 9-7. The parking of vehicles is prohibited in the front or side yardslawns.
Pools
Barrier fencing and gates for swimming pools and spas shall be maintained as
required by the California Building Code. Swimming pools and spas shall not
contain unfiltered or stagnant water.
L. Rodent and Vermin Control
All property, including landscaped areas, buildings, and structures, shall be
maintained free of rodents and other vermin in accordance with the requirements
of the Kings County Environmental Health Department.
M. Signs
All signs and sign structures shall be maintained in order to prevent
deterioration, disrepair, and unsightliness. The structural integrity of all
supporting poles, and mounting fixtures shall be maintained. All sign faces shall
be maintained free of missing lettering or lighting.
N. Trash Bins
Trash bins or dumpsters shall be kept within an enclosed building, trash
enclosure, or screened from public view to the maximum extent feasible.
Overflowing trash bins or dumpsters due to inadequate number of bins and/or
request for service from the trash hauler are prohibited. Use of commercial trash
bins for residential uses other than during construction with a valid building
permit is prohibited.
O. Use of Canopies
9.79-9
The use of portable canopies in non-residential zones is allowed 20 feet back of
sidewalk. The use of portable canopies, including portable carports, in
residential zones is allowed 20 feet back of sidewalk.
Any canopy structure existing prior to December 31, 2000 within the City limits
of the City of Avenal shall be exempt from abatement removal provided:
1. The owner applies to the City for an exemption and provides proof of date of
installation.
2. The owner pays an exemption/ inspection fee of $25 every two years. This
fee may be modified from time to time by Resolution of the City Council.
3. An inspection by the City establishes that the canopy structure is safe, in
good repair, and well maintained.
P. Use of Tarps
Use of tarps for roof and building repairs in excess of 60 days is prohibited.
Additionally, the use of tarps for vehicle covers, carports, or temporary
canopies, enclosures, and/or awnings is allowed 30 feet back of sidewalk.
Q. Walls, Fences, and Trash Enclosures
All walls, retaining and planter walls, and fences abutting a street or trash
enclosure shall be maintained free of significant surface cracks, dry rot, warping,
deterioration, leaning, missing panels or blocks which either threaten the
structural integrity, or result in a dilapidated, decaying, disfigured, or partially
ruined appearance.
R. Window Screens and Security
All window and glass door screens shall be maintained free of tears, rips, and
holes. On residential rental properties, window screens are required on all
windows. Security bars are prohibited in all non-residential zones.
S. Windows
Broken windows and glass doors and the use of materials other than glass as a
replacement or covering of windowpanes are prohibited.
9.79.07 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS FOR UNDEVELOPED OR
VACANT PROPERTIES.
A. Mandatory standards
9.79-10
All vacant real property in the City shall be secured and maintained at a level
not less than the following standards during the time period that such property
remains vacant real property:
1. Graffiti. All structures, equipment, walls, and fencing on the property shall
be maintained free of graffiti.
2. Rubbish, Litter and Weeds. All landscaped, concrete, dirt, or paved open
areas on the real property and adjoining public parkway shall be kept clear
of rubbish, litter, and weeds. All rubbish, litter and weeds shall be removed
according to the following standards:
a. Small lots 1 acre or less.
Lot is to be scraped of all weeds, trash, and debris, to include all areas
outside of property fence (if present) to the edge of pavement or street
curbing at front and side streets; and at the rear of alley or center of non
dedicated easement if applicable. Grass or weeds unable to be scraped
such as in corners of lot or along fences shall be cut to within 1 inch of
ground. All weeds, trash, and debris are to be removed from property
and properly disposed of at an approved City/County disposal site.
b. Large lots greater than 1 acre.
Parcels exceeding 1 acre whether residential or non residential may be
cleaned by scraping, plowing or tilling soil until soil is rolled, creating a
path 20 feet in width completely around the perimeter of parcel unless
otherwise specked by Responsible Officer. All trash and debris in area
are to be cleaned, are to be removed from property and disposed of at an
approved City/County disposal site.
c. Lots containing structures and/or trees.
Lots unable to be scraped shall be cleaned by mowing or cutting grass or
weeds to within 1 inch of the ground. All shrubbery adjacent to
structures covering window areas shall be cut or trimmed to windowsill
height. Tree branches shall be cut to provide six (6) feet of clear area
above ground. All weeds, trash, and debris are to be cleaned and
removed from the property and disposed of at an approved City/County
disposal site.
Note: Tumbleweeds and similar vegetation must be removed prior to
tilling the soil.
B. Additional Standards
9.79-11
When deemed necessary by the Responsible Official, all windows, doors, and
other open access features to the structures on the real property shall be boarded
up and secured.
a. Any missing or broken windows or doors shall be covered as specified.
Complete boarding of all unbroken windows shall only be required
when specified by the Responsible Official.
a. Exterior door openings may be secured against entry by locking or using
#10 minimum flathead wood screws penetrating a minimum of ¾ inches
into framing members, only if doors do not contain glazing panes.
b. All wood used to cover openings shall be new or comparable (to be
approved by Responsible Official), exterior grade ½-inch nominal
thickness plywood or O.S.B. (oriented strand board) board. Only one
piece of plywood or O.S.B. board shall be used per opening unless the
opening requires more than one 4-foot by 8-foot sheet in which case,
splices shall have 2-inch by 4 inch backing the complete length of the
splice. Plywood or O.S.B. board shall extend 2 inches minimum beyond
opening on all sides and shall be seared by #10 minimum flathead wood
screws. Screws shall be spaced 12 inches on center around complete
opening and shall penetrate framing members a minimum of 3/4 inches.
c. Where applicable, plywood or O.S.B. board shall extend flush to top of
door threshold and protruding windowsills.
d. All variations from above requirements shall be approved by
Responsible Official.
e. Contactor shall first confer with officer prior to submitting bid for
special board-up conditions such as apartment buildings, motels, or
commercial buildings.
f. All boards visible from the building's exterior shall be painted to match
the buildings' exterior.
g. Refill holes, which are more than one-foot in depth.
2. A building shall be permitted to be boarded up for no longer than six
months. If a demo permit or building permit are not issued within six
months, the City shall initiate abatement proceedings.
3. Fencing. The property shall be temporarily fenced on all sides along the
property line with a chain link fence or other type of secure fencing at a
minimum height of 6 feet from grade, or greater, as determined by the fire
chief or Public Works Director. The fence shall be properly posted with no
trespassing signs, and kept clear of all other signs, except lawfully installed
9.79-12
real estate signs for the lease or sale of the property and signs identifying
ownership of the property or fencing.
4. Security lighting. All structures which could be used for human habitation
shall have a minimum of one light each in the front and rear yards. Such
lighting shall be capable of illuminating the structure's exterior so as to be
visible from the street or alley from dusk to dawn. However, the lights shall
be shielded to avoid lighting adjacent properties.
9.79.08 COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY. Compliance with the standards contained in
this Chapter shall be at the sole cost of the responsible party for the vacant real
property and shall not limit the remedies or recovery of costs for the abatement of
any vacant real property found to be in violation by City Council or its designee
pursuant to this Ordinance.
9.79.09 ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
A. Abatement Administrative Costs
1. City Council Authority. Upon discovering that a property is in violation of
this Chapter, the City Council or its designee shall have the authority to
cause the abatement and removal of the violation in accordance with the
procedures prescribed in this Chapter.
2. Administrative Costs. The City Council shall determine and fix the amount
to be assessed as administrative costs in addition to the actual costs for
removal of the public nuisance conditions on the real property pursuant to
this Chapter.
B. Abatement Authorized
1. Responsible Officials. The Public Works Director, Code Enforcement
Officer, Fire Chief or their designees are authorized to abate any dangerous
building or conditions found to exist on real property subject to this Chapter.
Such abatement action may include but is not limited to the implementation
of standards in Sections 9.79.06 and 9.79.07 of this Chapter.
2. Weed and Rubbish Abatement. The Fire Chief, Code Enforcement Officer or
any Responsible Official is authorized to abate any rubbish or weeds found
to exist on any real property subject to this Chapter.
3. Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles. Upon
discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private property or, public property
within the City, the Responsible Official shall have the authority to cause its
abatement and removal in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this
9.79-13
Chapter.
C. Abatement Procedures, Excepting Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or
Inoperative Vehicles
1. Resolution. Where the Responsible Official or their designees find
conditions to exist on any real property in the City that violates this Chapter,
the City Council by resolution may declare such conditions a public
nuisance. A resolution shall refer to the real property by the name under
which it is commonly known, or by the street upon which the private
property fronts or abuts or nearest to which the private property is located.
The Resolution shall describe the property upon which the public nuisance
appears, in the manner set forth in subsection C2.
2. Property Description. The resolution shall describe the property upon which,
or in front of which, the public nuisance exists by describing the property in
accordance with the map used in describing property for taxation purposes.
No other description shall be necessary. If the private property fronts or
abuts upon more than one street, it shall be necessary to refer to only one of
the streets. Any number of streets or parcels of private property may be
included in one resolution.
3. Notice. Notice of the hearing at which the City Council will consider a
resolution declaring a public nuisance shall be provided at least 10 days in
advance of the hearing to the owner of the affected premises, as shown on
the latest real property tax assessment roll, and any known responsible party,
shall, if practical, be posted on the affected premises. The Responsible
Official is hereby designated as the person to give notice to the Responsible
Party to abate the public nuisance conditions on the real property. The
Responsible Official shall have the power to develop such regulations,
forms, and procedures as are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
Chapter. After City Council has passed a resolution pursuant to this Section,
the notice to the Responsible Party to abate the public nuisance conditions
shall comply with the following:
(a) The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE TO ABATE PUBLIC NUISANCE
Notice is hereby given that on the _____ day of ___________, 20__, the
City Council of the City of Avenal passed a resolution declaring that
conditions detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare exist upon
the real property on or nearest to Street/road/avenue in the City, and that
the conditions constitute a public nuisance which must be abated by the
City, and the cost of removal assessed upon the land from which such
public nuisance conditions were removed and will constitute a lien upon
9.79-14
such land until paid. Reference is hereby made to Resolution No.
_______ for more particulars. A copy of the resolution is on file in the
Office of the City Clerk, 919 Skyline Boulevard, Avenal, CA 93204.
All property owners and other Responsible Parties having any objections
to the proposed removal of such public nuisance conditions are hereby
notified to attend the meeting of the City Council to be held on
________________ when their objections will be heard and given due
consideration.
Dated this _____ day of ___________, 20__.
Responsible Official
(b) After the adoption of a resolution by City Council, the notice shall be
mailed by certified first class mail to the property owner(s) as shown by
the most recently received real property tax assessment roll, and to any
other Responsible Party, to the extent that his/her address is known.
(c) Proof of notice shall be provided to City Council at the hearing on
protests as set forth in this section.
4. Public Hearing (Hearing): At the time stated in the notice set forth in
subsection C3 of this Section, the City Council shall hear and consider all
objections or protests, if any, to the proposed removal of the public nuisance
conditions and may continue the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing,
the City Council shall allow or overrule by resolution or motion any or all
objections, whereupon the City Council shall acquire jurisdiction to proceed
to perform the work of removal and the decision of the Council on the matter
shall be final and subject to California Code of Civil Procedure Section
1094.6. If objections have not been made, or if the City Council has
overruled those made, it shall order the Responsible Official or their
designee to abate the public nuisance by having the public nuisance
conditions removed. Such order shall be made by resolution or motion of
City Council.
5. Decision. The decision of the City Council shall be final.
6. Contact with Responsible Party. The Responsible Official or their designee
shall not undertake to abate any public nuisance by order of City Council
pursuant to this Section until he/she has made a reasonable effort to
personally contact any Responsible Party protesting the Council order to
abate, in order to explain the purpose of the program, handle any special
problem, and grant the Responsible Party additional time if warranted to
provide his/her own abatement.
9.79-15
7. Right of Entry. The Responsible Official or their designee may enter upon
private property to inspect or abate any public nuisance prohibited by this
Chapter upon:
(a) Receipt of consent from the owner or occupant of the affected premises;
(b) Obtaining a warrant authorizing such an inspection and/or abatement.
Such Responsible Official may enter the private property immediately, if
the public nuisance presents a significant and immediate threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare; or
(c) As otherwise permitted by law.
8. Removal Before City Representative. Any Responsible Party may have the
public nuisance conditions removed and abated at his/her own expense if it
is done before the arrival of the City representative to remove such
conditions pursuant to this Chapter.
9. Abatement Work; Costs and Records; Manner of Collection.
(a) Abatement Work. The abatement work may be done by City work forces
or by independent contractors.
(b) Records and Costs. The Responsible Official or their designees who are
responsible for carrying out the order of abatement by City Council shall
keep an account of the cost of abatement of the public nuisance on each
separate lot or parcel of land and shall render a written itemized report
(Report) to City Council for confirmation showing the costs of removing
the public nuisance conditions on each separate lot or parcel of land.
1. Posting of Report Required. Before the report is submitted to the
City Council, it shall be posted at least 3 days on the bulletin board
at the City Hall with a notice of the time when the report will be
submitted to the City Council for confirmation.
2. Mailing of Notice of Submission. At least 7 days prior to the date of
submission for confirmation, a postcard notice of the time and place
of the submission of the report for confirmation, stating generally
the nature of the report, shall be mailed to the owners of the parcels
who have filed with the Council a written request for a postcard
notice within one year prior to the date of mailing the notice.
3. Hearing on Report. At the time fixed for receiving and considering
the report, the City Council shall hear it with any objections of any
of the property owners liable to be assessed for the work of
abatement. The City Council may make such modifications in the
report as it deems necessary, after which, by motion or resolution,
9.79-16
the report shall be confirmed.
4. Costs Lien on Property Affected. The amount of the costs for
abating the public nuisance on the lot or parcel of land mentioned in
the report, as confirmed, shall constitute special assessments against
the respective parcels or lots, and shall be a lien on the property for
the amount of the respective assessments. The decision by City
Council to confirm the costs for abating the public nuisance shall be
final and subject to California Code of Civil Procedure Section
1094.6.
(c). Manner of Collection. A certified copy of the report set forth in
subsection 9b shall be filed with the County of Kings Assessor on or
before August tenth. The description of the parcels reported shall be
those used for the same parcels on the Kings County Assessor's map
books for the current year. The amount of the assessments shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as City taxes are
collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary City
taxes.
1. Application of Tax Statutes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of City taxes shall be applicable to such
special assessment taxes.
2. Issuance of Separate Tax Bills, Receipts. The Kings County Tax
Assessor, in his/her discretion, may issue separate bills for such
special assessment taxes and separate receipts for collection on
account of such assessments.
3. Cancellation or Refund Required, Grounds. All or any portion of
any such special assessment, penalty or costs heretofore or hereafter
entered shall, on order of the City Council, be canceled by the
Kings County Assessor if uncollected, or, except as provided in
subsection iii hereof, be refunded by the director of finance if
collected, if it was entered, charged or paid:
i. More than once;
ii. Through clerical error;
iii. Through the error or mistake of the City Council or of the
Responsible Official in respect to any material fact, including
the case where the cost report rendered and confirmed as
hereinbefore provided shows that the City abated the nuisance
but such was not the actual fact;
iv. Illegally;
v. On property acquired after the lien date by the state or by any
county, city, school district or other political subdivision, and
9.79-17
because of this public ownership is not subject to sale for
delinquent taxes.
4. Claim or Refund. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
cancellations. No order for a refund under this section shall be made
except on a claim:
i. Verified by the person who paid the special assessment, his
guardian, executor or administrator.
ii. Filed with the City Clerk on or before March first after the tax
became due and payable.
10.Demolition. Where the Responsible Official or their designee find that a real property contains resolution may declare the structure a public nuisance and order the
demolition of the structure where it finds the property violates this Chapter,
presents an immediate threat to the safety or health of the public and finds
that persons have continued to enter, occupy or inhabit such structures
despite the application of the standards in Section 9.79.06 and 9.79.07. The
demolition of a structure pursuant to this Section shall not occur until the
abatement procedures are complied with as set forth in this Chapter.
11. Emergency Abatement. In the event the public nuisance constitutes a
significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, the
Responsible Official or their designee, may enter the property upon which
the public nuisance exists, abate the public nuisance, and restore any
property affected by the public nuisance. To the extent reasonably
practicable, informal notice shall be provided to the owner or occupant
before abatement. If necessary to protect the public health, safety, or
welfare, abatement may proceed without prior notice to or consent from the
owner/occupant thereof and without judicial warrant.
(a) Imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, circumstances that
present a significant and immediate threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
(b) Notwithstanding the authority of the City to conduct an emergency
abatement action, an administrative hearing before the City Council
shall follow the abatement action. The hearing on the emergency
abatement action shall be held within 5 business days following the
action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time required for the
hearing) is waived in writing by the parties subject to the abatement
action. A request for a hearing shall not be required of the person whose
property is the subject of the abatement action. The City Council at the
hearing will determine the reasons for the abatement.
D. Abatement Procedures for Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative
Vehicles
9.79-18
1. Notice Required. A 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the
vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered
mail to the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and to the
owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices
of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE
VEHICLE OR PART THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(Name and address of owner of the property on which the vehicle is located)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at
(address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Title 9,
(Avenal Municipal Code) has determined that there exists upon said land an
(or part of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle
registered to ___________________, license number ____________, which
constitutes a public nuisance. You are hereby notified to abate said public
nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said part of a vehicle) within
10-days from the date of mailing of this notice, and upon your failure to do
so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Avenal, and the costs
thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to you as Responsible
Party on which said vehicle (or said part of a vehicle) is located.
As Responsible Party on which said vehicle (or said part of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the City Council within the 10-day period, the
City of Avenal shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or
said part of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid
without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within
such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle
(or said part of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and
such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your
presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested
by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn
written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.
Notice Mailed ____________
(Date) CITY OF Avenal By _______\Responsible Official
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE
VEHICLE OR PART THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE,
9.79-19
(Name and address of last registered and legal owner(s) of record of vehiclenotice
should be given to both if different)
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of
vehicle-make, model, license, etc.) you are hereby notified that the
undersigned, pursuant to Title 9, Avenal Municipal Code, has determined
that said vehicle (or part of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private
property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said
Municipal Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said public nuisance by the removal of said
vehicle (or said part of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of
this notice.
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said part of a
vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten 10 days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the City Council within such 10-day period, the
City Council shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or
said part of a vehicle) without a hearing,
Notice Mailed ___________
(Date) CITY OF Avenal By ____\Responsible Official
2. Public Hearing upon Written Request. Upon request by the owner of the
vehicle or the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located received
by the City within 10 days after the mailing of the notices of intention to
abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the City Council on the
question of abatement and removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, as an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment
of the administrative costs and the costs of removal of the vehicle, or part
thereof, against the property on which it is located.
3. Public Hearing upon Constructive Request, Notice of Hearing, Authority to
Abate and Remove without Hearing. If the owner of the property on which
the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his/her land within such
10-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing
which does not require his/her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be
mailed, by registered mail, at least 10 days before the hearing to the owner
of the property on which the vehicle is located and to the owner of the
vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers
are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not
received within said 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate
9.79-20
and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the
vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public
hearing.
4. City Council to Hear Facts and Testimony. All hearings under this Chapter
shall be held before the City Council, which shall hear all facts and
testimony it deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony may include
testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the
circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public
property. The City Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of
evidence. The owner of the property on which the vehicle is located may
appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time
for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of
the vehicle on the land with his/her reasons for such denial.
5. General Powers of City Council; Notice of Council's Decision.
(a) The City Council may impose such conditions and take such other
action, as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the
purposes of this Chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the
vehicle, or part thereof, if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At
the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council may find that a
vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is
an inoperative vehicle on private or public property and order the same
removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as
hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost
of removal to be charged against the Responsible Party. The order
requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part
thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the
vehicle, if available at the site.
(b) If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle, or part thereof, was
placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the property on
which the vehicle is located and that he/she has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the City Council shall not assess the costs of
administration or removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, against the
property upon which the vehicle, or part thereof, is located or otherwise
attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the property on which
the vehicle is located.
(c) If the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located submits a
sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on his/her land but does not appear, or if an interested party
makes a written presentation to the City Council but does not appear,
he/she shall be notified in writing of the decision.
9.79-21
6. Appeal. Any rehearing or judicial review of the City Council decision shall
be according to the procedures set forth in Chapter 9.75.
7. Disposal. Seven days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or
part thereof, to be a public nuisance, or seven (7) days from the date of
mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by this article, the
vehicle, or part thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or
automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not
thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle that
qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle
license plates, pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case the
vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.
8. Notice of Removal to Department of Motor Vehicles. Within 5 days after
the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the
Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle, or part thereof,
removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of
Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including, but not
limited to the registration card, certificates of ownership, and license plates.
9. Costs of Removal Assessed. If the administrative costs and the cost of
removal which are charged against the owner of the property on which the
vehicle is located or any other known responsible party pursuant to this
Chapter are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final
disposition of an appeal there from, such costs shall be assessed against the
parcel (and pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code), and shall
be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have
the same priority as other City taxes.
10. Nonexclusive Remedy. This Chapter is not the exclusive regulation of
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles with the City of
Avenal. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory Codes,
Statutes, and Ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City of
Avenal, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.

