
Baldwin Park Code of Ordinances


CITY OF BALDWIN PARK, CALIFORNIA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-25 Supplement contains:
Local legislation passed through 8-13-18



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



ORDINANCE NO. 1100



   AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BALDWIN PARK,
CALIFORNIA, ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF
BALDWIN PARK REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN
SAID CODE



WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the City of Baldwin Park are
incomplete and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and
indexing thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the City; and



WHEREAS, the Acts of the State Legislature of the State of California empower
and authorize the City Legislative Body of this City to revise, amend,
restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all
new ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate said
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and



WHEREAS, the Legislative Body of the City of Baldwin Park has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City
of a general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in book
form.



NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Legislative Body of the City of Baldwin
Park that:



Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Baldwin Park as herein
revised, amended, restated, codified, and compiled in book form are adopted
as and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Baldwin
Park.”



Section 2.   Said Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the
following titles, to-wit:



   Title I      General Provisions



   Title III   Administration



   Title V      Public Works



   Title VII   Traffic Code



   Title IX   General Regulations



   Title XI   Business Regulations



   Title XIII   General Offenses



   Title XV   Land Usage



   Tables of Special Ordinances



   Parallel References



   Index



Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in
said Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of said
code except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in said
Code; provided such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty
incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of said Code,
nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes,
appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises
or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use, naming or
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, alleys or other public places,
nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained therein.



Section 4.   Said Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the City Legislative Body and the Clerk of the City
of Baldwin Park is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of said Code
in the Office of the City Clerk.



Section 5.   Said Code shall be in full force 30 days from the date of its
adoption, and filing thereof in the Office of the Clerk, and said Code shall
be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinance and all
provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of the
date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded and
approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by law
have been given.



PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Legislative Body of the City of Baldwin Park
this day of April 5 , 1995.



   Mayor Vargas



   MAYOR



ATTEST



Linda L. Gair



LINDA L. GAIR, CITY CLERK



STATE OF CALIFORNIA      )



COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES   ) ss



CITY OF BALDWIN PARK    )



   I, LINDA L. GAIR, City Clerk of the City of Baldwin Park, do hereby
certify the foregoing Ordinance No. 1100 was regularly introduced and placed
upon first reading at a regular meeting of the City Council on March 15,
1995. That, thereafter, said Ordinance was duly approved and adopted at a
regular meeting of the City Council on April 5, 1995 by the following vote:
AYES:  MARTINEZ, LOZANO, LOWES, MUSE, MAYOR VARGAS



NOES:  NONE



ABSENT:  NONE



ABSTAIN:  NONE



Linda L. Gair



LINDA L. GAIR, CITY CLERK



TITLE I:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Chapter



   10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   15.   ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CODE VIOLATIONS



CHAPTER 10:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance



   10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code



   10.18   Section histories; statutory references



   10.19   Claims for money or damages



   10.20   Review of decisions; statute of limitations



   10.21   Criminal justice sdministration fee



   10.98   Violations ­ citation and arrest procedure



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the city of Baldwin Park
shall be designated as the Code of Baldwin Park and may be so cited.



Statutory reference:



   Code adoption, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 50022.1 - 50022.10



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CASH DEPOSIT.  Whenever this code requires a cash deposit for any
purpose, a valid and sufficient corporate surety bond may be deposited in
lieu thereof, if approved by the City Manager.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY  The city of Baldwin
Park, California.



   CITY MANAGER.  The duly appointed and acting City Manager of the city.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city.



   COUNTY.  Los Angeles County, California.



   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.  The duly appointed and acting Director of
Public Works.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES.  The duly appointed and acting
Director of Administrative Services.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.  The duly appointed and acting
Director of Community Development of the city.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   DIRECTOR OF HUMAN SERVICES.  The duly appointed and acting Director of
Human Services.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   FIRE CHIEF.  The Fire Chief of the city.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   POLICE CHIEF.  The Police Chief of the city.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN
shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT.  An officer,
office, employee, commission, or department of this city unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.



   OWNER.  As applied to a building, land or personal property, means any
part owner, joint owner, tenant, of the whole or a part thereof.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver.  Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



   SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person cannot
write.



   STATE.  The State of California.



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of
the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT or OCCUPANT.  As applied to a building or land, includes any
person who occupies the whole or part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others, or a person who is entitled to the occupancy.



('83 Code, § 1.04.030)



   WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.



   YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this city shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the City Council or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)    AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written "and/or," if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act
by an authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject
matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting  of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the
intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no
meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be
corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will
conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same
effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as originally
published.  No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all city
business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Ordinances take effect 30 days after their final passage.



   (B)   An ordinance takes effect immediately, if it is an ordinance:



      (1)   Relating to an election;



      (2)   For the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health or safety, containing a declaration of the facts constituting the
urgency, and is passed by a four-fifths vote of the City Council;



      (3)   Relating to street improvement proceedings;



      (4)   Relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of
the city; or



      (5)   Covered by particular provisions of law prescribing the
manner of its passage and adoption.



(Cal. Gov't Code § 36937)



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.



   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter
or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.



   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.  In addition to
such indication as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.



§ 10.18  SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending
ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. 
Example:  (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)



   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this
indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the
statute. Example:  (Cal. Gov't Code § 10001)  (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80;
Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).



      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory
reference" following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:



   § 31.10  MAYOR.



      The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council.



   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)



   Statutory reference:



      For the powers and duties of the Mayor, see Cal. Gov't Code §§
36801 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the city published in 1983 and subsequently amended, the 1983
code section number shall be indicated in the history by "('83 Code, §    
  )."



§ 10.19  CLAIMS FOR MONEY OR DAMAGES.



   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 935, claims against the city and any
city officers, employees and agents for money or damages which are excepted
by Cal. Gov't Code § 905 from the claims presentation requirements and which
are not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating
thereto, shall be governed by the procedures contained in chapter 1
(commencing with Cal. Gov't Code § 900) and chapter 2 (commencing with Cal.
Gov't Code § 910) of part 3, division 3.6, title 1 of the Government Code as
a prerequisite to bringing any lawsuit or action for money or damages against
the city or any city officers, employees or agents. Such claims shall include
the following:



   (A)   Claims under the Revenue and Taxation Code or other statute
prescribing procedures for the refund, rebate, exemption, cancellation,
amendment, modification, or adjustment of any tax, assessment, fee or charge
or any portion thereof, or of any penalties, costs or charges related thereof;



   (B)   Claims in connection with which the filing of a notice of
lien, statement of claim, or stop notice is required under any provision of
law relating to mechanics', laborers' or materialmen's liens;



   (C)   Claims by public employees for fees, salaries, wages, mileage
or other expenses and allowances;



   (D)   Claims for which workers' compensation authorized by division
4 (commencing with Cal. Labor Code § 3201) of the Labor Code is the
exclusive remedy;



   (E)   Application or claims for any form of public assistance under
the Welfare and Institutions Code or other provisions of law relating to
public assistance programs, and claims for goods, services, provisions or
other assistance rendered for or on behalf of any recipient of any form of
public assistance;



   (F)   Applications or claims for money or benefits under any public
retirement or pension system;



   (G)   Claims for principal or interest upon any bonds, notes,
warrants or other evidences of indebtedness;



   (H)   Claims which relate to a special assessment constituting a
specific lien against the property assessed and which are payable from the
proceeds of such an assessment, by offset of a claim for damages against it
or by delivery or any warrant or bonds representing it;



   (I)   Claims by state or by a state department or agency or by
another local public entity;



   (J)   Claims arising under any provision of the Unemployment
Insurance Code, including but not limited to claims for money or benefits, or
for refunds or credits of employer or worker contributions, penalties or
interest, or for refunds to workers of deductions from wages in excess of the
amount prescribed;



   (K)   Claims for recovery of penalties or forfeitures made pursuant
to article 1 (commencing with Cal. Labor Code § 1720) of chapter 1 of part 7
of division 2 of the Labor Code;



   (L)   Claims governed by the Pedestrian Mall Law of 1960, part 1
(commencing with Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 11000) of division 13 of
the Streets and Highways Code; and



   (M)   Any other claims that may be included within Cal. Gov't Code
§ 905 in the future.



   (N)   Any claim shall be made in writing and verified by the
claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator.
In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by Cal.
Gov’t Code § 910. The foregoing reference to Cal. Gov’t Code § 910
shall not be construed to authorize a class claim; no claim may be filed on
behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every  member of that class.



   (O)   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 935(B) and 945.6,
all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by
the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action
may be maintained by a person, or his or her guardian, conservator, executor
or administrator, who has not complied with the requirements of this section.



   (P)   Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand
shall conform to the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 940 through 949.
Any action brought against an employee of the city shall conform to the
requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 950 through 951.



   (Q)   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable
process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against
the city or an officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes,
fees or fines sought to be collected pursuant to any provision or resolution
ordinance of the city for the payment of all taxes, fees or fines, unless and
until the taxes, fees or fines, and any outstanding interest and penalties
have been paid in full.



(Ord. 1103, passed 7-5-95; Am. Ord. 1349, passed 3-7-12)



§ 10.20  REVIEW OF DECISIONS; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   The provisions of Cal. Civil Procedure Code § 1094.6 are
hereby adopted. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary,
judicial review of any decision of the city and of any commission, board,
officer, or agent of the city shall be had pursuant to the Cal. Civil
Procedure Code § 1094.5 only if the petition for writ of mandate is files
not later that the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision
becomes final, as set forth in division (b) of Cal. Civil Procedure Code §
1094.6.



   (B)   For the purposes of this section, DECISION shall mean
suspending, demoting or dismissing an officer or employee of the city,
revoking or denying an application for a permit, license or other
entitlement, or denying an application for any retirement benefit or
allowance.



(Ord. 1103, passed 7-5-95)



§ 10.21  CRIMINAL JUSTICE ADMINISTRATION FEE.



   (A)   Any person who is arrested by a police officer of the city or
who is booked or processed at the detention facility of the city, and who is
subsequently convicted of any offense related to the arrest, shall pay to the
city a criminal justice administration fee for reimbursement of
administrative expenses incurred by the city in connection with the arrest
and/or booking processing.  The amount of the fee shall be in accordance
with a fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of the City
Council.



   (B)   When the judgment of conviction includes an order for payment
of the criminal justice administration fee owed to the city, it may be
collected by any means provided by law for the enforcement of judgments.  If
the convicted person is subject to probation, the court must, as a condition
of probation, order the convicted person to reimburse the city for the
criminal justice administration fee.  If the convicted person fails to pay
the city the criminal justice administration fee, the city may prosecute a
civil action to collect the debt.



   (C)   All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited
into the General Fund and may be used for any lawful purpose.



(Ord. 1231, passed 7-7-04)



§ 10.98  VIOLATIONS ­ CITATION AND ARREST PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Power to arrest.  Any city peace officer or other designated
employee (designated employee) whose duties include the enforcement of any
provision of this code may arrest a person without a warrant whenever such
officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be
arrested has committed in his presence a violation of this code.



('83 Code, § 1.16.005)  (Ord. 950, passed - -86)



   (B)   Citation procedure for violations.



      (1)   Any city peace officer or other designated employee
arresting any person for a violation of any provision of this code, who does
not immediately take the arrested person before a magistrate, as prescribed
in the Cal. Penal Code, shall prepare a written notice to appear in court. 
The notice shall contain the following:



         (a)   The name and address of the person arrested.



         (b)   The offense charged, the time and place of the
alleged violation.



         (c)   Where and when the arrested person shall appear in
court.



      (2)   The time specified in the notice to appear must be at
least ten days after the arrest, unless waived by the arrestee.  The place
specified in the notice to appear, and the notice, shall be in conformity
with all applicable provisions of the Cal. Penal Code.



('83 Code, § 1.16.005)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 950, passed - -86)



   (C)   Delivery of notice.  The arresting city peace officer or
other designated employee shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to
the alleged violator.  The alleged violator, in order to secure his
immediate release, must give his written promise to so appear in court at the
time and place indicated thereon, by signing the duplicate notice which shall
be retained by the officer.  Thereafter, the arresting officer shall
forthwith release from custody the person so arrested.  The duplicate copy
of the notice to appear shall be filed in the manner prescribed in the Cal.
Penal Code.



('83 Code, § 1.16.005)  (Ord. 950, passed - -86)



   (D)   Failure to appear in court.  Any person who wilfully violates
his written promise to appear in court by failing to so appear at the time
and place stated, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the
disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested.



('83 Code, § 1.16.005)



   (E)   Warrant issuance.  When a person signs a written promise to
appear at the time and place specified therein, and has not posted bail as
provided in the Cal. Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have
delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within 20 days after the
person has failed to appear as promised, or if the person promises to appear
before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and
fails to do so on or before the date with which he promised to appear, then
within 20 days after the delivery of the written promise to appear by the
officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, the magistrate
shall issue and have delivered for execution, a warrant for his arrest. 
When the person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized
to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately
deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the
written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting
city peace officer or designated employee.



('83 Code, § 1.16.005)  (Ord. 950, passed - - 86)



Statutory reference:



   Citations for misdemeanors, see Cal. Penal Code §§ 853.5 - 853.8



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions, or failing to
comply with any of the mandatory requirements, of this code, or any other
ordinance of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation
thereof, pursuant to this code or such ordinance, is expressly made an
infraction.



   (B)   Except where a different punishment is lawfully prescribed, a
person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of this code, or any
ordinance of the city, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000
or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.



   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of the uniform
codes adopted by this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as
such.



('83 Code, § 1.01.070)



   (D)   Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of a
specific section of this code, or any ordinance of the city, shall be
punishable by the following:



      (1)   First violation.  A fine not exceeding $100.



      (2)   Second violation.  A fine not exceeding $200 for a
second violation of the same section of this code or the same ordinance of
the city occurring within one calendar year.



      (3)   Third violation.  A fine not to exceed $500 for a third
violation of the same section of this code or the same ordinance of the city
within one calendar year.



   (E)   City personnel as designated by the City Manager shall have
the authority to issue citations for violations of this code which are
declared to be infractions.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any provision of this code to the contrary,
the violation of any ordinance relating to parking shall not be an
infraction, but shall be subject to a civil penalty which shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1075, passed 11-17-93)



   (G)   A separate offense, whether punishable as an infraction or a
misdemeanor, shall exist for each and every day and any portion of any day,
during which a violation of any provision of this code, or any of the
ordinances of this city, is committed, continued or permitted to continue by
any person.



('83 Code, § 1.20.010)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82;  Am. Ord. 1000, passed -
-88; Am. Ord. 1004, passed - -88; Am. Ord. 1295, passed 11-1-06)



Cross-reference:



   Prisoners required to perform labor on  public works, see § 38.01



Statutory reference:



   Imprisonment, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36903 - 36904



   Penalties for ordinance violations, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36900 -
36901



   Penalties for misdemeanor violations, see Cal. Penal Code, § 19



CHAPTER 15: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF CODE VIOLATIONS



Section



   15.01   Administrative fines and penalties



   15.02   Definitions



   15.03   Administrative citation



   15.04   Extension of time to remedy code violation



   15.05   Contents of administrative citation



   15.06   Issuance of administrative citations



   15.07   Amount of administrative fines and penalties



   15.08   Payment of fines



   15.09   Administrative hearing



   15.10   Hearing procedures



   15.11   Judicial review



   15.12   Collection of delinquent fines and penalties



   15.13   Effect on future actions of responsible person



§ 15.01  ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES.



   Each violation of a provision of a code or ordinance shall be subject
to an administrative fine and penalty pursuant to this chapter. The
provisions of this chapter relating to administrative fines and penalties are
in addition to all other remedies, criminal and civil, which may be pursued
by the city to address a violation of a code or ordinance, and the
administrative citation process described in this chapter does not preclude
the city from penal or civil enforcement of a code or ordinance, nor from
recovering code violation abatement costs incurred by the city under any
applicable provision of law. The determination to issue an administrative
citation in addition to or in lieu of any other available remedy shall be at
the sole discretion of the city.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  The city's Chief Executive Officer. When any
provision of this chapter refers to the Chief Executive Officer, it shall be
deemed to include any person designated by the Chief Executive Officer to
undertake the action so delegated.



   CODE or ORDINANCE.  This code, any code or ordinance which has been
adopted by the city by reference whether through this code or otherwise, any
other city ordinance, and any condition of approval imposed upon any license,
permit or other discretionary approval issued by the city pursuant to the
authority of this code, any code or ordinance adopted by reference or any
other city ordinance. When a reference is made to a code or ordinance, such
reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto.



   CODE VIOLATION.  Any violation of a code or ordinance.



   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Any individual designated by the Chief Executive
Officer to enforce the provisions of a code or ordinance.



   HEARING OFFICER. The Chief Executive Officer. The Chief Executive
Officer may delegate the duties of hearing officer to a designee, including
but not limited to a person retained on contract with the city, provided,
however, that the choice of designee shall be consistent with all obligations
of law relating to due process for the particular hearing to be held by such
designee.



   ISSUE. To give, mail, or post an administrative citation.



   NOTICE OF VIOLATION.  A notice issued to a responsible person of a
code violation which does not create an immediate danger to the health,
safety or welfare of the general public.



   OWNER.  As applied to a building or land includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, tenant by
the entirety, co-partnerships of the whole or of a part of such building or
land, or a person having an interest in community property as a member, or
former member, of the community.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  Any of the following:



      (1)   An individual who or legal entity which causes a code
violation to occur.



      (2)   An individual or legal entity that, by his, her or its
action or failure to act, maintains or allows a code violation to continue.



      (3)   An individual or legal entity whose agent, employee or
independent contractor causes a code violation by his, her or its action or
failure to act.



      (4)   An owner of, or a lessee or sublessee with the current
right of possession of, real property on which a code violation occurs.



      (5)   An on-site manager of a business who normally works
daily at the site when the business is open and is responsible for the
activities at such premises.



      (6)   The owners, majority stockholders, corporate officers,
trustees and/or general partners of a legal entity that is a responsible
person under divisions (1) through (5) above.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.03  ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.



   (A)   Except as set forth in division (B) below, when a code
violation does not create an immediate danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public, an enforcement officer shall provide a notice
of violation to a responsible person prior to issuing an administrative
citation. The notice of violation shall state that an administrative citation
will issue if the code violation is not corrected or remedied within the
period of time specified in the notice of violation. If the code violation
pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or similar structural or zoning
issues that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the period
of time specified in the notice of violation shall be 14 days. Otherwise, the
period of time shall be a reasonable period of time for the responsible
person to correct or otherwise remedy the code violation, as determined by
the enforcement officer. After the expiration of such time period, or any
extension thereof authorized pursuant to § 15.04, if the enforcement officer
determines that the code violation still exists, the enforcement officer may
issue an administrative citation to that responsible person.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, if an enforcement officer determines after investigation that a code
violation which does not create an immediate danger to the health, safety, or
welfare of the general public exists on a property for which a notice of
violation for the same code violation has been issued within the previous
three months, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation
without first issuing another notice of violation.



   (C)   When a code violation creates an immediate danger to the
health, safety, or welfare of the general public, an enforcement officer may
issue an administrative citation to a responsible person without first
providing a notice of violation as set forth in division (A) of this section.



   (D)   After conducting an investigation, an enforcement officer may
determine that a responsible person committed a code violation and may issue
an administrative citation for the code violation whether or not the
enforcement officer personally observed the creation of the circumstances
which constitute the code violation.



   (E)   Each day a responsible person allows a code violation to exist
shall be a separate violation and that responsible person shall be subject to
a separate fine for each such day.



   (F)   An administrative citation may charge a code violation for one
or more days on which a violation exists and may charge violation of one or
more code sections.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.04  EXTENSION OF TIME TO REMEDY CODE VIOLATION.



   (A)   A responsible person issued a notice of violation may request
an extension of the correction period established by such notice of violation
if that such request is filed with the City Clerk prior to the expiration of
the original correction period together with evidence showing that the
correction cannot be made within the established period. Notwithstanding the
filing of such a request, the correction period as so established shall
remain in effect unless and until extended pursuant to this section.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall forward the request for extension to the
Chief Executive Officer who may grant a reasonable extension of the period of
time to correct such code violation if the evidence submitted establishes
that the correction cannot be made within the established period. The
decision to grant or deny the request for an extension shall be in writing
and shall be final and non-appealable.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.05  CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.



   (A)   Every administrative citation shall contain the following:



      (1)   Name of the responsible person(s);



      (2)   Date on which an inspection established the code
violation(s);



      (3)   The code section(s) violated;



      (4)   Address where the code violation(s) occurred;



      (5)   Description of the code violation(s);



      (6)   The amount of the fine;



      (7)   The date payment of the fine is required;



      (8)   Procedures to pay the fine;



      (9)   Procedures to request waiver of the deposit of the fine;



      (10)    Procedures to request a hearing to contest the
administrative citation;



      (11)    Signature of the enforcement officer issuing the
administrative citation; and



      (12)    Date of issuance.



   (B)   A self-addressed envelope in which the responsible person may
mail the fine to the city shall accompany the administrative citation.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.06  ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.



   An administrative citation may be issued by any of the following means:



   (A)   Personal service of the citation on the responsible person;
the responsible person is required to sign a copy of the administrative
citation showing his or her receipt, but his or her failure to do so shall
have no effect on the enforcement of the citation; or



   (B)   Mailing the administrative citation by registered or certified
mail, provided, however, that if such registered or certified mail is
refused, the administrative citation may then be served by first class mail,
to the owner(s) of the property on which the code violation occurred at the
address(es) shown on the latest equalized assessment roll, or to the
responsible person at the address of the property on which the code violation
occurred; or



   (C)   If the code violation is property related, posting a copy of
the administrative citation on the subject property in a conspicuous place,
provided, however, that if the administrative citation is issued by posting,
the enforcement officer shall also mail, by first class mail, a copy of the
administrative citation to the property owner(s) at the address(es) shown on
the latest equalized assessment roll, and, if the responsible person is other
than the property owner, to the responsible person at the address of the
subject property.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.07  AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Administrative fines for code violations shall be established
by resolution of the City Council. The schedule of fines may include
escalating fine amounts for repeated code violations within specified periods
of time.



   (B)   Administrative fines not paid prior to their due date shall be
subject to a penalty and interest for every day of delinquency as established
by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.08  PAYMENT OF FINES.



   (A)   A responsible person to whom an administrative citation is
issued shall be liable for, and shall pay to the city, the fine specified in
the administrative citation. Fines are due on the day specified in the
administrative citation, unless payment is stayed pursuant to the provisions
of division (D) of this section.



   (B)   Payment shall be made:



      (1)   By mailing the envelope included with the administrative
citation with first-class postage thereon and enclosing the fine amount paid
by check or money order, or



      (2)   By cash, check or money order payment in person at City
Hall.



   (C)   Payment of a fine or penalty pursuant to this chapter shall
not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated code violation, nor affect
the city's right to enforce any provision of a code or ordinance by any other
means, including but not limited to, nuisance abatement proceedings.



   (D)   Pending a hearing by the hearing officer, payment of a fine
may be stayed if a request by the responsible person for a waiver of the fine
deposit, accompanied by a sworn affidavit that such responsible person is
unable to deposit the fine required by the administrative citation, is filed
with the city not less than five business days prior to the time the fine is
due. The burden of proof of such inability to post the fine shall be on the
responsible person. The Finance Director may stay the payment of the fine if,
in his or her sole determination, such burden of proof has been met. The
decision to stay payment of the fine is not appealable.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.09  ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.



   (A)   A responsible person may request a hearing on an
administrative citation by filing a request for hearing with the City Clerk
on a form established by the city.



   (B)   The request must be filed prior to the time provided in the
administrative citation for payment of the fine or penalty, and shall include
any grounds for the hearing which the responsible person wishes the city to
consider. The request for hearing shall be accompanied by deposit of the fine
imposed by the administrative citation, unless such deposit has been stayed
pursuant to § 15.08(D).



   (C)   Notice of the date, time, and location of a hearing shall be
given to the responsible person requesting the hearing by first class mail
sent to the address specified in the request for the hearing not less than 15
days prior to the hearing date.



   (D)   Failure of the responsible person who requested the hearing to
attend the hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for the
hearing and shall be a bar to juridical review of the hearing officer's
decision based upon a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.10  HEARING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing officer at the
date, time and location specified in the notice of hearing.



   (B)   The enforcement officer shall provide all information relevant
to the administrative citation to the hearing officer prior to the hearing
date. If an enforcement officer submits a written report concerning the
administrative citation to the hearing officer at least five days prior to
the date of the hearing, a copy of such report shall be deposited in the
United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the responsible
person at the address set forth on such person's request for hearing. If a
written report is submitted by an enforcement officer to the hearing
authority less than five days prior to the date of the hearing, a copy of any
written report shall be provided to the responsible person at the hearing.
Failure of the responsible person to receive the report shall not invalidate
the hearing.



   (C)   An administrative citation and any additional document
submitted by the enforcement officer shall be accepted by the hearing officer
as prima facie evidence of the facts stated in such document(s).



   (D)   The hearing officer shall allow the responsible person an
opportunity to testify at the hearing and to present evidence concerning the
administrative citation, including but not limited to the code violation
specified in the administrative citation, efforts to correct the code
violation, and any financial hardship.



   (E)   The enforcement officer or any other representatives of the
city shall not be required to attend the hearing. The hearing officer shall
not require that the enforcement officer submit any evidence other than a
copy of the administrative citation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
enforcement officer and/or other city representative(s) may, but need not,
appear at the hearing and/or submit additional evidence at the hearing.



   (F)   The hearing officer may continue a hearing from time to time.
The hearing officer may request additional information or evidence from the
responsible person who filed the request for hearing prior to issuing a
decision. The hearing officer may allow the responsible person additional
time to correct the code violation prior to rendering his or her decision.



   (G)   All hearings shall be recorded on a video or audio device,
unless the city elects to use a court reporter. The city need not provide
transcriptions of any hearings. All audio and video recordings are public
records, available pursuant to the city's established provisions regarding
public records. If a court reporter is used, the responsible person who
requested the hearing may obtain a copy of the transcript upon payment to the
court reporter of any applicable fees or costs.



   (H) A hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical
rules of evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is evidence
on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule
which might consider such evidence improper in a civil action. Oral evidence
shall be taken only on oath or affirmation. Irrelevant or unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded.



   (I)   After considering all testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, within ten days of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a
written decision to affirm, modify, or dismiss the administrative citation.
The decision shall include the hearing officer's findings, as well as
information regarding the responsible person's right to seek judicial review
of the decision and the time in which to do so. The decision of the hearing
officer shall be the final administrative order or decision of the city and
is non-appealable.



   (J)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be served on the
responsible person by mailing a copy thereof to the responsible person at the
address indicated on the hearing request form. Service shall be deemed
complete five days after deposit of such copy in the United States mail,
first class postage prepaid.



   (K)   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative
citation should be affirmed, the amount on deposit with the city shall be
retained by the city. If the hearing officer modifies the administrative
citation in such a manner as to decrease the fine and/or any interest and/or
penalties on deposit with the city, any amount on deposit which is in excess
of the amount affirmed by the hearing officer shall be returned to the
responsible person who filed the hearing request form. If the hearing officer
determines that the administrative citation should be canceled, the city
shall promptly refund the amount of any deposited fine.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.



   The responsible person who filed the hearing request form may seek
judicial review of the hearing officer's decision pursuant to California
Government Code § 53069.4. The appeal shall be heard by the court as set
forth in that section. Service upon the city of the notice of appeal, which
is required by that section, shall be upon the City Clerk.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.12  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT FINES AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies
for the collection of fines, interest and penalties.



   (B)   If a responsible person owes the city any delinquent fines,
interest, or penalties, the city may refuse to issue, extend, or renew a
permit, license or other approval to that person or pertaining to the
property that is the subject of the administrative citation or delinquent
fines, interest, or penalties.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



§ 15.13 EFFECT ON FUTURE ACTIONS OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON.



   The City Council, Planning Commission, or city staff may consider the
fact that a responsible person has been issued an administrative citation(s)
when determining whether to grant, suspend, revoke or deny any permit,
license or other approval to that responsible person and an administrative
citation shall be evidence that the responsible person has committed acts
that threaten the health, safety and welfare of the general public.



(Ord. 1282, passed 3-1-06)



TITLE III:  ADMINISTRATION



Chapter



   30.   CITY COUNCIL



   31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



   32.   COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES AND AUTHORITIES



   33.   PERSONNEL SYSTEM



   34.   FINANCE; PURCHASING



   35.   TAXATION



   36.   EMERGENCY ORGANIZATIONS



   37.   PROPERTY



   38.   CITY POLICIES



   39.   DECORUM AT COUNCIL MEETINGS



CHAPTER 30:  CITY COUNCIL



Section



   30.01   Meetings



   30.02   Council reorganization



   30.03   Councilmember salaries



   30.04   Appeals to Council



   30.05   Terms of Mayor and City Council



Statutory reference:



   Legislative body, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36801 et seq.



§ 30.01  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Time.  There shall be two regular meetings of the City
Council during each calendar month.  Such meeting shall be held at the hour
of 7:00 p.m. on the first and third Wednesday of each calendar month.



('83 Code, § 2.08.010)  (Ord. 835, passed  -  -82)



   (B)   Location.  The Council Chambers in the City Hall, located at
14403 East Pacific Avenue, within the city, is designated as the official
meeting place of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.08.020)



Cross-reference:



   Decorum at Council meetings, see Ch. 39



Statutory reference:



   Meetings, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54950 et seq.



§ 30.02  COUNCIL REORGANIZATION.



   The Council shall reorganize and select one of its number as Mayor Pro
Tempore, on the following occasions:



   (A)   In odd-numbered years at the Council meeting at which the
canvass of the results of the general municipal election are declared.



   (B)   In even-numbered years at the first regular meeting conducted
in the month of December.



   (C)   At such other times as a majority of the City Council shall
order.



(‘83 Code, § 2.08.030)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1122, passed
2-5-97; Am. Ord. 1249, passed 11-17-04)



Statutory references:



   Election of legislative body by districts, see Cal. Gov't Code §§
34870 et seq.



   Elective Mayor, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 34900 - 34906



   Mayor, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40601 et seq.



§ 30.03  COUNCILMEMBER SALARIES.



   The salary of the Mayor and each member of the City Council shall be in
the sum of $600 per calendar month.



('83 Code, § 2.08.040)  (Ord. 825, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1269, passed
7-20-05)



§ 30.04  APPEALS TO COUNCIL.



   (A)   Procedure.  A standard appeal procedure is established for
those parts of this code which specifically permit an appeal to the City
Council from the decision of a city officer or employee.  This section shall
not apply to those parts of this code that specifically provide for an
alternative appeal procedure.



('83 Code, § 2.12.010)



   (B)   Appeal period.  An appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
within ten consecutive calendar days after the written notice of decision is
deposited in course of transmission with the United States Postal Service.



('83 Code, § 2.12.020)



   (C)   Contents.  An appeal shall be in writing, and shall state
therein the basis for the appeal.



('83 Code, § 2.12.030)



   (D)   Fee.  A filing and processing fee in an amount as set by
resolution of the City Council shall be paid to the Director of
Administrative Services contemporaneously with the filing of an appeal.



('83 Code, § 2.12.040)



   (E)   Hearing.  Upon the receipt of a written appeal and proof of
payment of the required fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter on the
Council agenda for consideration by the City Council at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, and give the appealing party and any other person
requesting the same, at least five consecutive calendar days written notice
of the time and place of the hearing.



('83 Code, § 2.12.050)



   (F)   Council action.  At the time and place for the de novo
hearing upon the appeal, the City Council shall give any person interested in
the matter a reasonable opportunity to be heard.  The burden of proof in the
appeal shall be on the appealing party to show that the appealed decision was
arbitrary, unreasonable, or not in conformity with the provisions of this
code.  The determination of the City Council shall be in accordance with the
standards set forth in this code relating to the subject of the appeal.  The
decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive.



('83 Code, § 2.12.060)



   (G)   Notice of action.  The City Clerk shall give written notice
of the City Council's action, within five days, to the appealing party, and
any other person requesting the same.



('83 Code, § 2.12.070)



§ 30.05  TERMS OF MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.



   The terms of all current incumbent Mayor and City Council members shall
be increased by no more than 12 months (one year) as follows:



   (A)   The Mayor and those Council members whose terms of office
would have prior to the adoption of this section, expired following the
November 2017, general municipal elections shall, instead, continue in their
offices until certifications of the results and administrations of the oaths
of office after the November 2017, city election.



   (B)   Those City Council members whose terms of office would have,
prior to the adoption of this section, expired following the November 2019,
general municipal election, shall instead, continue in their offices until
certification of the results and administration of the oaths office after the
November 2020 city election.



(Ord. 1391 ,passed 11-16-16)



CHAPTER 31:  CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



Section



Chief Executive Officer



   31.01   Office created and established



   31.02   Eligibility



   31.03   Duties



   31.04   Removal



   31.05   Compensation



   31.06   Terminology



City Attorney



   31.15   Office created



   31.16   Appointment



   31.17   Duties



   31.18   Deputies; special counsel



   31.19   Removal



   31.20   Compensation



City Clerk; City Treasurer



   31.30   Duties



   31.31   Compensation



   31.32   Expenses



   31.33   Deputies



Director of Administrative Services



   31.45   Office created and established



   31.46   Powers and duties



   31.47   Bond



Police and Public Safety Officers



   31.60   Public safety dispatcher program



Statutory reference:



   City officers generally, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 36501 et seq.



CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER



§ 31.01  OFFICE CREATED AND ESTABLISHED.



   There is hereby created in the unclassified service of the city the
position of Chief Executive Officer, (hereinafter referred to as "CEO") who
shall serve directly under the supervision and control of the Council in a
purely at will, administrative capacity and whose powers and duties shall be
as set forth in §§ 31.02 through 31.06.



('83 Code, § 2.04.010)(Am. Ord. 1131, passed 5-6-98)



§ 31.02  ELIGIBILITY.



   No member of the City Council shall be eligible for an appointment as
CEO during his term as such, nor within one year after he has ceased to be a
member of the Council.



('83 Code, § 2.04.020) (Am. Ord. 1131, passed 5-6-98)



§ 31.03  DUTIES.



   (A)   The CEO shall plan, direct, and supervise the appointed
department heads in the operations of the City. The CEO shall advise the City
Council of the ongoing affairs of the City and receive and implement, as
appropriate, policy direction from the City Council. The CEO shall provide
administrative direction for all department heads and the “E”-Team, and
oversee the municipal and redevelopment service functions and activities.



   (B)   The CEO shall direct and participate in the development and
implementation of goals, objectives, policies, and procedures for the city
government, as directed by the City Council, including the city's economic
development and housing programs.



   (C)   The CEO shall assist the City Council by coordinating, through
the "E"-team, the various departments, divisions and services of the City
government. The CEO shall also confer with the "E"-team concerning
administrative and operational problems, and make appropriate decisions and
recommendations.



   (D)   The CEO shall provide administrative oversight, support
motivation and coordination of the City's Executive Team ("E"-Team). The CEO
shall preside at all "E"-Team meetings as the Chairperson of the "E"-Team.



   (E)   The CEO shall conduct ongoing evaluations of all city
departments to ensure that there is a consistent and high level of
effectiveness and efficiency in all services provided



   (F)   The CEO shall conduct personnel evaluations of all department
heads at a minimum of an annual basis on behalf of the City Council.
Evaluations of department heads will be reviewed by the City Council upon
completion. The CEO shall also be responsible for the administration of the
personnel division. The CEO shall designate a qualified officer or employee
of the City to act as Personnel Officer. The City Council shall be informed
of all recruitment hiring, termination, and promotions of City personnel.



   (G)   The CEO shall communicate new ideas proposed by department
heads and employees with respect to the operations of the City Council.



   (H)   The CEO shall ensure that the City Council is informed on all
significant matters, especially with respect to finance and the economic
well-being of the City. The CEO shall develop a mechanism, including weekly
updates, to ensure full Communication between city staff and the City Council.



   (I)   The CEO shall tactfully and diplomatically present
professional views, concerns and short-term/long-range implications of
proposed policy action which may be under considerations, within the context
of the uniqueness of Baldwin Park, while also being committed to ensuring
that all Council decisions are enacted in a timely, effective, professional
and impartial manner. The CEO shall perform an evaluation with respect to
whether the policies of the City Council have been enacted.



   (J)   The CEO shall attend meetings of the Council with duty of
reporting on or discussing any matter concerning the affairs of the
departments, services, or activities upon which in his judgment the Council
should be informed.



   (K)   The CEO shall assist the Council and the "E"-Team in
coordinating the administrative functions and operations of the various
departments, divisions and services of the city government, and, on its
behalf, carry out the policies, rules and regulations and ordinances adopted
but it, relating to the administrative of the affairs of such departments,
divisions or services,



   (L)   The CEO shall bring to the attention of the council problem
areas which require council intervention. The CEO shall have the full
authority to access all documents and computer records within each respective
department for audit and evaluation purposes.



   (M)   The CEO shall cooperate with all community organizations whose
aim and purpose it is to advance the spiritual and material interests of the
city and its people and to provide them with assistance through the city
government. He or she shall encourage direct contact between City
Councilmembers and said community organizations.



   (N)   The CEO shall not exercise any policy-making or legislative
functions whatsoever nor attempt to commit or bind the Council or any member
thereof to any action, plan or program requiring official Council action. It
is not intended by this Chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty
upon said CEO which is vested in or imposed by general law or valid
ordinances in any other City commission, board, department, officer or
employee.



   (O)   The CEO shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest
degree of tact, patience and courtesy in his contacts with the public and
with all City commissions, boards, departments, officers and employees and
shall use his best efforts to establish and maintain a harmonious
relationship between all personnel employees in the government of the city to
the end that highest possible standards of public service be continuously
maintained



   (P)   The CEO shall perform such other duties as may be required of
him or her from time to time by the City Council.



   (Q)   The CEO shall inform the City Council of all media contacts or
communications directed at the city and shall coordinate the City's responses
to media inquiries. The CEO may be the spokesperson for the city on a case by
cases basis where authorized by the City Council; however, when the CEO
serves as media spokesperson, the City Council shall not be prohibited from
or impeded from or impeded in any way from communicating with the media.



   (R)   The CEO shall monitor each department in the preparation and
submittal to the Council of the itemized annual estimates of expenditures
required by any of the departments for capital outlay, salaries, wages and
miscellaneous operating costs: to ensure and facilitate the presentation of a
preliminary consolidated municipal budget and ensure the submittal of same to
the Council before the 15th of June of each year with such recommendations as
to such changes which he deems advisable.



   (S)   The CEO shall monitor the administration of the budget by each
of the departments after its final adoption and keep the Council informed
with respect thereto.



   (T)   The CEO shall monitor and inform the Council of the
expenditures of all departments, divisions or services of the city government
and appoint a purchasing agent upon council confirmation, for the purchase of
all supplies, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment and material which may be
required for any of such departments, divisions or services.



   (U)   The CEO shall interpret, analyze and explain the city's
policies, procedures and programs.



   (V)   The CEO shall be the Emergency Services Director and shall
coordinate emergency services as required by local, state and federal law.



   (W)   The CEO shall plan, direct, supervise, coordinate, and
evaluate persons appointed to the Personnel/Risk Manager position in the same
manner as is established by this section for department heads.  The CEO may
delegate these responsibilities as appropriate for administration of city
operations.  The positions of department head and manager are those
described in § 33.05(B)(1) of this Code.



(‘83 Code, § 2.04.030)  (Ord. 845, passed - - 82; Am. Ord. 1131, passed
5-6-98; Am. Ord. 1146, passed 10-6-99; Am. Ord. 1225, passed 2-18-04; Am.
Ord. 1226, passed 3-3-04)



§ 31.04  REMOVAL.



   (A)   The CEO shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, but
he shall not be removed from office except:



      (1)   At a regular, adjourned regular, or special meeting of
the City Council; and



      (2)   By a motion carried by not less than the affirmative
votes of three members of the City Council.



   (B)   In removing the CEO, the City Council shall use its
uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and conclusive.



('83 Code, § 2.04.040) (Am. Ord. 1131, passed 5-6-98)



§ 31.05  COMPENSATION.



   The City Council shall, from time to time, establish the compensation
to be paid to the CEO, including, but not limited to, appropriate fringe
benefits.



('83 Code, § 2.04.050) (Am. Ord. 1131, passed 5-6-98)



§ 31.06  ABSENCE.



   All references in the Baldwin Park Municipal Code and ordinances and
resolutions of the City Council to the office or position of the "City
Manager" and the like shall mean and refer to the CEO except where such
provisions are inconsistent with Urgency Ordinance 1074 and 1110 and the
provisions of §§ 31.01 to 31.06 unless the context of such a reference may
require otherwise.  Sections 31.01 to 31.06 shall take precedence with
respect to any conflicts with Urgency Ordinance 1074 and 1110.



('83 Code, § 2.04.060)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 1131, passed
5-6-98)



Editor's Note:  The city from time to time operates under alternative
procedures in the absence of a City Manager. At the time of this
codification, Urgency Ord. 1074, passed 10-20-93, as amended by Ord. 1110,
passed 1-17-96, delegates authority and functions to various department heads.



CITY ATTORNEY



§ 31.15  OFFICE CREATED.



   The part-time position of the City Attorney for the city is created.



('83 Code, § 2.16.010)



Statutory reference:



   City Attorney, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 41801 et seq.



§ 31.16  APPOINTMENT.



   The City Council shall appoint a qualified person to the position of
City Attorney.  No person shall be eligible for appointment thereto unless
he has been admitted to the practice of law in the state for at least five
years.



('83 Code, § 2.16.020)



§ 31.17  DUTIES.



   The City Attorney shall act as the legal advisor to all officers and
employees of the city.



('83 Code, § 2.16.030)



§ 31.18  DEPUTIES; SPECIAL COUNSEL.



   With the approval of the City Manager, the City Attorney may appoint
qualified persons as deputies.  Compensation for such deputies, if any,
shall be established by the City Council.  With the approval of the City
Council, special counsel may be appointed for special projects or matters in
litigation.



('83 Code, § 2.16.040)



§ 31.19  REMOVAL.



   The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, and
may be removed, at any time, upon an affirmative vote of not less than three
members of the Council.



('83 Code, § 2.16.050)



§ 31.20  COMPENSATION.



   The compensation for the position of City Attorney shall be set, from
time to time, by resolution of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.16.060)



CITY CLERK; CITY TREASURER



§ 31.30  DUTIES.



   The duties of the City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be those
established by applicable law, and such other duties, consistent therewith,
as may be assigned to those positions by the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.20.010)



Statutory references:



   City Clerk, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 40801 et seq.



   City Treasurer, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 41001 et seq.



Cross-reference:



   Date of elections for City Clerk and City Treasurer, see § 30.05



§ 31.31  COMPENSATION.



   The City Council shall, by resolution, from time to time, establish the
compensation for the positions of City Clerk and City Treasurer.



('83 Code, § 2.20.020)



§ 31.32  EXPENSES.



   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the City Clerk and City
Treasurer shall be entitled to advances and/or reimbursement for expenditures
actually made or incurred, or, required to be made, in the respective
performance of their official duties.



('83 Code, § 2.20.030)



§ 31.33  DEPUTIES.



   Both the City Clerk and the City Treasurer shall have the authority to
appoint deputies to assist in the performance of their respective duties. 
Compensation, if any, for those positions shall be established by the City
Council.



('83 Code, § 2.20.040)



DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES



§ 31.45  OFFICE CREATED AND ESTABLISHED.



   There is created and established the office of Director of
Administrative Services.  The office of Director of Administrative Services
may be combined by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council,
with any other office or position having duties which are not inconsistent
therewith.



('83 Code, § 2.24.010)



§ 31.46  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Director of Administrative Services shall be the head of the
Finance Department of the city, and, under the direction of the City Manager,
shall:



   (A)   Perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore
imposed upon the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall be relieved of such
duties, including all duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Cal. Gov't Code
§§ 40802 through 40805; and



   (B)   Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him by law or
by this code, or by the City Manager, or by the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.24.020)



§ 31.47  BOND.



   The Director of Administrative Services shall execute a surety bond in
an amount set by the City Council, the premium on which shall be paid by the
city.



('83 Code, § 2.24.030)



POLICE AND PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS



§ 31.60  PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHER PROGRAM.



   The city desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under
provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 13522, Chapter I, of Title 4, Part 4.
Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 13510(c), Chapter I, the Police Department
will adhere to standards for recruitment and training established by the
California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (P.O.S.T.). 
Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 13512, Chapter I, the Commission and its
representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the
Commission to ascertain that the Police Department's public safety dispatcher
personnel adhere to the standards for selection and training established by
the Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.



('83 Code, § 1.30.010) (Ord. 1013, passed - -89)



CHAPTER 32:  COMMISSIONS, AGENCIES AND AUTHORITIES



Section



City Commissions ­ General Provisions



   32.01   Appointment



   32.02   Service



   32.03   Terms



   32.04   Meetings



   32.05   Absence from meetings



   32.06   Organization



   32.07   Secretary



   32.08   Vacancies



   32.09   Removal



   32.10   Compensation



   32.11   Qualifications



Housing Commission



   32.20   Creation



   32.21   Membership



   32.22   Terms



   32.23   Functions



   32.24   Limitations



Recreation/Community Services Commission



   32.35   Creation



   32.36   Membership



   32.37   Terms



   32.38   Duties



Personnel Commission



   32.50   Creation



   32.51   Membership



   32.52   Terms



   32.53   Meetings



   32.54   Duties



Planning Commission



   32.65   Creation



   32.66   Membership



   32.67   Terms



   32.68   Duties



Community Redevelopment Agency



   32.80   Creation and regulations



Industrial Development Authority



   32.90   Creation and authorization



Community Development Commission



   32.100   Declaring a need for a Community Development Commission
(CDC)



   32.101   Establishing the CDC Board



CITY COMMISSIONS ­ GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 32.01  APPOINTMENT.



   Members of each city commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council.



§ 32.02  SERVICE.



   Each member of a city commission shall serve at the pleasure of the
City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.28.020)



§ 32.03  TERMS.



   (A)   Expiration of terms.  The term of a commission office shall
expire on June 30 of the designated expiration year.



   (B)   Continuation in office.  Each member of a city commission
holding such office, as of the effective date of this subchapter, shall
continue in the office until his or her successor is appointed and qualified,
unless a City Council order of removal otherwise provides.



   (C)   Continuity in office.  The City Council in making
appointments and reappointments to all commission offices shall observe,
whenever possible, the principle of staggered terms so as to provide for
continuity in membership for each such commission.



('83 Code, § 2.28.030)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81)



§ 32.04  MEETINGS.



   Except as expressly provided in this code, each commission shall
establish the time and place of its regular meetings.  All the meetings
shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown
Act codified in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54950 et seq. Each commission shall
adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of
its proceedings, which shall be open for inspection by any member of the
public.



('83 Code, § 2.28.040)



§ 32.05  ABSENCE FROM MEETINGS.



   (A)   Any member of any commission who is absent, without cause,
from three successive regular meetings of the commission, shall be deemed,
automatically, to have vacated his office.



   (B)   An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the
city shall be deemed an excused absence; provided, that notice thereof is
given to the secretary of the commission by the member, on or before the day
of any regular meeting of the commission.



('83 Code, § 2.28.050)



§ 32.06  ORGANIZATION.



   Each city commission shall annually elect one of its members as
chairman and one of its members as vice-chairperson.  The election shall
take place at the first commission meeting in July of each year. 



('83 Code, § 2.28.060)



§ 32.07  SECRETARY.



   The City Manager shall designate the secretary of each such
commission.  He shall provide appropriate clerical assistance for each
commission, and shall be responsible for the maintenance of all permanent
records of each such commission.



('83 Code, § 2.28.070)



§ 32.08  VACANCIES.



   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs on any city commission, the vacancy
shall be filled in the manner set forth in § 32.01.  Where a vacancy occurs
leaving an unexpired term, the subsequent appointment shall be made for the
balance of the unexpired term.



   (B)   Except for the removal of a commission member, as provided in
§ 32.09, or vacancy due to absence, as provided in § 32.05, notwithstanding
the expiration of the term of a commission member, the member shall continue
to serve as such, until his successor is appointed and qualified.



('83 Code, § 2.28.080)(Am. Ord. 1155, passed 1-19-00)



§ 32.09  REMOVAL.



   Any member of any city commission may be removed from the office, with
or without cause, at any time, by the City Council.  No such removal shall
be effective unless a motion to that effect, made at a regular, adjourned
regular, special or adjourned special meeting, is carried by not less than
the affirmative votes of three members of the Council.



('83 Code, § 2.28.090)



§ 32.10  COMPENSATION.



   Each member of a commission shall be entitled to such compensation as
may be set by the City Council.  The commission members shall be entitled to
reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of his official
duties, if the same is approved, in advance, by the City Council.  No
commission shall have any authority to expend, or authorize the expenditure
of any public funds, except with the prior express approval of the City
Council.



('83 Code, § 2.28.100)



§ 32.11  QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Commission members shall be qualified residents of the city at
the time of their appointment and at all other times during their term.



   (B)   Commission members shall not hold public office as an elected
official at the time of their appointment or at any other time during their
term.



(Ord. 1155, passed 1-19-00)



HOUSING COMMISSION



§ 32.20  CREATION.



   There is created a Housing Commission, which commission shall have the
duties as prescribed in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 2.36.010)  (Ord. 826, passed - -81)



§ 32.21  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The Housing Commission shall consist of seven members who
shall be designated as Commission Office Nos. 1 through 7 respectively.



   (B)   Commissioners Nos. 6 and 7 shall be persons who are tenants of
the authority.  Commissioner No. 7 shall be over 62 years of age if the
authority has tenants of such age.  Tenant Commissioners shall have all the
powers, duties, and privileges as any other Commissioner.



('83 Code, § 2.36.020)  (Ord. 826, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 1155, passed
1-19-00)



§ 32.22  TERMS.



   (A)   Three of the Commissioners first appointed shall be designated
by the appointing authority to serve terms of one, two, and three years,
respectively, from the date of their appointments, and two shall be
designated to serve for terms of four years from the date of their
appointments.



   (B)   The two Tenant Commissioners shall serve for terms of two
years from the date of their appointments and their successors shall be
tenants.  Successors of Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of four
years, except that successors of Tenant Commissioners shall be appointed for
a term of two years and all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.



   (C)   If a Tenant Commissioner ceases to be a tenant of the
authority, the person shall be disqualified as a Commissioner and another
tenant shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term.



   (D)   Any appointment of a successor to a Commissioner of the
Housing Commission shall be made by the Mayor subject to the concurrence of
the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.36.030)  (Ord. 826, passed - -81)



§ 32.23  FUNCTIONS.



   The functions of the Housing Commission shall be as follows:



   (A)   To serve as required in an advisory capacity to the City
Council/Housing Authority on matters relating to housing in the community.



   (B)   To assist in developing long-range objectives and goals for
housing in the community.



   (C)   To recommend changes from time to time in the City Housing
Assistance Plan.



   (D)   To undertake studies in areas of concern or as may be assigned
by the City Council/Housing Authority.



('83 Code, § 2.36.040)  (Ord. 826, passed - -81)



§ 32.24  LIMITATIONS.



   The Housing Commission shall have no power or authority to bind or
obligate the city or any officer or department thereof for any money, debts
undertaking or obligation of any kind in excess of the appropriation which
the City Council may have made for the purposes of the Commission in any
fiscal year.



('83 Code, § 2.36.050)  (Ord. 826, passed - -81)



Recreation/Community Services Commission



§ 32.35  CREATION.



   The Recreation/Community Services Commission of the city is created.



('83 Code, § 2.48.010)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 1133, passed
8-5-98)



§ 32.36  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A) The Recreation/Community Services Commission of the city shall
consist of seven members, five of who shall be designated as Commission
Office Nos. 1 through 5 respectively. 



   (B)   Three members shall be designated to Commission Office Nos. 6,
7, and 8 respectively  and:



      (1)   Shall be over the age of 16 years, and less than 19
years of age during their terms of office;



      (2)   One member shall be a student at Baldwin Park High
School, the other member shall be a student at Sierra Vista High School, and
one member shall be a student at North Park High School at the time of their
respective appointments; and



      (3)   No person shall be appointed to Office Nos. 6, 7 or 8
unless the principal of his/her high school has certified his/her eligibility
for the appointment. Certification shall only be made after an appropriate
selection process has been observed, involving as a part thereof, the wishes
of the student body of each high school as to appropriate candidates.



(‘83 Code, § 2.48.020)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 1155, passed
1-19-00; Am. Ord. 1168, passed 11-15-00)



§ 32.37  TERMS.



   The term of office for members of the Recreation/Community Services
Commission shall be, as to Offices 1 through 5, inclusive, a period of two
years.  The terms of office for Offices 6 and 7 shall be for a period of one
year, subject to the provisions of §§ 32.01 through 32.10.



(‘83 Code, § 2.48.030)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81)



§ 32.38  DUTIES.



   The Recreation/Community Services Commission shall perform the
following duties:



   (A)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council in all matters
pertaining to parks, public recreation and social services including
playgrounds, parks, stables, bridle trails and beautifications.



   (B)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council with respect
to the development of Human Services recreational programs in the city,
stimulate public interest in recreational and social service programs and
cooperate with schools located in the city for summer recreation and swimming
pool programs and all other agencies relating to securing and developing an
adequate recreational and social services program.



   (C)   Act in an advisory capacity to the City Council with respect
to the acquisition, development and maintenance of park, recreation and
social service facilities in the city.



   (D)   Exercise such other powers and duties as may be assigned by
order of the City Council.



(‘83 Code, § 2.48.040)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81)



PERSONNEL COMMISSION



§ 32.50  CREATION.



   There is created a Personnel Commission for the city.



('83 Code, § 2.40.010)



§ 32.51  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Personnel Commission of this city shall consist of a total of five
members.



('83 Code, § 2.40.020)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 1133, passed
8-5-98)



§ 32.52  TERMS.



   The term of office for members of the Personnel Commission shall be for
a period of two years, subject to the provisions of §§ 32.01 et seq.



('83 Code, § 2.40.030)  (Ord. 822, passed - -81)



§ 32.53  MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall meet upon noticed call of the Chairman.  Its
meetings shall be held in the Council Chambers of City Hall of the city.



('83 Code, § 2.40.040)



§ 32.54  DUTIES.



   The Personnel Commission shall perform the following duties.



   (A)   Hear disciplinary actions as set forth in the city's personnel
rules.



   (B)   Such other duties as the Council shall, from time to time,
require.



('83 Code, § 2.40.050)



PLANNING COMMISSION



§ 32.65  CREATION.



   A Planning Commission for the city is created.



('83 Code, § 2.44.010)



Statutory reference:



   Planning Commissions, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65100 - 65102



§ 32.66  MEMBERSHIP.



   The Planning Commission of this city shall consist of a total of five
members.



('83 Code, § 2.44.020)  (Ord. 996, passed - -88; Am. Ord. 1057, passed -
-92; Am. Ord. 1155, passed 1-19-00)



§ 32.67  TERMS.



   Each member of the Planning Commission shall serve for two-year terms,
subject to the provisions of §§ 32.01 et seq.



('83 Code, § 2.44.030)



§ 32.68  DUTIES.



   The City Planning Commission shall perform the duties required by
applicable state law, and such other duties as may be ordered by the City
Council.



('83 Code, § 2.44.040)



COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY



§ 32.80  CREATION AND REGULATIONS.



   There being a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city,
a Community Redevelopment Agency is created in and for the city.  The City
Council, pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law of the state, declares
itself to be the Community Redevelopment Agency.  The City Council, when
acting as the agency, shall be vested with all of the rights, powers, duties,
privileges and immunities incident thereto.  Each member of the City Council
shall receive compensation for serving as a member of the Agency, to the
maximum extent permitted by Cal. Health & Safety Code § 33114.5.



('83 Code, § 2.32.010)  (Ord. 867, passed - -83)



INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY



§ 32.90  CREATION AND AUTHORIZATION.



   There being a need in the city for an industrial development authority
to provide industry with an alternative and additional method of finance in
accordance with state policy as set forth in the California Industrial
Development Financing Act, Title 10, commencing with Cal. Gov't Code §
91500, the Industrial Development Authority of this city established by the
act is declared organized and shall function under the name Industrial
Development Authority of the city and be authorized to transact business and
exercise all powers and other authority conferred upon industrial development
authorities by the act. The City Council shall constitute the Industrial
Development Authority's legislative body.



('83 Code, § 2.52.010)  (Ord. 834, passed - -82)



COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION



§ 32.100  DECLARING A NEED FOR A COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION (CDC).



   (A)   The City Council, pursuant to Health and Safety Code §
34115.5, does hereby declare the need for a Community Development Commission
to function with respect to the powers, duties and obligations of its
Redevelopment Agency.  In making this finding the City Council takes this
action in establishing the Community Development Commission for the city in
furtherance of the goals, objectives and policies of enhancing development
and redevelopment opportunities and in furtherance of meeting the housing
needs and objectives of the city.



   (B)   The city in establishing the Community Development Commission
is declaring this need only with respect to the Baldwin Park Redevelopment
Agency and not with respect to the Baldwin Park Housing Authority.



(Ord. 1239, passed 7-21-04)



§ 32.101  ESTABLISHING THE CDC BOARD.



   (A)   The City Council hereby declares itself to be the Community
Development Commission of the City of Baldwin Park, California.



   (B)   In addition to the rights, power, duties and responsibilities
of the Baldwin Park Redevelopment Agency being vested in the CDC, by
operation of law, the City Council also delegates to the CDC the power,
authority, functions and jurisdiction to enhance its position as a leader
amongst communities of the San Gabriel Valley and Los Angeles County in the
promotion and attraction of business development and redevelopment
opportunities by identifying, designing, implementing, and managing
development and redevelopment efforts, goals and objectives including
providing for flexibility in identifying future housing developments.



   (C)   The monthly stipend for the Community Development Commission
shall be $1,100 per member per month.  Commissioners who elect to
participate in the California Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS)
as a City Council member will have their Commission stipend included in
CalPERS.  Any future changes to the monthly stipend may be made by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1240, passed 7-21-04)



CHAPTER 33:  PERSONNEL SYSTEM



Section



Classified and Unclassified Service



   33.01   Creation and purpose



   33.02   Status of officers and employees



   33.03   Elective officers of the city



   33.04   Classified service officers or employees



   33.05   Unclassified service employees



   33.06   Salaries



   33.07   New positions



   33.08   Adoption of rules



   33.09   Appointment to and removal from system



   33.10   Council not to interfere with appointments or removals



Conditions of Employment



   33.20   Basic salary plan



   33.21   Holidays



   33.22   Discrimination



   33.23   Retirement



   33.24   Absence because of injury



   33.25   Reimbursement for damage to personal property



   33.26   Political activities



   33.27   Contract for services



   33.28   Appropriation of funds



Reduction in Work Force



   33.40   Purpose



   33.41   Definitions



   33.42   Procedure



   33.43   Demotion



   33.44   Subsequent demotion or termination



   33.45   Reemployment list



CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE



§ 33.01  CREATION AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the personnel system created by this chapter, is to:



   (A)   Establish an equitable and uniform procedure for attracting to
the system the best and most competent persons available;



   (B)   Assure that appointments and promotions of employees in the
system will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive tests;



   (C)   Provide a reasonable degree of security for employees in the
system; and



   (D)   Insure to the city a staff of loyal, qualified and competent
employees.



('83 Code, § 2.56.010)



Statutory reference:



   Personnel system, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 45000 et seq.



§ 33.02  STATUS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.



   The City Council shall adopt, by resolution, a classification plan
prepared by the City Manager for all positions in the classified and
unclassified service pursuant to §§ 33.02 through 33.07.  All officers and
employees of the city shall be included in one of the categories specified in
§§ 33.02 through 33.07.



('83 Code, § 2.56.020)



§ 33.03  ELECTIVE OFFICERS OF THE CITY.



   The elective officers of the city shall be the following:



   (A)   Mayor.



   (B)   Each member of the City Council.



   (C)   City Clerk.



   (D)   City Treasurer.



('83 Code, § 2.56.030)



§ 33.04  CLASSIFIED SERVICE OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.



   Except as otherwise expressly provided in this section, all full-time
officers and employees of the city shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be
included within the city's personnel system, and such persons shall be
referred to as employees in the "classified service." All employment rights
and duties of employees in the classified service shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules and regulations of the
city.



('83 Code, § 2.56.040)



§ 33.05  UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE EMPLOYEES.



   The persons now, or hereafter, holding any of the following positions
shall be deemed to be included within the unclassified service of the city. 
Unclassified service employees shall not be subject to the provisions of this
chapter with reference to the city's personnel system; nor shall the
unclassified service employees be subject to, or governed by, the provisions
of the city's personnel rules and regulations.  Appointments to, and
dismissals from, positions in the unclassified service shall be governed,
exclusively, by the provisions of §§ 33.02 through 33.07.



   (A)   City Council appointees.  Persons holding any of the
positions enumerated in this division shall be "at-will" employees, appointed
by, and serve at the pleasure of, the City Council:



      (1)   Any person employed by the city as an independent
contractor for the purpose of performing a specific function or service;



      (2)   The Chief Executive Officer (sometimes referred to in
this code as the City Manager);



      (3)   The City Attorney;



      (4)   Department heads;



      (5)   Personnel/Risk Manager; or



      (6)   Assistant Chief Executive Officer.



   (B)   Department head and manager positions.  The following
positions constitute the department head and manager positions of the city:



      (1)   Department head positions:



         (a)   Chief of Police;



         (b)   Director of Community Development;



         (c)   Director of Finance;



         (d)   Director of Public Works;



         (e)   Director of Recreation and Community Services;



      (2)   Manager positions:



         (a)   Accounting Manager;



         (b)   Assistant Public Works Director;



         (c)   Chief Deputy City Clerk;



         (d)   City Planner;



         (e)   Housing Authority Manager;



         (f)   Personnel/Risk Manager;



         (g)   Redevelopment Manager.



   (C)   Chief Executive Officer appointees.  Persons holding any of
the following positions shall be "at-will" employees, appointed by, and serve
at the pleasure of the Chief Executive Officer:



      (1)   All part-time employees;



      (2)   All temporary employees;



      (3)   Any position which is funded, in whole or in part, by a
state or federal grant; and



      (4)   Manager positions other than Personnel/ Risk Manager.



(‘83 Code, § 2.56.050)  (Ord. 845, passed - - 82; Am. Ord. 1021, passed -
- 89;  Am. Ord. 1046, passed - - 91; Am. Ord. 1225, passed 2-18-04; Am. Ord.
1226, passed 3-3-04; Am. Ord. 1258, passed 2-2-05; Am. Ord. 1259, passed
6-15-05)



§ 33.06  SALARIES.



   Salaries and fringe benefits for each position referred to in §§
33.02 through 33.07 shall be established by the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.56.060)



§ 33.07  NEW POSITIONS.



   The City Council may, as recommended by the City Manager, create new
positions in city employment.  Any new full-time position shall be deemed to
be in the classified service, unless the City Council otherwise directs.



('83 Code, § 2.56.070)



§ 33.08  ADOPTION OF RULES.



   Personnel rules, as recommended by the City Manager, subject to the
provisions of this chapter, shall be submitted for approval to the City
Council (hereinafter referred to as "rules").  The rules shall establish
specific procedures and regulations governing the phases of the personnel
system.  The rules may be amended from time to time, by the City Council, as
may be required.



('83 Code, § 2.56.080)



§ 33.09  APPOINTMENT TO AND REMOVAL FROM SYSTEM.



   Persons shall be appointed to, and removed from, positions in the
classified service in the time and manner provided in the rules.



('83 Code, § 2.56.090)



§ 33.10  COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE WITH APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.



   Neither the City Council, nor any of its members, shall direct or
request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the
City Manager, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of
officers and employees in the ser-vice of the city, except as specified in
this chapter.  Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its
members shall deal with city employees solely through the City Manager.



('83 Code, § 2.56.100)



CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT



§ 33.20  BASIC SALARY PLAN.



   The City Council shall adopt, by resolution, a basic salary plan for
all officers and employees of the city.  The salary plan may, from time to
time, be amended as required by the public interest.



('83 Code, § 2.56.170)



§ 33.21  HOLIDAYS.



   Holidays for all city officers and employees shall be those designated
by resolution of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.56.180)



§ 33.22  DISCRIMINATION.



   No person in employ of the city or seeking admission thereto, shall be
employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or
discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, race,
color, religious belief, age, sex, or sexual orientation.



('83 Code, § 2.56.190) (Cal. Labor Code § 1102.1)



§ 33.23  RETIREMENT.



   A contract is authorized between the city and the Board of
Administration of the Public Employees Retirement System, providing
retirement benefits for officers and employees of the city.



(‘83 Code, § 2.56.200)  (Am. Ord. 1392, passed 1-18-17)



§ 33.24  ABSENCE BECAUSE OF INJURY.



   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, or any other rule
or regulation, the absence of any officer or employee from his position,
caused by injury or disease for which he is entitled to compensation pursuant
to Cal. Lab. Code §§ 3201 et seq., shall not constitute a break in the
person's continuous service for the purpose of salary adjustments, sick
leave, vacation leave or seniority rights.



('83 Code, § 2.56.210)



§ 33.25  REIMBURSEMENT FOR DAMAGE TO PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   Any employee who suffers damage, without negligence on his part, to his
personal property, while in the performance of his duties shall be reimbursed
for the damage upon a determination by the City Manager that such damage
occurred in the course of his employ, and that the amount claimed is
reasonable.  Upon approval of the item by the City Manager, a warrant in
that amount, payable to the employee suffering the damage, shall be submitted
to the City Council for approval at its next most convenient regular Council
meeting.



('83 Code, § 2.56.220)



§ 33.26  POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.



   No person, other than elective officers, while in the employ of the
city, in any capacity, shall engage in any political activity during the time
as such person is on duty.  No city employee shall engage in any political
activity, at any time, while wearing a city uniform, or other distinctive
part thereof.



('83 Code, § 2.56.230)



§ 33.27  CONTRACT FOR SERVICES.



   The City Council shall have authority to enter into contracts, with
qualified persons, for the performance of any personnel function.



('83 Code, § 2.56.240)



§ 33.28  APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.



   The City Council shall, from time to time, appropriate such funds as it
deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 2.56.250)



REDUCTION IN WORK FORCE



§ 33.40  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish an equitable and
reasonable procedure for the lay-off of employees of the city for economy
purposes.



('83 Code, § 2.56.110)



§ 33.41  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DEMOTION.  The demotion of an employee to a lesser position included
within the same family of positions, occasioned by a reduction in force.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any full-time employee of the city.



   FAMILY OF POSITIONS.  A group of related positions which have been
designated as such by resolution of the City Council, as recommended by the
City Manager.  As a part of such designation, each position in each family
shall be ranked for the purpose of establishing a line of lesser positions
for the purpose of the demotion process, where such is ordered to effect a
reduction in force.



   LENGTH OF SERVICE.  The total number of years of an employee's
employment by the city, including the time spent in a probationary,
provisional or leave status by any such employee.



   LESSER POSITION.  A position having a lesser ranking than one or more
other positions in a family of positions.



   NOTICE.  Where notice is required pursuant to this subchapter, it
shall be in written form, and given by personal service or by depositing the
notice in the custody of the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid,
addressed to the person to be notified at his last-known address.  The
notice shall be deemed, for all purposes, to have been given as of the time
of personal service, or, as of the time of its deposit in the custody of the
United States Postal Service.



   POSITION.  A position of employment in the classified service, as
defined in §§ 33.02 through 33.07.



('83 Code, § 2.56.120)



§ 33.42  PROCEDURE.



   Whenever the City Council determines, in its discretion, that for
reasons of economy, a reduction in the number of employees of the city is
required, the City Manager shall proceed with such a reduction in force by
demotion and/or termination in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.



('83 Code, § 2.56.130)



§ 33.43  DEMOTION.



   (A)   Family of positions. Where reduction in force involves a
position that is included within a family of positions, each employee holding
the position shall be ranked, based upon his length of service with the
city.  The employee holding the position having a lesser length of service
shall be demoted to the next lower position within the family of positions. 
The City Manager shall give written notice of the demotion to each employee
to be demoted.  Such order of demotion shall be effective on the 30th day
after the giving of the notice.  If within ten days after the giving of the
notice, an employee files with the City Manager a written statement declining
the demotion, that employee's employment with the city shall be terminated
effective on the 30th day after the giving of the notice.  Any employee who
is demoted pursuant hereto, shall not be subject to further demotion, by a
subsequent reduction in force order, for a period of one year after the
effective date of the order of demotion.



   (B)   Request for reassignment.  An employee proposed to be demoted
pursuant to division (A) of this section may request, subject to the approval
of the City Manager, a reassignment to a lesser position in the family of
positions.



   (C)   Positions not included within a family of positions.  Where
an ordered reduction in force involves a position which is not included
within a family of positions, if only one employee holds the position, he
shall be terminated from the city's employment, effective on the 30th day
after the giving of notice of termination by the City Manager.  If more than
one employee holds such a position, all employees holding the position shall
be ranked based upon their length of service with the city; an order of
termination shall be given as to the employee or employees having the lesser
lengths of service in the position.



   (D)   Salary determination.  An employee affected by this section
shall be placed in the salary range of the position and the step closest to
the salary held in the former position but not in excess thereof.



('83 Code, § 2.56.140)



§ 33.44  SUBSEQUENT DEMOTION OR TERMINATION.



   Where one or more employees have been demoted from a position within a
family of positions, by reason of an ordered reduction in force, other
employees holding the lesser positions in such family shall be subject to the
same demotion process, upon direction of the City Manager in the time and
manner as set forth in § 33.43.  Where an employee holding a position,
which is ranked last in a family of positions, is preempted the position by
reason of the demotion process, he shall, upon the 30th day after the giving
of notice thereof, be terminated from the city's service.



('83 Code, § 2.56.150)



§ 33.45  REEMPLOYMENT LIST.



   An employee who is demoted to a lesser position, or who is terminated
by reason of a reduction in force, accomplished pursuant to this subchapter,
shall, automatically, have his name placed on a reemployment list for the
position which he formerly held.  The ranking of names upon the
re-employment list shall be in accordance with the employee's length of
service with the city in that position.  The re-employment list shall have
priority for a period of one year over any other eligibility list for the
affected position.



('83 Code, § 2.56.160)



CHAPTER 34:  FINANCE; PURCHASING



Section



Fiscal Affairs



   34.01   Fiscal year



   34.02   Preparation of annual budget



   34.03   Submission to City Council



   34.04   Hearings



   34.05   Approval



   34.06   Amendments to budget



   34.07   Appropriations



   34.08   Claims, demands and warrants



   34.09   Audits



   34.10   Fees



Purchasing



   34.20   Adoption of purchasing system



   34.21   Exemptions from centralized purchasing



   34.22   Requisitions



   34.23   Bidding; exceptions



   34.24   Purchase orders



   34.25   Encumbrance of funds



   34.26   Formal contract procedure



   34.27   Notice inviting bids



   34.28   Bidder's security



   34.29   Bid opening procedure



   34.30   Award of contracts



   34.31   Rejection of bids



   34.32   Tie bids



   34.33   Performance bonds



   34.34   Open market procedure



   34.35   Inspection and testing



   34.36   Bidding procedure prescribed



   34.37   Cooperative purchasing agreements



   34.38   Contracts for services



   34.39   Public works contracts



Home Mortgage Financing Program



   34.50   Adoption; purpose



   34.51   Operation



Reduction Program Funding



   34.60   Intent



   34.61   Definitions



   34.62   Administration of vehicle registration fee surcharge program



Statutory reference:



   Public works and public purchases, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 4000 et seq.



FISCAL AFFAIRS



§ 34.01  FISCAL YEAR.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 of each calendar year
and shall end on the June 30 of the following year.



('83 Code, § 3.04.010)



§ 34.02  PREPARATION OF ANNUAL BUDGET.



   Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall
prepare a proposed annual budget, covering expected income and all proposed
expenditures of the city for the forthcoming fiscal year.



('83 Code, § 3.04.020)



§ 34.03  SUBMISSION TO CITY COUNCIL.



   Not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of each fiscal year,
the City Manager shall transmit copies of the proposed budget, and his budget
message, to the City Council.  In addition, three copies of the proposed
budget, and the City Manager's budget message, shall be on file in the office
of the City Clerk, available for examination by members of the general public.



('83 Code, § 3.04.030)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 34.04  HEARINGS.



   (A)   Upon submission of the budget, the City Council shall conduct
a public hearing upon the adoption of the budget, which hearing shall be held
at the first regular meeting of the City Council in the month of June of each
year.



   (B)   Notice shall be given of the public hearing in the manner as
the City Council deems appropriate to give reasonable notice thereof, to the
residents of the city.



   (C)   At the time of the public hearing, the City Council shall
consider evidence presented by any interested person concerning any or all of
the items as contained in the proposed budget.



   (D)   Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the City Council shall
make the alterations, deletions or additions to the budget as proposed, as it
finds to be in the public interest, and thereafter, it shall approve the
budget as devised.



('83 Code, § 3.04.040)



§ 34.05  APPROVAL.



   The approval shall take place prior to the commencement of the fiscal
year to which the budget relates.  Upon its adoption by a majority vote of a
quorum of the City Council, the budget shall be in effect for the ensuing
fiscal year.  The budget as approved shall be filed with the City Clerk,
shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of the public and
of departments, officers and agencies of the city.



('83 Code, § 3.04.050)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 34.06  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   At any meeting after adoption of the budget, total
appropriations may be amended by the City Council by a majority vote of a
quorum of the City Council.



   (B)   For transfers of appropriations within the same  cost 
center  program,  such  transfers  in  an amount less than $10,000 may
be approved by the department head, and such transfers up to $15,000 may be
approved by the City Manager.  For amounts greater than $15,000, City
Council approval is required.



   (C)   Transfers up to $15,000 between cost center programs may be
approved by the City Manager.  For amounts greater than $15,000, City
Council approval is required.



   (D)   All transfers of appropriations in accordance with subsections
(B) and (C) above shall be within the same fund.



   (E)   Any transfer of appropriations from one fund to another fund
is considered a new appropriation requiring a budget amendment, and such
appropriations must be approved by the City Council by a majority vote of a
quorum of the City Council.



   (F)   All transfers made pursuant to the above provisions shall be
submitted to the City Council for informational purposes.



('83 Code, § 3.04.060)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 1130, passed
4-15-98)



§ 34.07  APPROPRIATIONS.



   From and after the effective date of the adoption of a budget, the
several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures, shall be deemed
appropriated to the several departments, offices and agencies for the
respective objects and purposes therein stated.  All appropriations with the
exception of capital improvement programs, shall lapse at the end of the
fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully
encumbered.



('83 Code, § 3.04.070)  (Ord. 945, passed - -86)



§ 34.08  CLAIMS, DEMANDS AND WARRANTS.



   Claims, demands and warrants shall be processed in the time, form and
manner as approved by the City Council, consistent with applicable laws.



('83 Code, § 3.04.080)



§ 34.09  AUDITS.



   Upon recommendation of the City Manager, the City Council shall obtain
the services of a qualified person or firm to conduct periodic audits of all
of the city's financial books and records, if it finds the public interest so
requires.



('83 Code, § 3.04.090)



§ 34.10  FEES.



   The City Manager shall recommend to the City Council all fees to be
charged for investigations, use of public buildings and city property,
services provided by city employees, filings, processings, recordations,
citations and other appropriate charges levied by the city.



('83 Code, § 3.04.100)



PURCHASING



§ 34.20  ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM.



   In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies
and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest
possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive
financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the
purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing
system is adopted.  The Director of Administrative Services is designated as
the purchasing officer.



('83 Code, § 3.08.010) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.21  EXEMPTIONS FROM CENTRALIZED PURCHASING.



   The provisions of this section apply to the purchase of supplies and
equipment and do not apply to the purchase of real property or the
procurement of personal services. The provisions of this chapter do not apply
to the purchase of supplies and equipment where the City Council has, by
contract or resolution, contracted for or transferred the authority to make
the purchase of supplies and equipment to another governmental agency or
officer thereof pursuant to lawful authority, and where the other
governmental agencies or officer, in the purchase of supplies and equipment,
follows to the satisfaction of the purchasing officer policies and procedures
in substantial compliance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54201 -
54294.



('83 Code, § 3.08.020) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.22  REQUISITIONS.



   Using departments shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to
the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms.



('83 Code, § 3.08.030) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.23  BIDDING; EXCEPTIONS.



   Purchases of supplies and equipment for city use shall be made and
accomplished in conformity with §§ 34.26 through 34.34, except:



   (A)   When an emergency as determined by the Director of
Administrative Services is deemed to require that an order be placed with the
nearest available source of supply;



   (B)   When the supplies and equipment needed can be obtained from
one source only; or



   (C)   When the City Council by a four-fifths vote determines to
dispense with such bidding and other procedures required by the
above-mentioned sections in any individual instance upon a finding by the
Council that it would be impractical, useless, or uneconomical in such
instance to follow the procedures, and that the welfare of the public would
be promoted by dispensing with the same.



('83 Code, § 3.08.040)  (Ord. 819, passed - -81; Am Ord. 845, passed - -82;
Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.24  PURCHASE ORDERS.



   Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase
order.



('83 Code, § 3.08.050) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.25  ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS.



   Except in cases of emergency as determined by the Director of
Administrative Services, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase
order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered
appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged.



('83 Code, § 3.08.060) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.26  FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, purchases and
contracts for supplies and equipment, which do not constitute a public
project as defined by Cal. Pub. Cont. § 20161 shall require the following
approvals:



 


Estimated value of contract

 
Authority of Approval


$0 to $10,000
 
Respective Department Head


$10,001 to $24,999
 
Chief Executive Officer


Greater than $24,999
 
City Council



 



   (B)   All contracts shall be by written contract with the lowest
responsible bidder pursuant to the public contract procedure prescribed in
§§ 34.27 through 34.33.



   (C)   Where possible, preference shall  be given to local bidders
or vendors, if all other factors in the bidding process are equal.



(‘83 Code, § 3.08.070)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 1101, passed
5-17-95; Am. Ord. 1250, passed 11-17-04)



§ 34.27  NOTICE INVITING BIDS.



   Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the
articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may
be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.  The purchasing officer
shall publicize each notice inviting bids in such manner as is calculated to
advise all prospective bidders thereof.



('83 Code, § 3.08.080) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.28  BIDDER'S SECURITY.



   When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder's security may
be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.  The security shall be
returned upon rejection of a bid; provided, that the successful bidder shall
forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract
within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless
the city is responsible for the delay.  The City Council may, on refusal or
failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the
next lowest responsible bidder.  If the City Council awards the contract to
the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be
applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second
lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.



('83 Code, § 3.08.090) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.29  BID OPENING PROCEDURE.



   Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk's office and shall be
identified as  bids  on  the envelope.  Bids shall be opened in public at
the time and place stated in the public notices.  A tabulation of all bids
received shall be open for public inspection.



('83 Code, § 3.08.100) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.30  AWARD OF CONTRACTS.



   Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.08.110) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.31  REJECTION OF BIDS.



   In its discretion, the City Council may reject all bids presented and
readvertise for bids.



('83 Code, § 3.08.120) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.32  TIE BIDS.



   If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit
price, quality and service being equal, the city council shall give
preference to local bidders or vendors; if there are none, it may accept the
one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie
bidders.



('83 Code, § 3.08.130) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.33  PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   The City Council shall have authority to require a performance bond
before entering a contract in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to
protect the best interests of the city.  If the City Council requires a
performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the
notice inviting bids.



('83 Code, § 3.08.140) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.34  OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in
the amount of $7,500 or less may be made by the purchasing officer in the
open market without observing the procedure described by §§ 34.26 through
34.33.



   (B)   The open market procedure to be utilized pursuant to this
section shall be set forth in administrative regulations approved by City
Council.



      (1)   Number of bids.  Open market purchases shall, wherever
possible, be based on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder in accordance with appropriate administrative rules.



      (2)   Notice inviting bids.  The purchasing officer shall
solicit bids from prospective vendors.



('83 Code, § 3.08.150)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82; Am. Ord. 1101, passed
5-17-95)



§ 34.35  INSPECTION AND TESTING.



   The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered
to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order
or contract.  The purchasing officer shall have authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of
deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance
with specifications.



('83 Code, § 3.08.160) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.36  BIDDING PROCEDURE PRESCRIBED.



   Whenever bids are required by law or by this code for the letting of
contracts, the doing of work or the furnishing of supplies, equipment or
materials, all of the steps, acts and proceedings required by law or by this
code shall be fully complied with, and in particular and supplementary to the
procedure set out in this section regulating the notices inviting bids, the
publication and posting of the notices, and the opening of the bids, shall be
followed.



   (A)   Notice; contents.  The notice inviting bids shall set a date
for the opening of bids.  All notices, whether mailed, published, or posted,
shall state the date, the hour, and the place at which the bids called for
are to be opened and shall also state the date, the hour, and the place of
the Council meeting at which the City Council intends to take action on the
bids.



   (B)   Bids; opening.  All bids shall be returnable to the City
Clerk and at the hour and date stated in the notice.  All bids shall be
publicly opened and declared.  From and after the time of their opening, the
City Clerk shall, upon request of any interested party, permit examination of
the bids.



   (C)   Bids; awarding.  After opening of the bids, the City Council
shall proceed in accordance with applicable provisions of law or this code
either to award the bid and to let the contract therein referred to, or to
take such other action as may be authorized by law.



('83 Code, § 3.08.170) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.37  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING AGREEMENTS.



   Whenever the council finds that the public interest and convenience
require, the city may purchase city supplies and equipment utilizing
purchasing agreements maintained by the county, state, or other public
agencies without complying with the requirements of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 3.08.180) (Am. Ord. 1101, passed 5-17-95)



§ 34.38  CONTRACTS FOR SERVICES.



   Whenever directed by the City Council to obtain administrative, legal,
accounting or other professional or contractual services to be performed by a
consultant, the Director of Administrative Services shall seek and obtain
written request for qualifications (RFQ) from qualified persons authorized to
perform the services. He/she shall obtain a sufficient number of the
proposals to insure that the cost thereof is consistent with the market. He
shall  thereafter  select the lowest responsible proposal, based upon a
performance or qualifications selection matrix, and offer the contract to the
person.



('83 Code, § 3.08.190)  (Ord. 819, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 1101, passed
5-17-95)



§ 34.39  PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACTS.



   The Director of Administrative Services shall obtain, based upon
written specifications, three informal bids from qualified persons to perform
the work required for any public project defined as such in Cal. Pub. Cont.
§ 20161, as to which Cal. Pub. Cont. § 20162 does not require compliance
with the formal bidding process contemplated by the Government Code sections.



('83 Code, § 3.08.200)  (Ord. 819, passed - -81; Am. Ord. 1101, passed
5-17-95)



HOME MORTGAGE FINANCING PROGRAM



§ 34.50  ADOPTION; PURPOSE.



   The city adopts the program for the purpose of increasing the housing
supply in the city.



('83 Code, § 3.34.010)  (Ord. 885, passed - -84)



§ 34.51  OPERATION.



   The city shall operate the program with respect to all property located
within the incorporated area of the city.



('83 Code, § 3.34.020)  (Ord. 885, passed - -84)



MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION
REDUCTION PROGRAM FUNDING



§ 34.60  INTENT.



   This subchapter is intended to support the South Coast Air Quality
Management District's imposition of the vehicle registration fee surcharge
and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 44223 in order to receive fee revenues for the
purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles.



('83 Code, § 3.35.010)  (Ord. 1047, passed - -91)



§ 34.61  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The city of Baldwin Park.



   FEE ADMINISTRATOR.  The Director of Administrative Services of the
city or their designee.



   MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION PROGRAMS.  Any program or
project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles
which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of
1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5, commencing with Cal. Health
& Safety Code § 40460.



('83 Code, § 3.35.020)  (Ord. 1047, passed - -91)



§ 34.62  ADMINISTRATION OF VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEE SURCHARGE PROGRAM.



   (A)   Receipt of fee.  The registration fees disbursed by the South
Coast Air Quality Management District and remitted to the city, pursuant to
this subchapter, shall be accepted by the Fee Administrator.



   (B)   Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund.  The Fee
Administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust account in a
financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds.



   (C)   Transfer of funds.  Upon receipt of these registration fees,
the Fee Administrator shall deposit the funds into the separate account
established pursuant to division (B) of this section.  All interest earned
by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account.



   (D)   Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund revenues.  All fees
received from the South Coast Air Quality Management District and deposited
in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source
emission reduction programs as defined in § 34.61.  Such fees, and interest
earned on the revenues, shall be expended within one year of the completion
of the programs.



   (E)   Audits.  The city consents to an audit of all programs and
projects funded by fees received from the South Coast Air Quality Management
District pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 44223.



('83 Code, § 3.35.030)  (Ord. 1047, passed - -91)



CHAPTER 35:  TAXATION



Section



General Provisions



   35.001   Adoption of tax procedure



Real Property Transfer Tax



   35.015   Title



   35.016   Authority



   35.017   Imposition



   35.018   Exemptions



   35.019   Refunds



   35.020   Administration



Sales and Use Tax



   35.035   Title



   35.036   Purpose



   35.037   Sales tax



   35.038   Rate



   35.039   Place of sale



   35.040   Use tax



   35.041   Adoption of provisions of state law



   35.042   Limitations on adoption of state law



   35.043   Additional seller's permit



   35.044   Exclusions and exemptions



   35.045   Amendments



   35.046   Enjoining collection prohibited



   35.047   Credit for taxes due to Redevelopment Agency



Transient Occupancy Tax



   35.060   Title



   35.061   Definitions



   35.062   Impositions



   35.063   Exemptions



   35.064   Operator's duties



   35.065   Registration of hotels; certificates



   35.066   Reporting and remitting



   35.067   Failure to remit tax when due



   35.068   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax by
City Manager



   35.069   Appeal



   35.070   Retention of records



   35.071   Refunds



   35.072   Action to collect tax



   35.073   Credit for transient occupancy; taxes due to Redevelopment
Agency



Utility Users' Tax



   35.090   Title



   35.091   Authority and purpose



   35.092   Tax imposed



   35.093   Definitions



   35.094   Constitutional exemptions



   35.095   Public Utilities Commission jurisdictional



   35.096   Exemption for seniors, handicapped and low-income residents



   35.097   Telephone users' tax



   35.098   Electricity users' tax



   35.099   Gas users' tax



   35.100   Water users' tax



   35.101   Cable television users' tax



   35.102   TWX teletypewriter tax



   35.103   Duty to collect; procedures



   35.104   Reporting and remitting



   35.105   Failure to remit tax collected



   35.106   Failure to pay tax



   35.107   Retention of records



   35.108   Refunds



   35.109   Additional power and duties of the Tax Administrator



   35.110   Suspension of tax



Construction Tax



   35.120   Definitions



   35.121   Imposition



   35.122   Rate




   35.999   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 35.001  ADOPTION OF TAX PROCEDURE.



   From and after the effective date of this section the duties of
assessing property and of collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed
by the Assessor and the Tax Collector of the city, shall be performed by the
County Assessor and the County Tax Collector of the county, in accordance
with all provisions of applicable law.



('83 Code, § 3.16.010)



Statutory references:



   Financial powers, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 37202 et seq.



   Property tax assessment, levy and collection, see Cal. Gov't Code §§
43000 et seq.



   Transfer of tax function to county, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 51500 et
seq.



REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX



§ 35.015  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Law"
of the city.



('83 Code, § 3.20.010)



§ 35.016  AUTHORITY.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq. to which reference is made by this
subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.20.020)



§ 35.017  IMPOSITION.



   (A)   There is imposed on each deed, instrument or other writing, by
which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city, shall be
granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the
purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their
direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property
conveyed (exclusive of the amount of any lien or encumbrance remaining
thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for
each $500, and each fractional part, of the value or consideration given for
such transfer.



   (B)   The tax imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be paid by
any person who makes, signs or issues any such document subject to the tax,
or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.



('83 Code, § 3.20.030)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.018  EXEMPTIONS.



   Taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall not apply to the
following:



   (A)   Any instrument given to secure a debt.



   (B)   The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof,
any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of
Columbia with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a
party, but the tax shall be collected by assessment, from any other party to
such transaction who is liable therefor pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter.



   (C)   The making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make
effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:



      (1)   (a)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as
amended;



         (b)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a
court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of
Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;



         (c)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a
court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506
of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or



         (d)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place
of organization is affected.



      (2)   Section (1) of this division shall only apply if the
making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs
within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.



   (D)   The making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any
order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision
(a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:



      (1)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, in
obedience to which the conveyance is made, recites that the conveyance is
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title
15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company
Act of 1935;



      (2)   The order specifies the property which is ordered to be
conveyed; and



      (3)   The conveyance is made in obedience to the order.



   (E)   (1)   By reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise, if:



         (a)   Such partnership, or another partnership, is
considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and



         (b)   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the
realty concerned.



      (2)   If there is a termination of any partnership, within the
meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes
of this subchapter, the partnership shall be treated as having executed an
instrument whereby there was conveyed for fair market value, exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon, all realty held by the
partnership at the time of the termination; provided, that not more than one
tax shall be imposed pursuant hereto by reason of a termination described in
this division, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty
by the partnership at the time of the termination.



   (F)   Any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or
mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in
lieu of foreclosure; provided, that the tax shall apply to the extent that
the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and
cost of foreclosure.  Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification
of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument
or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury
for tax purposes.



   (G)   Any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to
transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital
property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of
community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a
judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a
judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to
the Family Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in
contemplation of any such judgment or order, whether or not the written
agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. In
order to qualify for this exemption, the deed, instrument, or other writing
shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the
deed, instrument, or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 



(Cal. Rev. & Tax Code § 11927)



   (H)   Any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is
conveyed by the State of California, any political subdivision thereof, or
agency or instrumentality of either thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby
the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt
agency. 



(Cal. Rev. & Tax Code § 11928)



   (I)   Any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the State of
California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality
of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition,
construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by
obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a governmental
unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of
Federal Regulations.



(Cal. Rev. & Tax Code § 11929)  ('83 Code, § 3.20.040)  (Ord. 845, passed
- -82)



§ 35.019  REFUNDS.



   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this subchapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 5096 et seq.



('83 Code, § 3.20.050)



§ 35.020  ADMINISTRATION.



   The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this subchapter
in conformity with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 11901 et seq.
and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.



('83 Code, § 3.20.060)



SALES AND USE TAX



§ 35.035  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the "Uniform Local Sales
and Use Tax Ordinance" of the city.



('83 Code, § 3.24.010)



§ 35.036  PURPOSE.



   The City Council declares that this subchapter is adopted to achieve
the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this
subchapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes.



   (A)   Comply with state codes.  To adopt a sales and use tax
ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5 and Cal. Rev. & Tax Code, §§
7200 et seq..



   (B)   Incorporation of state revenue provisions. To adopt a sales
and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the
Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not
inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5.



   (C)   Establish a tax.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance
which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered
and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California
State Sales and Use Taxes.



   (D)   Minimize administration.  To adopt a sales and use tax
ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree
possible, consistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2,
Part 1.5, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the
same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to
taxation under the provisions of this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.24.020)



Statutory reference:



   Sales and use tax, see Cal. Rev. and Tax. Code §§ 7200 et seq.



§ 35.037  SALES TAX.



   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a
tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in § 35.038
of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal
property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date.



('83 Code, § 3.24.030)



§ 35.038  RATE.



   The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this subchapter shall be
1%.



('83 Code, § 3.24.040)



§ 35.039  PLACE OF SALE.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated
at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal
property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state
destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state
destination.  The gross receipts from the sales shall include delivery
charges when the charges are subject to the state sales and use tax,
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.  In the event a retailer
has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the
State Board of Equalization.



('83 Code, § 3.24.050)



§ 35.040  USE TAX.



   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city
at the rate stated in § 35.038 of the sales price of the property.  The
sales price shall include delivery charges when the charges are subject to
state sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.



('83 Code, § 3.24.060)



§ 35.041  ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division
2, Part 1.5, all of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part
1 are adopted and made a part of this subchapter as though fully set out in
this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.24.070)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.042  LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.



   (A)   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division
2, Part 1, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency,
the name of this city shall be substituted therefor.  The substitution,
however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title
of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the
State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the
state.



   (B)   The substitution shall not be made when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
subchapter.



   (C)   The substitution shall not be made in those sections,
including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior
boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage,
use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while the sales, storage, use or other
consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1, or to impose this tax with respect to
certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions
of that code.



   (D)   The substitution shall not be made in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
§§ 6701, 6702 (except the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or
6828.



   (E)   The substitution shall not be made for the word "state" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
§ 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6203.



('83 Code, § 3.24.080)



§ 35.043  ADDITIONAL SELLER'S PERMIT.



   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code § 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's
permit shall not be required by this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.24.090)



§ 35.044  EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use
tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.



   (B)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax
under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. &
Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5 by any city and county, county, or city in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this subchapter.



   (C)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the
sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the
laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.



   (D)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate
of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this
state, the United States or any foreign government, is exempted from the use
tax.



('83 Code, § 3.24.100) (Ord. 869, passed - -83; Am. Ord. 870, passed - -83) 



§ 35.045  AMENDMENTS.



   All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state
which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division 2, Part 1.5 shall automatically become a part
of this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.24.110)



§ 35.046  ENJOINING COLLECTION PROHIBITED.



   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state
or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or
enjoin the collection under this subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
Division 2, Part 1.5, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be
collected.



('83 Code, § 3.24.120)



§ 35.047  CREDIT FOR TAXES DUE TO REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.



   Any person subject to a sales and use tax under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be entitled to credit against the payment of taxes due under
this subchapter the amount of sales and use taxes due to the Redevelopment
Agency pursuant to applicable state law.



('83 Code, § 3.24.155)  (Ord. 913, passed - -85)



TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX



§ 35.060  TITLE.



   The tax levied by this subchapter shall be known as the "transient
occupancy tax."



('83 Code, § 3.28.010)



§ 35.061  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOTEL.  Any structure or any portion of any structure, which is
occupied or intended or designated for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse,
apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house
trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.



   OCCUPANCY.  The use or possession, or the right to the use or
possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for
dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.



   OPERATOR.  The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or
any other capacity, where the operator performs his functions through a
managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this subchapter
and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal.  Compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or the
managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.



   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or
any other group or combination acting as a unit.



   RENT.  The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and
property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.



   TRANSIENT.  Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting
portions of calendar days as full days.  Any such person so occupying space
in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has
expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the
occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy.  In determining whether
a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior
and subsequent to the effective date of this subchapter may be considered.



('83 Code, § 3.28.020)



§ 35.062  IMPOSITIONS.



   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject
to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10% of the rent charged by the
operator.  The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city
which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city.  The
transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent
is paid.  If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the
tax shall be paid with each installment.  The unpaid tax shall be due upon
the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel.  If any reason the tax
due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Administrator may
require that the tax shall be paid directly to the Tax Administrator.



('83 Code, § 3.28.030)  Penalty, see § 35.999



Statutory reference:



   Transient occupancy tax, see Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 7280 and 7281



§ 35.063  EXEMPTIONS.



   No tax shall be imposed upon:



   (A)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is
beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this subchapter.



   (B)   Any federal or state officer or employee when on official
business.



   (C)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt
by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.  No
exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent
is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the City
Manager.



('83 Code, § 3.28.040)



§ 35.064  OPERATOR'S DUTIES.



   (A)   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this subchapter
to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every
transient.  The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of
the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from
the operator.



   (B)   No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state, in any
manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will
be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the
rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner
provided in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.28.050)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.065  REGISTRATION OF HOTELS; CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   Within 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter, or
within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator
of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with
the City Manager and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration
certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.



   (B)   The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:



      (1)   The name of the operator.



      (2)   The address of the hotel.



      (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued.



      (4)   "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate
signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the
requirement of this part by registering with the City Manager for the purpose
of collecting from transient the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said
Tax to the City Manager.  This certificate does not authorize any person to
conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an
unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all
local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit
from any board, commission, department or office of this City.  This
certificate does not constitute a permit."



('83 Code, § 3.28.060)



§ 35.066  REPORTING AND REMITTING.



   (A)   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month
following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter
reporting period which may be established by the City Manager, make a return
to the City Manager, on forms provided by him of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies.  At the
time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be
remitted to the City Manager.



   (B)   The City Manager may establish shorter reporting periods for
any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection
of the tax and he may require further information in the return.



   (C)   Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason.



   (D)   All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this subchapter
shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is
made to the City Manager.



('83 Code, § 3.28.070)



§ 35.067  FAILURE TO REMIT TAX WHEN DUE.



   (A)   Original delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any
portion of any tax imposed by this subchapter, within the time required,
shall pay a penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax, in addition to the
amount of the tax.



('83 Code, § 3.28.080)



   (B)   Continued delinquency.  Any operator who fails to remit any
delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date on
which the remittance first became delinquent, shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of 10% of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax
and the 10% penalty first imposed.



('83 Code, § 3.28.090)



   (C)   Fraud.  If the City Manager determines that the nonpayment of
any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25% of
the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties
stated in divisions (A) and (B).



('83 Code, § 3.28.100)



   (D)   Interest.  In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator
who fails to remit any tax imposed by this subchapter shall pay interest at
the rate of 0.5% per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.



('83 Code, § 3.28.110)



   (E)   Merged with tax.  Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this division shall become a part of the tax
required to be paid in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 3.28.120)  Penalty, see § 35.999



§ 35.068  FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX BY CITY
MANAGER.



   (A)   If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to
make, within the time provided in this subchapter, any report and remittance
of the tax or any portion thereof required by this subchapter, the City
Manager shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and
information on which to base his estimate of the tax due.  As soon as the
City Manager procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon
which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this subchapter and
payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to
make the report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess
against the operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this
subchapter.



   (B)   In case the determination is made, the City Manager shall give
a notice of the amount so assessed by servicing it personally or by
depositing it in the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed
to the operator so assessed at his last-known place of address.



   (C)   The operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing
of the notice make application in writing to the City Manager for a hearing
on the amount assessed.



   (D)   If application by the operator for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any,
determined by the City Manager shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable.



   (E)   If the application is made, the City Manager shall give not
less than five days written notice, in the manner prescribed in this
subchapter, to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the
notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for the tax,
interest and penalties.



   (F)   At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why
the specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.



   (G)   After the hearing, the City Manager shall determine the proper
tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in
the manner prescribed in this subchapter of the determination and the amount
of the tax, interest and penalties.



   (H)   The amount determined to be due shall be payable after 15 days
unless an appeal is taken as provided in § 35.069.



('83 Code, § 3.28.130)



§ 35.069  APPEAL.



   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager with respect
to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
City Council by filing an appeal in the time and manner set forth in §
30.04.  Any amount found by the Council to be due, shall be immediately due
and payable upon the service of notice of the Council's action.



('83 Code, § 3.28.140)



§ 35.070  RETENTION OF RECORDS.



   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and
payment to the city of any tax imposed by this subchapter, to keep and
preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of the tax as he may have been liable for the collection
of and payment to the city, which records the City Manager shall have the
right to inspect at all reasonable times.



('83 Code, § 3.28.150)



§ 35.071  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city under this subchapter, it may be refunded
as provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section, provided a claim in
writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon
which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Manager within three years
of the date of payment.  The claim shall be on forms furnished by the City
Manager.



   (B)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or
erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a
manner prescribed by the City Manager that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund
nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has
either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently
payable by the transient to the operator.



   (C)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more
than once or erroneously of illegally collected or received by the city by
filing a claim in the manner provided in division (A) of this section, but
only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the City Manager, or
when the transient having paid the tax to the operator established to the
satisfaction of the City Manager that the transient has been unable to obtain
a refund from the operator who collected the tax.



   (D)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.



('83 Code, § 3.28.160)



§ 35.072  ACTION TO COLLECT TAX.



   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. 
Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city
shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city.  Any person owing
money to the city under the provisions of this subchapter shall be liable to
an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of the amount.



('83 Code, § 3.28.170)



§ 35.073  CREDIT FOR TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY; TAXES DUE TO REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.



   Any person subject to a transient occupancy tax under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be entitled to credit against the payment of transient
occupancy taxes under this subchapter, the amount of transient occupancy
taxes due to the Redevelopment Agency pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §
7280.5.



('83 Code, § 3.28.190)  (Ord. 1067, passed - -93)



UTILITY USERS' TAX



§ 35.090  TITLE.



   This subchapter shall be known as the "Utility Users' Tax Ordinance" of
the city.



('83 Code, § 3.32.010)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.091  AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.



   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't
Code § 37100.5 and other applicable law for the purpose of providing general
municipal revenues to be used for general municipal purposes.



('83 Code, § 3.32.020)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.092  TAX IMPOSED.



   There is imposed an annual utility tax in the amounts and as provided
in this subchapter to raise revenues for the general governmental purposes of
the city.



('83 Code, § 3.32.030)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.093  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY.  The City of Baldwin Park.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   PERSON.  Any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association,
syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club,
Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individual, or municipal
corporation.



   SERVICE SUPPLIER.  A person required to collect and remit a tax under
the provisions of this subchapter.



   SERVICE USER.  A person required to pay a tax imposed by this
subchapter; SERVICE USER shall not mean or include any public entity.



   TAX ADMINISTRATOR.  The City Manager of the city or his designee.



   TELEPHONE CORPORATION, ELECTRICAL CORPORATION, GAS CORPORATION, WATER
CORPORATION and CABLE TELEVISION CORPORATION.  These terms shall have the
same meanings as defined in Cal. Pub. Util. Code §§ 234, 218, 241 and
215-5, respectively.  ELECTRICAL CORPORATION and WATER CORPORATION shall be
construed to include any organization, municipality or agency engaged in the
selling or supplying of electrical power or water, respectively, to a service
user.



   UTILITY TAX YEAR.  The fiscal year; provided, that the initial utility
tax year shall be the effective date of this subchapter through June 30,
1986, inclusive.



('83 Code, § 3.32.040)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.094  CONSTITUTIONAL EXEMPTIONS.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon
any person when imposition of the tax upon such person would be in violation
of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of
California, or any valid statute or regulation of either the United States or
the state, or any of their respective agencies.  The Tax Administrator, with
the advice of the City Attorney, shall review each application for exemption
under this section and allow the exemption if warranted.



('83 Code, § 3.32.050)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.095  PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION JURISDICTIONAL.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter is intended to conflict with
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of any service supplier subject to
the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission.  In the
event of any conflict, the provision of the PUC rules, regulations and
tariffs shall control.



('83 Code, § 3.32.060)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.096  EXEMPTION FOR SENIORS, HANDICAPPED AND LOW-INCOME RESIDENTS.



     (A)   (1)   Any service user shall be eligible for an
exemption from the taxes imposed by this subchapter if any of the following
exist.



         (a)   He or she is certified as meeting the criteria of
disability as established by the Social Security Administration for
Supplemental Income for the Aged, Blind or Disabled; and/or



         (b)   The annual gross income of all persons in the
household in which the individual resides is less than the annual amount
prescribed by resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   The exemptions permitted hereunder:



         (a) Shall apply only to taxes imposed by this subchapter on
the residence in which the service user resides;



         (b)   Shall not apply to the taxes imposed on any other
property owned by the individual; and



         (c)   Shall not apply to a second utility service
account within the household if such service is used for business purposes.



   (B)   Definition.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definition shall apply.



   GROSS ANNUAL INCOME.  Any and all income regardless of source.



   (C)   The exemption granted by this section shall not eliminate the
duty of the service supplier of collecting taxes from the exempt individuals,
or the duty of the exempt individuals from paying such taxes to the service
supplier, unless an exemption is applied for by the service user and granted
in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   (D)   Any service user who qualifies for an exemption from the taxes
imposed by this subchapter because of the provisions of division (A) of this
section may file an application with the Tax Administrator for an exemption
at any time.  The application shall be verified by declaration under penalty
of perjury and shall contain such information as may be required by the Tax
Administrator.



   (E)   The Tax Administrator shall review all such applications and
shall certify the applicant as exempt if the eligibility requirements for
division (A) of this section are met, except that no exemption shall be
granted to an applicant who is receiving service from a service supplier
through a master meter, or who is sharing or prorating service with other
service users even though such service users qualify under the provisions of
division (A) of this section, and no exemption shall be granted with respect
to any tax imposed by this subchapter which is or has been paid by a public
agency or where the applicant receives funds from a public agency
specifically for the payment of such tax.



   (F)   If an applicant is certified as exempt, the Tax Administrator
shall promptly transmit the following information to the service supplier.



      (1)   Name of the exempt applicant.



      (2)   Account number shown on utility bill.



      (3)   Address to which exempt service is being supplied.



      (4)   Any other information as may be necessary for the
service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing
procedure.



   (G)   Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall not be
required to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this subchapter from
the exempt service user until further notice by the Tax Administrator is
given.  The service supplier shall eliminate the exempt service user from
its tax billing procedure no later than 60 days after receipt of the notice
from the Tax Administrator.



   (H)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an application for
exemption is faulty, or that the applicant has failed to truthfully set forth
the facts contained therein, application for the exemption shall be denied in
writing to the applicant.  The applicant shall have ten days thereafter in
which to file an amended application for exemption.  Upon receipt of the
amended application, the Tax Administrator shall determine whether the
requirements for exemption have been met and shall notify applicant in
writing of such determination.



   (I)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the service suppliers of
the termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change
of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person.



   (J)   Taxes billed by the service supplier to the service user prior
to removing the service user from its tax billing procedures shall be
collected from the service user, and the service user shall pay such taxes to
the service supplier.  Taxes billed to and paid by the service user between
the time that the application for exemption is filed and the service supplier
removes the service user from its taxing procedure will not be refunded to
the service user.



   (K)   Exemptions certified by the Tax Administrator shall continue
so long as the facts supporting the qualification for exemption shall exist;
provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate with any
change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual, or
assignment of a different account number by the service supplier because of
discontinuance or suspension of service at the request of the service user;
and provided, further, that such individual may nevertheless apply for a new
exemption with each change of address or residence.



   (L)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and right to demand
evidence of continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under the
provisions of this section.  The evidence may include, but need not be
limited to, copies of business records, letters or statement from the Social
Security Administration, copies of income tax returns, and such other
evidence concerning the service user or other members of his household as may
tend to prove or disprove such eligibility.  Failure to provide the evidence
as is within the control of a service user to so provide, either directly by
him or by his consent or the consent of a member of his household when the
evidence is requested of the service user in writing by the Tax
Administrator, shall be grounds for the immediate discontinuance of the
service user's eligibility for exemption under the provisions of this
section.  Evidence provided to the Tax Administrator upon request, or
voluntarily provided by the service user without request, may not be used
against the service user as evidence of violation of the provisions of this
section; such evidence may only be used as grounds for termination of the
exemption herein provided.



   (M)   Any service user who has been exempted under this section
shall notify the Tax Administrator within ten days of any change in fact or
circumstance which might disqualify the individual from receiving the
exemption.  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive
the benefits of the exemption provided by this section when the basis for the
exemption does not exist or ceases to exist.



   (N)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereof, if the Tax
Administrator is notified from any source that a new or nonexempt service
user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of
an exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter or
connection, the Tax Administrator shall conduct an investigation to ascertain
whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with and,
where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax
from the nonexempt service user.



   (O)   The service supplier is authorized to bill the tax imposed by
this subchapter to any new user or to any account whose name has been
changed, other than by correcting a spelling error or other similar clerical
error, until the supplier receives notification of exemption as provided in
division (F) of this section.  Thereupon, the supplier shall cease billing
the exempt user for the tax within 60 days as provided in division (A) of
this section.



   (P)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (E) of this
section, service users who otherwise qualify for an exemption from the tax
pursuant to division (A) of this section who reside in mobilehome parks may
receive a refund of taxes paid pursuant to this subchapter for services
provided through a master meter by filing an application with the Tax
Administrator in such form and at such times as are required by the Tax
Administrator.



('83 Code, § 3.32.070)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85; Am. Ord. 922, passed -
-86; Am. Ord. 1053, passed - -91)



§ 35.097  TELEPHONE USERS' TAX.



   (A)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other
than the city and any telephone corporation, using intrastate and/or
interstate telephone communication services in the city.  The tax imposed by
this section shall be at the rate of 5% of the charges made for the services
and shall be paid by the person paying for the services.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term CHARGES shall not include
charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones
except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a
guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under the guarantee plus any fixed
monthly or periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the
amount of tax due; nor shall the term CHARGES include charges for any type of
service or equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to public
utilities regulation during any period in which the same or similar services
or equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a
service supplier subject to public utilities regulation; nor shall the term
TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION SERVICES include land mobile services or maritime
mobile services as defined in Section 2.1 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, as such section existed on June 1, 1985.  The term TELEPHONE
COMMUNICATION SERVICE refers to that service which provides access to a
telephone system, and the privilege of telephone quality communication with
substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of the
telephone system.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any
person for using intrastate and/or interstate telephone communication
services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt
from or not subject to the tax imposed under Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Division
2, Part 20 or the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue
Code, as those provisions existed and were implemented by the relevant
regulatory authorities on August 21, 1985.



   (D)   The telephone users' tax imposed by this section is intended
to, and does apply to all charges billed to a telephone account having a
situs in the city, irrespective of whether a particular communication service
originates and/or terminates within the city.  The situs shall be the
service address, if it exists; otherwise, the billing address. 



   (E)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication
services, or the person receiving payment for the services.  The amount of
the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on
or before the last day of the following month; or at the option of the person
required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax collected,
measured by the tax billed in the previous month, shall be remitted to the
Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each month.



('83 Code, § 3.32.080)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85; Am. Ord. 922, passed -
-86; Am. Ord. 1053, passed - -91; Am. Ord. 1292, passed 8-16-06)



§ 35.098  ELECTRICITY USERS' TAX.



   (A)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city using
electrical energy in the city, except the city.  The tax imposed by this
section shall be at the rate of 5% of the charges made for such energy for
each service user, and shall be paid by the person paying for the energy. 
CHARGES, as used in this section, shall include charges made for metered
energy and minimum charges for service, including, but not limited to,
customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and annual
and monthly charges, fuel and cost adjustments.



   (B)   As used in this section, the term USING ELECTRICAL ENERGY
shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a
battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery
or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received;
provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy
for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries; nor shall the term
include electricity used and consumed by an electric utility supplier in the
conduct of its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term
include the mere receiving of the energy by an electric public utility or
governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; nor the use of the
energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a
governmental agency.



   (C)   The tax imposed under this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person supplying such energy.  The amount of tax
collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or
before the last day of the following month.  Remittance of tax may be
predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier's
customers.



('83 Code, § 3.32.090)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.099  GAS USERS' TAX.



   (A)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other
than the city or a gas corporation or electrical corporation, using in the
city gas which is delivered through mains and pipes.  The tax imposed by
this section shall be at the rate of 5% of the charges made for such gas for
each service user, and shall be paid by the person paying for the gas.
CHARGES, as used in this section, shall include the following.



      (1)   Gas which is delivered through mains or pipes.



      (2)   Minimum charges for such services, including customer
charges, service charges, and annual and monthly charges.



   (B)   There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed
in this section is computed the following.



      (1)   Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes.



      (2)   Charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of
electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public
utility or governmental agency.



      (3)   Charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and
consumed in the conduct of the business of gas public utilities.



      (4)   Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor
vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of
California utilizing natural gas.



   (C)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person selling the gas.  The person selling the gas
shall, on or before the 20th of each calendar month, make a return to the Tax
Administrator stating the amount of taxes billed during the preceding
calendar month.  At the time such returns are filed, the person selling the
gas shall remit tax payments to the Tax Administrator in accordance with
schedules established or approved by the Tax Administrator.



   (D)   The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same
time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular
billing practices of the service supplier.



('83 Code, § 3.32.100)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.100  WATER USERS' TAX.



   (A)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, except
the city, using water which is delivered through mains or pipes.  The tax
imposed by this section shall be at the rate of 5% of the charges made for
such water for each service user and shall be paid by the person paying for
such water.  CHARGES, as used in this section, shall include the following.



      (1)   Charges made for water which is delivered through mains
or pipes.



      (2)   Minimum charges for service, including, but not limited
to, customer charges, service-charges, demand charges, standby charges and
annual and monthly charges, fuel and cost adjustments.



   (B)   There shall be excluded, from the base on which the tax
imposed in this section is computed, charges made for water which is to be
resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal
water department, public utility or county or municipal water district for
water used and consumed by such department, utility or district.



   (C)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one
month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of
the following month; or at the option of the person required to collect and
remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax, measured by the tax billed in the
previous month, shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the
last day of each month.  Remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula
based on the payment pattern of the supplier's customers.



('83 Code, § 3.32.110)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.101  CABLE TELEVISION USERS' TAX.



   (A)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the city, except
the city, using cable television service.  This tax shall be at the rate of
5% of the charges made for the service and shall be paid by the person paying
for the service.



   (B)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person furnishing the cable television service.  The
amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on
or before the last day of the following month.



('83 Code, § 3.32.120)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.102  TWX TELETYPEWRITER TAX.



   There is imposed a tax on every person in this city, except the city,
using intrastate TWX tele-typewriter services in the city.  The tax imposed
by this section shall be at the rate of 5% of all charges made for the
services and shall be paid by the person paying for the services.  The
amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on
or before the last day of the following month.



('83 Code, § 3.32.130)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.103  DUTY TO COLLECT; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Every person receiving payment of charges from a service user
shall collect the amount of tax imposed by this subchapter from the service
user.



   (B)   The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same
time as and along with the collection of charges made in accordance with the
regular billing practice of the service supplier.  If the amount paid by a
service user is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which has
accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and
the tax shall be deemed to have been paid except in those cases where a
service user pays the full amount of the charge, but notifies the service
supplier of his refusal to pay the tax imposed on the charges.



   (C)   The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence
with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the
service user where all charges normally included in the regular billing are
subject to the provisions of this subchapter or as soon thereafter, as the
respective utilities are physically and mechanically able to get "on line"
for the imposition of the charges.  Where a person receives more than one
billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to
collect shall arise separate for each billing period.



('83 Code, § 3.32.140)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.104  REPORTING AND REMITTING.



   Each month the service supplier shall remit taxes to the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the provisions of §§ 35.097(E), 35.098(C),
35.099(C), 35.100(C), 35.101(B) or 35.102.  At such time the service
supplier shall also make a return to the Tax Administrator, on forms provided
by him, state the amount of taxes billed, and the amount of taxes collected,
by the service supplier for the period to which the remittance applies.  The
Tax Administrator is authorized to require such further information as he
deems necessary to properly determine if the tax here imposed is being levied
and collected in accordance with this subchapter. Returns and remittances are
due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.



('83 Code, § 3.32.150)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.105  FAILURE TO REMIT TAX COLLECTED.



   (A)   Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to
the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this subchapter
are delinquent.



   (B)   Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected
shall attach to and be paid by the person required to collect and remit at
the rate of 15% of the total tax collected and not remitted on or before the
due dates provided in this subchapter.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to impose
additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under
the provisions of this subchapter for fraud or negligence in reporting or
remitting at the rate of 15% of the amount of tax collected or as recomputed
by the Tax Administrator.



   (D)   Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section
shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted.



('83 Code, § 3.32.160)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.106  FAILURE TO PAY TAX.



   (A)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user
has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts
remitted to a service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the
amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever
the Tax Administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he may
relieve the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under
this subchapter for certain named service users for specified billing periods.



   (B)   The service supplier shall provide the city with amounts
refused along with the names, addresses and reasons of the service users'
refusing to pay the tax imposed under the provisions of this subchapter.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that he
has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods
and demand payment of such taxes.  The notice shall be served on the service
user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the
United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at
the address to which billing was made by the service supplier; or should the
service user have changed his address, to his last known address.  If a
service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within 15 days
from the date of the service of the notice upon him, which shall be the date
of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of 25% of the
amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than
$5.  The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid.



('83 Code, § 3.32.170)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.107  RETENTION OF RECORDS.



   It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to
the city any tax imposed by this subchapter to keep and preserve, for the
period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the
amount of such tax as may have been liable for the collection of and
remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator
shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.



('83 Code, § 3.32.180)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.108  REFUNDS.



   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more
than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
city under this subchapter, it may be refunded as provided in division (B)
and (C) of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under
penalty of perjury the specific grounds under which the claim is founded, is
filed with the Tax Administrator within three years of the date of payment. 
The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator.



   (B)   A service supplier may claim a refund against taxes collected
and remitted in an amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or
illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Tax Administrator that the service user from whom the tax
has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a
refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so
collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges
subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect
and remit.



   (C)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.



   (D)   Any service user may obtain a refund of taxes over-paid, or
paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the
city, by filing a claim in the manner provided in division (A) of this
section, but only when the service supplier establishes to the satisfaction
of the Tax Administrator that the service user has been unable to obtain a
refund from the service supplier who collected the tax. Nothing herein shall
permit the filing of a single refund claim on behalf of a class or group of
taxpayers. For class claims, every member of the class shall be required to
file a claim as required by this § 35.108.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter,
whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public
Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction makes a refund to
service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant
to this subchapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be
refunded to service users by the service supplier, and the service supplier
shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the
amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly return.  In the event the
ordinance enacting this subchapter is repealed, the amount of any refundable
taxes will be borne by the city; provided, however, the same have been
remitted to the city by the service supplier and have been received by the
city.



(‘83 Code, § 3.32.190)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85; Am. Ord. 1350, passed
3-7-12)



§ 35.109  ADDITIONAL POWER AND DUTIES OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is
directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and
regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this subchapter for the
purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance
of the taxes imposed in this subchapter.



   (C)   The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to
vary the strict requirements of this subchapter so that collection of any tax
imposed in this subchapter may be made in conformance with the billing
procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result
in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of
this subchapter.  A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax
Administrator's office.



   (D)   The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any
person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this
subchapter.  The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with
the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from
the tax imposed by this subchapter, together with the address and account
number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person.  The Tax
Administrator shall notify the service supplier of the termination of any
person's right to exemption under this subchapter or the change of any
address to which service is supplied to exempted person.



('83 Code, § 3.32.200)  (Ord. 908, passed - -85)



§ 35.110  SUSPENSION OF TAX.



   Commencing immediately, all utility user taxes imposed pursuant to this
subchapter, in excess of 3% of the charges made for such utility services,
shall be suspended.



('83 Code, § 3.32.210)  (Ord. 1053, passed - -91)



CONSTRUCTION TAX



§ 35.120  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any building or portion thereof, which is designed for
use as a residence by one family.



   CONDOMINIUM.  An estate in a lot that consists of an undivided
interest in common, in a portion of a part of a lot combined with a separate
interest in space in a building on such lot (see also § 783 of the Cal.
Civil Code).



   ONE-FAMILY DWELLING.  A building which contains one kitchen, which is
designed and used exclusively as a dwelling unit for one family.



('83 Code, § 3.30.020B.)



§ 35.121  IMPOSITION.



   There is imposed a general tax upon the privilege of obtaining a
building permit for the construction of one-family dwelling units and/or
dwelling units and/or condominiums.  The tax shall be due and payable prior
to the issuance of a building permit allowing the construction of such
one-family dwelling units and/or dwelling units and/or condominiums.



('83 Code, § 3.30.010)  (Ord. 889, passed - -85)



§ 35.122  RATE.



   The general tax imposed pursuant to § 35.121 shall be $250 for each
bedroom included within a one-family dwelling unit, dwelling unit or
condominium unit; provided, that the total tax due hereunder shall not exceed
$1,000 per one-family dwelling unit, dwelling unit or condominium unit.



('83 Code, § 3.30.020A.)



§ 35.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§ 35.035
through 35.047 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.



('83 Code, § 3.24.150)



   (B)   (1)   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to
register as required in §§ 35.060 through 35.073, or to furnish any return
required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return
or other data required by the City Manager, or who renders a false or
fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as
provided in § 10.99.



      (2)   Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any
report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent
to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by §§
35.060 through 35.073, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as
aforesaid.



('83 Code, § 3.28.180)



CHAPTER 36:  EMERGENCY ORGANIZATIONS



Section



   36.01   Purpose



   36.02   Definition



   36.03   Disaster Council; creation and membership



   36.04   Disaster Council; powers and duties



   36.05   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services



   36.06   Powers and duties of Director and Assistant Director



   36.07   Emergency organization



   36.08   Emergency plan



   36.09   Expenditures



   36.10   Actions prohibited during emergency



   36.99   Penalty



§ 36.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the City Council in enacting this chapter is to provide
for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons
and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of
the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions
of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and
affected private persons.



('83 Code, § 2.65.010)  (Ord. 1006, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1007, passed -
-89)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency services, see Cal. Gov't Code §§ 8550 et seq.



§ 36.02  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY.  The actual or threatened existence of conditions of
disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within
this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm,
epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions
resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions
resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be
beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of
the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to
combat.



('83 Code, § 2.65.020)  (Ord. 1006, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1007, passed -
-89)



§ 36.03  DISASTER COUNCIL; CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   A Disaster Council for the city is created.  Membership on the
Disaster Council shall consist of the following.



   (A)   The City Manager, who shall be Chairperson.



   (B)   The Police Chief who shall be Vice Chairperson.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works.



   (D)   A representative of Los Angeles County Fire Protection
District and such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a
current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   The Mayor or the Mayor pro tem in the absence of the Mayor,
and the City Council's representative to the Civil Defense Area "D" Committee.



   (F)   Such other city officers and/or representatives of civic,
business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an
official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the Chairperson
with approval of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.65.030)  (Ord. 1006, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1007, passed -
-89)



§ 36.04  DISASTER COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is empowered, to
develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council, emergency and mutual
aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and
regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.  The
Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson, or, in his absence
from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the
Vice-Chairperson.



('83 Code, § 2.65.040)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)



§ 36.05  DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.



   (A)   There is created the office of Director of Emergency
Services.  The City Manager shall serve as the Director without additional
compensation.



   (B)   There is created the office of Assistant Director.  The
Police Chief shall serve as the Assistant Director without additional
compensation.



('83 Code, § 2.65.050)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)



§ 36.06  POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Director is empowered to:



      (1)   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or
threatened existence of a local emergency if the City Council is in session,
or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. 
Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council
shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or
the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.



      (2)   Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency
when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are
inadequate to cope with the emergency.



      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency
organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this
chapter.



      (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services
and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions
of authority and responsibility that may arise between them.



      (5)   Represent this city in all dealings with the public or
private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in the
chapter.



      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as
provided in this section, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the
Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the
existence of a state of war emergency the Director is empowered:



         (a)   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters
reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such
emergency; provided, however, the rules and regulations must be confirmed or
modified at the earliest practicable time by the City Council.



         (b)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such
other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and
property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use.



         (c)   To require emergency services of any city officer
or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency by
the County of Los Angeles, or the existence of a state of war emergency, to
command the aid of as many persons as he deems necessary to the execution of
his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and
immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service
workers.



         (d)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of
any city department or agency.



         (e)   To execute any powers conferred upon him by this
chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the
City Council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, and/or by any
agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.



   (B)   The Director shall designate the order of succession to that
office, to take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend
meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency.  Such order
of succession shall be approved by the City Council.



   (C)   The Director shall develop emergency plans and manage the
emergency programs for this city.



('83 Code, § 2.65.060)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)



§ 36.07  EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.



   All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer
forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups,
organizations and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law,
including persons impressed into other applicable law charged with duties
incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such
emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city.



('83 Code, § 2.65.070)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)



§ 36.08  EMERGENCY PLAN.



   The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the
city's emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective
mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to
meet any condition constituting a local emergency, and shall provide for the
organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency
organization.  The plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the
City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.65.080)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)



§ 36.09  EXPENDITURES.



   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities,
including mutual-aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the
direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants of the city.



('83 Code, § 2.65.090)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)



§ 36.10  ACTIONS PROHIBITED DURING EMERGENCY.



   The following acts are prohibited during an emergency.



   (A)   To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the
emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed
upon such member by virtue of this chapter.



   (B)   To do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter, if the act is of such a nature as to give,
or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives and
property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the
defense or protection thereof.



   (C)   To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the emergency agency of the state.



('83 Code, § 2.65.100)  (Ord. 1007, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1006, passed -
-89)  Penalty, see § 36.99



§ 36.99  PENALTY.



   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1000, or
by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during
an emergency, to commit any of the violations mentioned in § 36.10.



('83 Code, § 2.65.100)  (Ord. 1006, passed - -89;  Am. Ord. 1007, passed -
-89)



CHAPTER 37:  PROPERTY



Section



City Property



   37.01   Responsibility for city property



   37.02   Use of personal property



   37.03   Use of real property



Lost or Unclaimed Property



   37.15   Custody



   37.16   Claiming property



   37.17   Sale at public auction



   37.18   Notice of auction sale



   37.19   Destruction of property



CITY PROPERTY



§ 37.01  RESPONSIBILITY FOR CITY PROPERTY.



   The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for all real
and personal property of the city and shall, from time to time, conduct
inventories thereof, and report the same to the City Council.



('83 Code, § 2.60.010)



§ 37.02  USE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   No person shall use any item of personal property of the city for any
purpose, other than in the conduct of authorized city business.



('83 Code, § 2.60.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 37.03  USE OF REAL PROPERTY.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall use any real property
belonging to the city for any purpose other than in the conduct of city
business.  The City Manager shall establish appropriate rules and
regulations for the use of public buildings and grounds by persons for
private and/or semipublic purposes, which rules and regulations shall not
take effect until approved by the City Council.  This section shall not be
deemed to prohibit the lease, sale or disposal of city property, if
accomplished in accordance with applicable law.



('83 Code, § 2.60.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



LOST OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY



§ 37.15  CUSTODY.



   All lost, abandoned or unclaimed personal property coming into the
possession of the city or any officer or employee thereof shall immediately
be turned over to the custody of the Chief of Police.  The personal property
shall be held by him for a period of at least six months unless sooner
claimed and restored.



('83 Code, § 2.64.010)



Statutory reference:



   Unclaimed property, see Cal. Civil Code § 2080 et seq.



§ 37.16  CLAIMING PROPERTY.



   If, at any time prior to the sale or destruction thereof, as provided
in this subchapter, any property is claimed by any person who establishes his
right to the possession thereof to the satisfaction of the Police Chief, the
personal property shall be delivered to the person, provided, the person
shall first pay to the city the reasonable cost of holding, protecting and
returning the property.



('83 Code, § 2.64.020)



§ 37.17  SALE AT PUBLIC AUCTION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by law, if any such property
remains unclaimed and unrestored for at least six months, the property shall
be sold at public auction to the highest bidder at such time or times as the
Police Chief determines.  The auction shall be conducted by the Police
Chief.  The property may be sold separately or in such lot or lots as the
Police Chief may determine.  The purchasers at the auction sale shall take a
clear title to the property purchased free of any right of redemption.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter, where the
unclaimed property can be utilized by the city, upon the direction of the
City Manager, the property may be devoted to such use.



('83 Code, § 2.64.030)



§ 37.18  NOTICE OF AUCTION SALE.



   Notice of each auction shall be given by the City Clerk at least five
days, and not more than 20 days, prior to the time fixed for the auction. 
The notice to be given shall be by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation and by such other means as the Clerk deems necessary to give
adequate notice of the auction.



('83 Code, § 2.64.040)



§ 37.19  DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.



   If any property is so offered for sale at the public auction as
provided in this subchapter, and is not sold, the property shall be destroyed
or otherwise disposed of, by the Police Chief, with the approval of the City
Manager.



('83 Code, § 2.64.050)



CHAPTER 38:  CITY POLICIES



Section



General Provisions



   38.01   Labor upon public works



   38.02   City seal



Smoking in City Buildings



   38.15   Purpose



   38.16   Definitions



   38.17   Smoking prohibited



   38.18   Signs



   38.19   Penalty



Emergency Response Costs



   38.30   Definitions



   38.31   Emergency response cost recovery



   38.32   Collection of costs



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 38.01  LABOR UPON PUBLIC WORKS.



   (A)   Persons confined under a final judgment of imprisonment for a
violation of any of the provisions of this code may be required to perform
labor on the streets or other public property or works with the city.



   (B)   The phrase STREETS OR OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY OR WORKS WITHIN
THE CITY, as used in this section, includes, among other things, clerical and
menial labor in any camp, or other place, maintained for such persons.



   (C)   The City Manager may prescribe and enforce rules and
regulations under which such labor is to be performed; and may provide
clothing of such distinctive character for such persons as he, in his
discretion, may deem proper.



('83 Code, § 1.12.010)



Statutory reference:



   Cal. Gov't Code § 36904



§ 38.02  CITY SEAL.



   (A)   Adoption.  There is adopted as the official seal of the city
that certain impression and engraving which is generally described as follows:



   A die of two and one quarter inches in diameter and circular in
shape.  On the surface of die at the top thereof there shall be engraved the
words "Baldwin Park, California."  Then at the bottom shall be engraved the
words, "Incorporated January 25, 1956."  In the center of the said circle
there shall be the hub of a wheel and superimposed on the wheel shall be the
words "Hub of the San Gabriel Valley."



('83 Code, § 1.08.010)



   (B)   Custody.  The City Clerk shall have and maintain custody of
the official seal of the city.



('83 Code, § 1.08.020)



SMOKING IN CITY BUILDINGS



§ 38.15  PURPOSE.



   The City Council has determined that there is ample evidence that
smoking in any form is a serious hazard to the health of members of the
general public and city employees and an irritation, inconvenience and
discomfort to persons.  In order to serve the public health, safety and
welfare, the declared purpose of this subchapter is to promote a policy of
nonsmoking in and around places where the public congregates, including
elevators and areas owned or operated by the city or utilized by the public
for goods or services.



(‘83 Code, § 2.68.010)  (Ord. 1023, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1232, passed
6-2-04; Am. Ord. 1299, passed 2-7-07)



§ 38.16  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY-OWNED PREMISES.  A building or site owned and occupied, or leased
and occupied, by the city for any municipal function, and includes the entire
site of the CITY-OWNED PREMISES and all structures thereon.  CITY-OWNED
PREMISES shall not include any public sidewalk adjacent to the site or
CITY-OWNED PREMISES, nor any building owned in part by the Baldwin Park
Redevelopment Agency which is also partly owned by a private individuals or
entity under a Disposition and Development Agreement or Owner Participation
Agreement.  CITY-OWNED PREMISES include, but are not limited to, City Hall,
the City Yard, and the site occupied by the City Housing Authority.



   DINING AREA.  Any area on any lot or parcel located outside of an
enclosed building which is either (1) in a non-residential zone or (2) in any
residential zone and utilized for a non-residential purpose, where food or
beverages are served, whether for compensation or otherwise, or where food or
beverages are routinely consumed by customers or patrons of the use located
at such location including, but not limited to, restaurant or bar seating
areas and patios.



   PUBLIC PARK.  Any park, roadside rest, or other site designated by the
city for any recreational purpose which is owned, managed or controlled by
the city, and includes the entire site of the public park, all structures
thereon, and any public sidewalk adjacent to that site.  Public park
includes, but is not limited to, the Julia McNeill Senior Center, the Esther
Snyder Community Center, Morgan Park, Barnes Park, Hilda Solis Park, Walnut
Creek Nature Park, and the Baldwin Park Teen Center and Skate Park.



   SERVICE AREA.  Any place located outside of an enclosed building where
people wait to access goods or services or where people are provided goods or
services by any private or government entity, including but not limited to
farmers’ markets, bus stops, the Metrolink Station, and areas where persons
line up to use automatic teller machines, vending machines of any type,
information kiosks, or similar good or service providers.



   SMOKE or SMOKING.  The burning of any form of tobacco, in a pipe,
cigar or a cigarette or any other device used for the burning of tobacco or
other similar combustible material, so that the person in possession thereof
can inhale and exhale the smoke therefrom.



(‘83 Code, § 2.68.020)  (Ord. 1023, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1232, passed
6-2-04; Am. Ord. 1299, passed 2-7-07)



§ 38.17  SMOKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Smoking in specific locations.  It shall be unlawful to smoke
on or in any of the following places:



      (1)   Any elevator;



      (2)   Any city-owned premises;



      (3)   Any public park;



      (4)   Any service area;



      (5)   Any dining area; or



      (6)   Within 20 feet of any entrance to, exit from or any open
window of any building open to the public.



   (B)   Disposal of smoking waste.  No person shall dispose of any
cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette or cigar, in any
place where smoking is prohibited under this subchapter, except in a
designated waste disposal container.



(‘83 Code, § 2.68.030)  (Ord. 1023, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1232, passed
6-2-04; Am. Ord. 1299, passed 2-7-07)  Penalty, see § 38.19



§ 38.18  SIGNS.



   Signs designating no smoking areas in city-owned premises and public
parks shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in such
premises and parks.  The manner of such posting, including the wording,
size, color, design, and place of posting, shall be determined by the Chief
Executive Officer or his or her designee.



(‘83 Code, § 2.68.040)  (Ord. 1023, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1232, passed
6-2-04)



§ 38.19  PENALTY.



   Any person who violates any provisions of the subchapter set forth in
§§ 38.15et seq. shall be guilty of an infraction and, notwithstanding any
other provision of this code to the contrary, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $100.



(‘83 Code, §2.68.050)  (Ord. 1023, passed - -89; Am. Ord. 1232, passed
6-2-04)



EMERGENCY RESPONSE COSTS



§ 38.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE. Those costs incurred by the city in
making an appropriate emergency response to the incident, and shall be
comprised of all costs directly arising because of the response to the
particular incident, including, but not limited to the costs of providing
police services at the scene of the incident, as well as the salaries of the
personnel responding to the incident.



('83 Code, § 9.05.010)  (Ord. 1017, passed -  -89)



§ 38.31  EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY.



   Pursuant to the authority vested in the city by state statute, each
person who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug, or the
combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or drug, whose negligent
operation of a motor vehicle caused by that influence proximately causes any
incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, or whose
intentionally wrongful criminal act proximately causes any incident resulting
in appropriate emergency response, shall pay to the city the expense of such
an emergency response.  In no event shall a person's liability under this
subchapter exceed the maximum allowable under that statute, and all costs
assessed pursuant to this subchapter shall reasonably relate to the actual
cost of the expense incurred by the city.



('83 Code, § 9.05.020)  (Ord. 1017, passed - -89)



§ 38.32  COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   The expense of an emergency response shall be charged against the
person liable for the expenses under this subchapter.  The charge
constitutes a debt of that person to the city, and is collectible by the city
in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract,
expressed or implied.



('83 Code, § 9.05.030)  (Ord. 1017, passed - -89)



Statutory reference:



   Cal. Gov't Code §§ 53150 et seq.



CHAPTER 39:  DECORUM AT COUNCIL MEETINGS



Section



   39.01   Decorum and order — Council and staff



   39.02   Decorum and order — audience



   39.03   Public comment



   39.04   Enforcement of decorum



   39.05   Failure to observe rules of order



Cross-reference:



   Council meetings in general, see § 30.01



§ 39.01  DECORUM AND ORDER — COUNCIL AND STAFF.



   (A)   Only Council members, designated city staff, and those
authorized by the presiding officer of the meeting, City Council or Chief
Executive Officer are permitted to sit on the dais or to be within the rail
in the front of the Council Chamber.



   (B)   While the Council is in session, the Council members and city
staff shall preserve appropriate order and decorum. No person, by
conversation or otherwise, shall delay or interrupt the proceedings or the
peace of the Council, disturb any speaker, or refuse to obey the directives
of the presiding officer of the meeting. All persons must refrain from
boisterous, profane or abusive behavior which disrupts, disturbs or otherwise
impedes the orderly conduct of the Council meeting.



   (C)   Staff members are encouraged to present their reports as
concisely as possible.  Staff should assume Council Members have studied all
agenda packet information and, therefore, require only brief summation by
staff speakers. Because the official meeting record will contain the entire
staff submittal and copies of reports are available to the public, verbatim
reading of staff reports is not required and is strongly discouraged.



(Ord. 1347, passed 12-15-10; Am. Ord. 1358, passed 6-19-13)



§ 39.02  DECORUM AND ORDER — AUDIENCE.



   (A)   Members of the public attending Council meetings must observe
the same rules of order and decorum applicable to the Council members and
city staff. Each person who addresses the Council shall do so in an orderly
manner and shall not make personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane
remarks to any member of the Council, staff or general public. Any person who
makes such remarks, or who utters loud, threatening, personal or abusive
language, or engages in any other disorderly conduct which disrupts, disturbs
or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any Council meeting shall, at the
discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the Council, be barred
from further audience before the Council during that meeting. Unauthorized
remarks from the audience, heckling, stamping of feet, whistles, yells,
applause, and similar demonstrations which disrupt, disturb or otherwise
impede the orderly conduct of the Council meeting should not be permitted by
the presiding officer of the meeting.



   (B)   The presiding officer of the meeting may order the meeting
room cleared and Council may continue in session if the meeting is willfully
interrupted by a person or group of persons so as to render the orderly
conduct of the meeting infeasible without removal of individuals who are
willfully disrupting the meeting. In these cases, only matters appearing on
the agenda may be considered.  Representatives of the press or other news
media, except those participating in the disturbance, and individuals not
responsible for disturbance of the orderly conduct of the meeting, will be
allowed to remain at the meeting or may be readmitted.



(Ord. 1347, passed 12-15-10; Am. Ord. 1358, passed 6-19-13; Am. Ord. 1384,
passed 3-16-16)



§ 39.03  PUBLIC COMMENT.



   (A)   Addressing the Council. Subject to compliance with rules of
order and decorum, members of the public have an absolute right to address
the Council at open meetings during oral communications segments of the
agenda, subject to reasonable time constraints imposed by the presiding
officer or a majority of Council members present. Consistent with the Brown
Act, speakers are limited to speaking on items presented on the agenda and to
items within the subject matter jurisdiction and authority of the City
Council and/or city.



   (B)   Manner of addressing Council. At the appropriate time, any
person wishing to address the Council should stand, proceed to the lectern
and wait to be recognized by the presiding officer of the meeting.  After
being recognized, the speaker should state his or her name and place of
residence for the record. The speaker should address comments only to the
Council from the lectern.



      (1)   All remarks and questions should be addressed to the
Council as a whole and not to any specific Council member, staff, the
audience, or the media. No question should be asked of a Council member or
staff member without first obtaining permission from the presiding officer of
the meeting.



      (2)   Comments should be fundamentally impersonal: the subject
of the debate is the issue, not any of its proponents or opponents. A motion
and its consequences may be attacked vigorously, but speakers should not
attack the motives, character, or personality of a member, speaker, or any
other person, either directly or by implication or innuendo, improper
language, irrelevancy, dilatory tactics, or disorderly conduct, including,
but not limited to, use of signs or other means to disrupt the meeting.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no speaker will be censured or prohibited from
speaking based upon the content of his or her remarks, but may be removed
from the meeting if the presiding officer of the meeting or a majority of the
Council members determines the speaker is out of order pursuant to this
chapter, and the speaker’s conduct is disrupting, disturbing or otherwise
impeding the orderly conduct of the Council meeting.



   (C)   Time limitation. Every member of the public addressing the
Council shall limit his or her remarks to a maximum of three minutes during
all speaking opportunities; provided, that comment shall not exceed two
minutes per speaker during oral communications just prior to adjournment.
When large numbers of persons wish to speak, the presiding officer of the
meeting may announce a reduction of the speaking time allotted to each person
so all persons wishing to speak may do so.



      (1)   Each person normally is allowed only one opportunity to
comment on each item of business or during oral communications. When any
group wishes to address the Council on the same subject, it is appropriate
for the presiding officer of the meeting to request a spokesperson be chosen
to represent the group to avoid redundancy.



      (2)   No express time limits are imposed on any appellant or
respondent during quasi-judicial proceedings (i.e., appeals, statutorily
required public hearings, and other proceedings involving due process rights
such as appeals of land use decisions and denials of business license
applications); however, the presiding officer of the meeting may limit
repetitive presentations and curtail irrelevant remarks.



(Ord. 1347, passed 12-15-10; Am. Ord. 1358, passed 6-19-13; Am. Ord. 1384,
passed 3-16-16)



§ 39.04  ENFORCEMENT OF DECORUM.



   The Police Chief, or other member of the Police Department designated
by the Chief, serves as Sergeant-at-Arms of the Council and may attend
meetings at the request of the presiding officer of the meeting or the Chief
Executive Officer. The Sergeant-at-Arms will be available to serve at all
meetings immediately upon call, and will carry out all lawful orders given by
the presiding officer of the meeting or Council for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at meetings.



   (A)   Warning. The presiding officer shall request that a person who
is breaching the rules of decorum be orderly and silent. If, after receiving
a warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing the
meeting, the presiding officer shall order him or her, to leave the Council
meeting. If such person does not remove himself or herself, the presiding
officer may order any law enforcement officer who is on duty at the meeting
as sergeant-at-arms of the Council to remove that person from the Council
chambers.



   (B)   Removal. Any law enforcement officer who is serving as
sergeant-at-arms of the Council shall carry out all orders and instructions
given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and
decorum at the Council meeting. Upon instruction of the presiding officer, it
shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove from the Council meeting
any person who is disturbing the proceedings of the Council.



   (C)   Resisting removal. Any person who resists removal by the
sergeant at-arm shall be charged with a violation of this section.



(Ord. 1347, passed 12-15-10; Am. Ord. 1384, passed 3-16-16)



§ 39.05  FAILURE TO OBSERVE RULES OF ORDER.



   (A)   The failure to observe such rules strictly does not affect the
jurisdiction of the Council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that
otherwise conforms to applicable law. Any member may move to require the
presiding officer of the meeting to enforce the rules, and the affirmative
vote of a majority of the members present will require him or her to do so.



   (B)   The failure of any person to observe any requirement of this
chapter or lawful order of the presiding officer or Sergeant-at-Arms is
punishable pursuant to §§ 10.98 and 10.99 of this code.



(Ord. 1347, passed 12-15-10)  Penalty, see §§ 10.98 and 10.99



TITLE V:  PUBLIC WORKS



Chapter



   50.   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT



   51.   SEWERS



   52.   STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION  PREVENTION



   53.   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS MANAGEMENT



CHAPTER 50:  SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT



Section



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Purpose; effect of franchise



   50.03   Storage and disposal of refuse and recyclable materials



   50.04   Collection and transportation of refuse



   50.05   Scavenging restricted



   50.06   Fees for service



   50.07   Requirements for customers with cart service



   50.08   Requirements for customers with bin service



   50.09   Bulky waste



   50.10   Disposal of tree trimmings



   50.11   Disposal of cardboard



   50.12   Denial of collection



   50.13   Termination of collection service



   50.14   Receptacles



   50.15   Impounding of unlawful receptacles



   50.16   Ownership of refuse and recyclable materials



   50.17   Mandatory commercial and residential recycling



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BIN.  A receptacle approved by the city and provided by the franchisee
consisting of a container from one to six cubic yards in capacity which can
only be emptied mechanically and which is left on the premises served.



   BIN SERVICE.  Service to any premises through the use of one or more
bins or drop-off boxes.



   BULKY WASTE.  Large items of the type produced as refuse from the
residential use of a dwelling unit including but not limited to large and
small household appliances, e-waste, water heaters, furnaces, furniture,
tires, carpets, and mattresses.  Bulky waste shall not include objects not
easily moved by two men including but not limited to discarded automobile
bodies or engines.



   CART.  A receptacle approved by the city and provided by the
franchisee consisting of a plastic container with a capacity of 35, 64 or 96
gallons and having a hinged lid and wheels, which is serviced by an automated
or semi-automated side-loading truck.



   CART SERVICE.  Service to any premises through the use only of a
cart(s).



   COMMERCIAL. Comprised of a business including any retail outlet,
financial establishment, commercial warehouse, manufacturing facility,
professional office, hotel or motel and automobile courts, hospital or other
health care facility, any nonprofit organization (such as any church or
club), and any multi-family dwellings comprised of five units or more.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS.  Used or discarded construction
materials removed from premises during the construction, renovation, and/or
demolition of any structure on the premises, including but not limited to
buildings, landscaping hardscape and paved surfaces.  Construction and
demolition debris is also subject to regulation pursuant to Chapter 53 of
this code; in the event of a conflict between the provisions of Chapter 53
and this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 53 shall prevail.



   CUSTOMER.  The occupant of premises from which refuse, recyclable
materials, or refuse and recyclable materials are generated.  If the
occupant of any premises is not the owner of the premises, the owner of the
premises shall be deemed to be a co-customer with such occupant.



   DIRECTOR. The city’s Public Works Director and his/her delegates.



   DISCARDED REFUSE or RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Refuse or recyclable material
which the owner has disposed of by the payment of a fee to another for the
service of collection, removal, or disposal of such material, whether or not
such fee is imposed separately or is part of the fee paid for other services
also provided by the person paid to collect, remove or dispose of such
material, and shall include, without limitation, refuse and recyclable
materials placed by a customer for pick-up by the franchisee.



   DROP-OFF BOX.  A receptacle approved by the city and provided by the
franchisee consisting of a container of 12 to 40 cubic yards in capacity,
commonly referred to as a roll off, or a compactor of the same size, that is
placed at a customer’s premises for refuse storage, is picked up by a truck
and transported to a disposal or recycling site for emptying, and is then
returned to the customer's premises.



   E-WASTE.  Electronic waste including, without limitation, televisions,
computers, monitors, printers, VCRs, microwave ovens, phones and radios.



   FRANCHISE. An agreement for the collection, removal, and disposal of
refuse, recyclable materials, or refuse and recyclable materials generated on
premises within the city, under such terms and conditions as are contained in
this code and as may be proscribed by the City Council.



   FRANCHISEE. A person who has a valid franchise or an agent or employee
of that person while acting in the course and scope of their official duties
pursuant to that franchise.



   GARBAGE.  Any and all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight,
except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of organic
waste matter, whether animal, vegetable and/or other organic matter, that
results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling,
packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats,
fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter
(including, but not by way of limitation, infectious wastes, all putrefactive
or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to
attract flies or  rodents); and other similar matter or material, but
excluding garbage which is set aside especially for recycling, rubbish, and
hazardous waste.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE.  A waste, or combination of wastes, which is defined
as “hazardous”, “extremely hazardous” or “acutely hazardous”
under any federal or California state law or regulation, and any waste or
combination of wastes which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may do either of the
following:



      (1)   Cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating
reversible, illness; or



      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or
disposed of, or otherwise managed.



   NON-COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Refuse and recyclable
materials consisting of ashes, glass and crockery bottles, aluminum cans and
containers, metals, and all other similar articles or materials which have
minimal potential for either combusting or decaying.



   OCCUPANT.  The person legally entitled to possession of all, or a
portion of, premises within the city.



   OWNER.  The person(s) that holds fee title to premises within the city.



   PREMISES.  Any lot or parcel, or any portion thereof, in the city, and
any building or structure located thereon.  Unless otherwise permitted by
written agreement of the Director, each lot, parcel, or portion thereof which
has an address separate from any other lot, parcel or portion thereof shall
be deemed to be a separate premises.



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Materials which a customer who is the owner
thereof intends to discard but which have some potential economic value and
which the city therefore permits to be set aside, handled, packaged, disposed
of by the customer, offered to the franchisee for collection, or collected by
the franchisee in a manner different from other materials being discarded by
a customer.



   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting and turning recyclable materials
into new products by reprocessing and remanufacturing them.



   REFUSE.  All types of solid wastes, including garbage, rubbish,
construction and demolition debris, yard waste, recyclable materials which a
customer has determined not to recycle but to treat as rubbish, and any other
solid waste matter, but excluding hazardous wastes.



   RESIDENTIAL. References single-family dwellings, and multi-family
dwelling less than five units.



   RUBBISH.  All solid waste material consisting of waste wood, wood
products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead
trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper,
pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, rubber, used and
discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, carpets, combustible
waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging or wrapping
crockery and glass, floor sweepings, glass, crockery, bottles, shelves, tin
and aluminum cans, mineral or metallic substances, earth, rock, demolished or
discarded building materials, ashes, cinders, water heaters, furnaces,
furniture, washers, dryers, refrigerators, television, radios, waste material
resulting from any manufacturing, building or construction operation, and
other waste material or household or business waste which is not included in
the definition of garbage or hazardous waste.



   SERVICE RATE.  The charge made by the franchisee to customers of
premises to which such franchisee provides service for the collection,
processing  and disposal of refuse and recyclable materials.



   UNLAWFUL RECEPTACLE.  Any receptacle used for storage or transport of
discarded refuse or recyclable material which receptacle has not been
provided by the franchisee, provided, however, that any receptacle owned and
operated by a State of California designated regional recycling facility
shall not be deemed an unlawful receptacle.



   YARD WASTE. All tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds,
leaves, branches and dead trees (not more than six inches diameter) and
similar materials produced at residential premises within the city.  YARD
WASTE is a type of rubbish, but may be set aside, handled, packaged, or
offered to the franchisee for collection in a manner different from other
types of rubbish.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07; Am. Ord. 1406, passed 5-2-18)



§ 50.02  PURPOSE; EFFECT OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   The collection and disposal of refuse and recyclable materials
is a matter requiring control and regulation by the city in order to protect
the public peace, health, safety and general welfare.  The regular,
thorough, and continuous collection of refuse and recyclable material is
necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety and general welfare. 
In order to insure that such will be accomplished, the city may issue one or
more franchises to a qualified person(s) to collect refuse and/or recyclable
materials upon an exclusive basis under such terms and conditions as are
contained in this code and as may be prescribed by the City Council. 



   (B)   At all times that the City Council has issued a franchise for
all or any part of the city, each person owning or occupying premises within
the area subject to such franchise shall be deemed a customer of such
franchisee and shall be subject to all requirements of this chapter
applicable to a “customer.”



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.03  STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   (A)   Customers may, on a voluntary basis, separate recyclable
materials for the purpose of recycling such items.  If a customer chooses
not to separate such items for recycling, such items shall be treated as
refuse for all purposes.



   (B)   No person shall cause or permit refuse or recyclable materials
to accumulate at any premises for a period in excess of seven days, except
non-combustible refuse and recyclable materials which may be accumulated for
a period not to exceed 30 days.



   (C)   Every person having charge or control of any premises shall
cause refuse located in or on such premises to be placed for collection by
the franchisee.  Every person having charge or control of any premises shall
cause recyclable materials located in or on such premises to be placed for
collection by the franchisee, deposited into any receptacle owned and
operated by a State of California designated regional recycling facility, or
otherwise disposed of at a location authorized to accept recyclable
materials.  Any recyclable materials not so disposed of shall be deemed to
be refuse, and the failure of any person having charge or control of the
premises in or on which materials are or were located to comply with all
provisions of this chapter relating to refuse shall be a violation of this
chapter.



   (D)   No person shall bury refuse or dispose of any refuse otherwise
than placing such refuse for collection by the franchisee, provided, however,
that this subsection shall not prohibit (1) the reduction of garbage to a
liquid condition and disposing of the same as sewage, or (2) the deposit of
yard waste and garbage in a container designed to compost such materials,
provided such container does not exceed one cubic yard in capacity.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.04  COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF REFUSE.



   (A)   Except as set forth in this section, no person shall collect,
carry, convey, or transport refuse generated or originating within the
jurisdictional limits of the city in, over, upon or through any public
street, alley or public place of the city.



      (1)   Any person who collects, carries, conveys or transports
refuse generated or originating within the jurisdictional limits of the city
in, over, upon or through any public street, alley or public place of the
city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the amount of refuse exceeds two
cubic yards.



      (2)   Any person who collects, carries, conveys or transports
refuse materials generated or originating within the jurisdictional limits of
the city in, over, upon or through any public street, alley or public place
of the city shall be guilty of an infraction if the amount of refuse is two
cubic yards or less.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to (1) an
officer or employee of the city while acting in the course and scope of his
or her official duties; or (2) a franchisee.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.05  SCAVENGING RESTRICTED.



   (A)   No person, other than the franchisee or a city officer, agent
or employee, shall interfere in any manner with any refuse or recyclable
receptacle, or the contents thereof, at the location where such receptacle
has been placed by the customer for collection by the franchisee.



   (B)   Except as set forth in this section, no person shall sort
through, gather, collect, or remove from any container, wherever situated,
any discarded refuse or recyclable materials, nor shall any person convey
discarded refuse or recyclable material which has been removed from a
container, wherever situated, upon or along any public or private street
within the city, or cause or permit any combination of the above to occur.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply of any to the
following persons:



      (1)   Any person in the employ of the city who shall be
assigned by the city to the work of sorting through, gathering, collecting or
removing refuse or recyclable materials;



      (2)   Any franchisee;



      (3)   Any person who has a contractual agreement with the city
for the sorting through, gathering, collecting or removing of refuse or
recyclable materials or any employee of such person during the time such
contract shall be in force who is acting within the scope of his or her
employment; or



      (4)   Any person in the employ of or under contract with a
State of California designated regional recycling facility while acting on
behalf of such facility by sorting through, gathering, collecting, or
removing material placed in a receptacle owned and operated by such facility.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.06  FEES FOR SERVICE.



   (A)   The service rates which may be charged by the franchisee shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.  Each customer shall pay
all service rates promptly upon receipt of an invoice therefore.  Service
rates shall be deemed a civil debt owed by the customer to the franchisee and
may be collected by the franchisee in the manner permitted by law.



   (B)   Failure of a customer to pay service rates which have been
invoiced by the franchisee to the customer in compliance with division (A) of
this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



   (C)   The City Council may elect to cause the collection of all, or
a portion of, the service rate as a part of the tax bill collection process
for real property taxes in the manner prescribed by law.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CUSTOMERS WITH CART SERVICE.



   Each customer receiving cart service shall comply with the following:



   (A)   Carts shall be placed on the street as close to the curb line
as is practical, or if there is no curb, as close to the street right-of-way
line separating the premises from the street as is possible.



   (B)   Carts and bulky waste shall not be placed for collection
before 8:00 p.m. on the day immediately prior to the day designated for such
collection.  After the collection of refuse, recyclable materials, and bulky
waste, each cart and any waste material not picked up by the franchisee shall
be promptly removed from the location and returned by the customer of the
premises to a location on the premises which is not visible from any location
outside of the premises.  Whether or not collection has occurred, no person
shall permit a cart or bulky material to remain in a location on the premises
visible from any location outside of the premises after 8:00 p.m. on the
designated day of collection.



   (C)   The maximum weight of the refuse that may be placed in an
individual cart for collection shall not exceed 150 pounds.



   (D)   If more refuse than will fit in the cart(s) provided by the
franchisee is regularly generated at the customer’s premises, such customer
shall obtain an additional cart(s).  The service rates may require payment
for such additional cart(s).



   (E)   If more refuse than will fit in the cart(s) provided by the
franchisee is generated on an occasional basis at the customer's premises,
such customer shall treat such excess refuse as bulky waste subject to the
provisions of § 50.09.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.08  REQUIREMENTS FOR CUSTOMERS WITH BIN SERVICE.



   Each customer receiving bin service shall comply with the following:



   (A)   The receptacle(s) shall be placed on a hard surface in a
location(s) accessible by franchisee’s collection trucks.  The service
rates may require different fees based upon the distance that the franchisee
is required to move a receptacle.



   (B)   If more refuse than will fit in the receptacle(s) provided by
the franchisee is generated on a regular basis at the customer’s premises,
such customer shall obtain an additional receptacle(s).  The service rates
may require payment for such additional receptacle(s).



   (C)   If more refuse than will fit in the receptacle(s) provided by
the franchisee is generated on an occasional basis at the customer’s
premises, such customer shall treat such excess refuse as bulky waste subject
to the provisions of § 50.09.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.09  BULKY WASTE.



   (A)   Each customer shall provide for the collection of bulky waste
by the franchisee when such bulky waste exists on the premises such customer
owns or occupies or when bulky waste is located in the right-of-way
immediately adjacent to such premises.



   (B)   Pursuant to state law, § 97.049 of this code, and § 50.04 of
this chapter, each owner of premises is required to maintain the sidewalk and
parkway adjacent to that premises, including but not limited to the removal
of bulky waste whether or not such bulky waste was generated by an occupant
of such premises or placed on the owner’s premises without the owner's
consent.  Consistent with such obligation, each owner of each premises in
the city is deemed to have authorized the franchisee to collect bulky waste
located in the sidewalk, parkway area, or right-of-way adjacent to such
owner's premises. whether or not a request for removal has been received. 
The owner shall be responsible for all costs of such removal, including
payment to the franchisee of a service rate.



   (C)   If the City Council determines to impose service rates for the
collection of bulky waste, such service rates shall be consistent with the
following:



      (1)   (a)   Bulky waste will be picked up from a premises
receiving cart service without cost if all the following conditions are met:



            1.   The franchisee has been provided notice not
less than 48 hours prior to the regularly scheduled collection date for such
premises that a pickup of bulky waste is required at such premises;



            2.   Not more than six such collections have been
made from such premises in the current calendar year;



            3.   The bulky waste is located near the curb
adjacent to such premises; and



            4.   The bulky waste in any single pickup does not
exceed three cubic yards of refuse or consists of one household appliance.



         (b)   If all such conditions are not met, the customer
at such premises will be charged a service rate for pickup of bulky waste
from such premises at a rate or rates established by resolution of the City
Council.



         (c)   If the customer who is billed at such premises is
a non-owner occupant and fails to pay such service rate, the owner of the
premises shall be liable for such cost.



      (2)   Bulky waste will be picked up from a premises receiving
bin service for a service rate as established by resolution of the City
Council.  The City Council shall establish a lower service rate for the
situation where the customer has provided the franchisee notice of the need
for the bulky waste pickup not less than 48 hours prior to the regularly
scheduled collection date for such premises.  If the customer who is billed
at such premises is a non-owner occupant and fails to pay such service rate,
the owner of the premises shall be liable for such cost.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.10  DISPOSAL OF TREE TRIMMINGS.



   If a customer placing bundles of tree limbs, palm fronds, brush, and
similar dry materials for collection by the franchisee does not place them
within an approved receptacle for refuse or for yard waste, the customer
shall tie such bundles with a heavy cord or wire strong enough to act as a
handle, with no bundle exceeding four feet in length, having a diameter
greater than 12 inches, or a weight greater than 50 pounds, and shall treat
such bundles as bulky waste.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.11  DISPOSAL OF CARDBOARD.



   If a customer placing cardboard containers and papers for collection by
the franchisee does not place them within an approved receptacle for refuse
or for recyclable materials, the customer shall flatten any containers and
tie the cardboard and papers securely into bundles with a heavy cord or wire
strong enough to act as a handle, not exceeding 50 pounds in weight, and
shall treat such bundles as bulky waste.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.12  DENIAL OF COLLECTION.



   The franchisee may decline to collect refuse, recyclable materials,
yard waste, or bulky waste presented for collection by a customer if the
materials or the receptacles in which the materials are presented do not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.  If the franchisee declines to
collect materials from a customer, the franchisee must tag the materials or
the receptacles refused for collection noting on the tag the reason(s) for
denial of collection.  Failure of the customer to correct the condition(s)
causing non-collection is a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.13  TERMINATION OF COLLECTION SERVICE.



   Any premises in the city where the service rate is due and unpaid for a
period of 30 days or more may have service discontinued.  Upon
discontinuance of service, the franchisee will provide notification to the
Director, or his/her designee, as to the discontinued service.  Termination
of service shall not relieve an owner or an occupant from the requirement to
comply with this chapter.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.14  RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   All carts, bins, and drop-off boxes provided by the franchisee
are the sole and exclusive property of the franchisee at all times.



   (B)   No person shall store discarded refuse or recyclable material
in any receptacle other than one provided by the franchisee.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to place on any private property
any receptacle for the storage or collection of discarded refuse or
recyclable material which receptacle has not been provided by the franchisee.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to place a receptacle for the
storage or collection of discarded refuse or recyclable material in or on any
public property unless such receptacle has been provided by the franchisee
and either (1) placement of the receptacle is consistent with the provisions
of §§ 50.07 and 50.08 of this code or (2) an encroachment permit has been
obtained from the city.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person with any ownership interest in
real property within the city to permit a receptacle for the storage or
transportation of discarded refuse or recyclable material to be located on
such real property if such receptacle has not been provided by the franchisee.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.15  IMPOUNDING OF UNLAWFUL RECEPTACLES.



   (A)   Any unlawful receptacle may be removed by the Director from
any premises in the city and impounded pursuant to the provisions of this
section.  In the event the unlawful receptacle has contents, such contents
may be impounded along with the unlawful receptacle.



   (B)   The Director may remove and impound any unlawful receptacle,
and any contents thereof, which is located on any city-owned property. Upon
being so removed, impoundment shall be pursuant to divisions (D) and (E) of
this section.



   (C)   Any unlawful receptacle located on property not owned by the
city is hereby declared to be an instrumentality of a crime, being in
violation of § 50.14 of this code.  Such receptacle may be removed from any
premises in the city and impounded without notice to the owner of the
receptacle, provided, however, that city staff shall undertake best efforts
to obtain consent of the owner or occupant of the property on which the
receptacle is to enter on to such property.  Upon being so removed,
impoundment shall be pursuant to divisions (D) and (E) of this section.



   (D)   Within two business days after removal of an unlawful
receptacle, the Director shall mail written notice to the owner of the
receptacle, if an address can be ascertained from information on the
receptacle itself, or to the owner of the property from which the receptacle
was removed, if removed from private property and the owner of the receptacle
cannot otherwise be ascertained.  Such notice shall advise that the
receptacle has been removed by the city, and if not redeemed within 30 days
by the owner thereof, and all applicable charges paid, may be disposed of by
the city in any manner which the city deems appropriate.  The charges to
redeem an unlawful receptacle shall be as established by resolution of the
City Council.



   (E)   If the owner does not redeem an unlawful receptacle within 30
days of such notice, the Director may dispose of the receptacle in such
manner as he/she deems appropriate.  Notwithstanding any provision of this
section to the contrary, the Director may dispose of the contents of an
impounded unlawful receptacle at any time following impoundment if he/she
determines such disposal is necessary to preserve the public health, safety,
or welfare.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.16  OWNERSHIP OF REFUSE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.



   Ownership of all refuse collected shall transfer to the franchisee as
of the time the same is received by it.  Ownership of recyclable materials
shall transfer to the franchisee when the customer owning such recyclable
materials places them for collection by the franchisee.  Ownership of
materials placed within a receptacle owned and operated by a State of
California designated regional recycling facility shall transfer to such
facility when the customer owning such materials places them within such
receptacle.



(Ord. 1297, passed 2-7-07)



§ 50.17  MANDATORY COMMERCIAL AND RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING.



   (A)   Definitions. The following words or phrases, whenever used in
this chapter, shall be constructed as defined in this section:



      CUSTOMER.  A generator that contracts for solid waste removal
services and enters into a service agreement with a franchised authorized
hauler for solid waste collection services.



      GENERATOR. An owner or responsible party of a commercial property
which generates solid waste as a result of its business, commercial activity
or other property activity. Generators may include tenants, property
managers, and employees and contractors of generators.



      LARGE EVENT.  An event that charges an admission price, or is
operated by a local agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000
individuals per day of operation of the event, including, but not limited to,
a public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course,
street system, or other open space when being used for an event, including,
but not limited to, a sporting event or a flea market.



      LARGE VENUE.  A permanent venue facility that annually seats or
serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the
facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this
chapter, a venue facility includes, but is not limited to, a public,
nonprofit, or privately owned or operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall,
amusement park, conference or civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport,
racetrack, horse track, performing arts center, fairground, museum, theater,
or other public attraction facility. For purposes of this chapter, a site
under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue
that is contiguous with other large venues in the site is a single large
venue.



      ORGANIC WASTE.  Food waste, green waste, landscape and pruning
waste, nonhazardous wood waste, and food-solid paper waste that is mixed in
with food waste.



      The definitions set forth in § 50.01 and § 50.17 shall also
apply to this chapter.



   (B)   Commercial generators. Each commercial generator shall be
responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. Each commercial generator shall:



      (1)   Ensure the segregation of recyclable materials and
organic material from garbage by placing each type of material in a separate
designated receptacle or container, and ensure that employees, contractors,
volunteer, customers, visitors, and other persons on site segregate
recyclable materials and organic materials.



      (2)   Provide an adequate number and type of labeled
receptacles needed for segregating and storing recyclable materials and
organic materials, and provide adequate access to these receptacles.



      (3)   Post and maintain signs containing information and
instructions on the proper segregating and storage of recyclable materials
and organic materials in areas where receptacles are located.



      (4)   Ensure that all receptacles used for collecting and
storing recyclable materials, organic materials, and garbage are affixed with
signs or labels that display the appropriate information to enable users to
clearly differentiate which receptacles are used for recyclable materials,
organic material, and garbage to minimize the contamination of material
placed in receptacles.



      (5)   Provide adequate instructions to employees, contractors,
and volunteers of the requirements of this chapter, including:



         (a)   The requirement and procedures to ensure the
segregation of recyclable materials and organic materials from garbage;



         (b)   The employee's, contractor's, and volunteer's
responsibilities regarding compliance with this chapter; and



         (c)   The types and location of receptacles and
containers for recyclable material, organic materials, and garbage.



      (6)   Ensure that instructions or training materials provided
to employees, contractors and volunteers are promptly made available to the
city upon request.



      (7)   Ensure that the contents of receptacles are deposited in
the proper container and ensure that the contents of the receptacles for
recyclable materials and organic materials are not delivered to garbage
containers. Commercial generators shall be assessed a premium fee based on
the size of the container for recyclable material and organic material
containers that are collected for garbage disposal by the franchisee if the
contents of their recyclable material and organic material containers contain
unacceptable levels of contamination.



   (C)   Large events and large venues. Large events and large venues
shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. In addition to other requirements in this
chapter and municipal code, each large event and large venue shall:



      (1)   Segregate recyclable materials and ensure that
employees, contractors, volunteers, customers, visitors, and other persons on
site segregate recyclable materials.



      (2)   Ensure the large event and large venue has access to an
adequate number and type of containers needed for collecting and storing
recyclable materials.



      (3)   Provide or ensure the provision of adequate receptacles
throughout the large event and large venue location to make the segregation
of recyclable materials and organic materials convenient for employees,
volunteers, contractors, vendors, exhibitors, presenters, visitors,
attendees, customers, and other persons on site.



      (4)   Ensure that all receptacles used for segregating and
storing recyclable materials, organic materials, and garbage are affixed with
signs or labels that display the appropriate information to enable users to
accurately segregate solid waste and to clearly differentiate which
receptacles are used for recyclable materials, organic materials, and
garbage, to minimize the contamination of material placed in receptacles.



      (5)   Ensure that the contents of the receptacles for
recyclable materials and organic materials are not delivered to garbage
containers unless they include unacceptable levels of contamination.



   (D)   Provisions for self-haulers.



      (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude any person, solid
waste customer, commercial generator, multi-family generator, or large event
and large venue from self-hauling recyclable materials or organic materials
generated by that entity to a recycling or organics processing facility.



      (2)   Self-haulers shall:



         (a)   Comply with the requirements in this chapter by
delivering for recycling those items that can be recycled by local recycling
facilities and establishments and shall comply by delivering for organics
processing those items that are accepted by local organics processing
facilities.



         (b)   Provide proof of compliance with this chapter,
upon request by the city; proof includes but is not limited to a receipt from
a recycling or organics processing facility that clearly identifies the type
and quantity of material delivered and an application for exemption from the
necessity for refuse collection.



   (E)   Authorized haulers.



      (1)   Authorized haulers shall obtain and maintain a business
license with the city.



      (2)   Authorized haulers shall keep separate garbage,
recyclable materials, and organic materials that have been segregated into
separate containers by commercial generators, multi-family generators, or
large event and large venues.



      (3)   Authorized haulers shall ensure that segregated
recyclable materials are delivered to a recycling facility and that
segregated organic materials are delivered to an organics processing
facility, except that a container that contains unacceptable levels of
contamination may be delivered for garbage disposal if the solid waste
collector notifies the city of the occurrence; the date of the occurrence;
and the account name, primary contact, phone number, billing address, and
service address for the solid waste customer at which the container is
located.



   (F)   Exclusions. Solid waste customers that subscribe to less than
four cubic yards of garbage collection service per week shall be excluded
from the requirements of this chapter.



   (G)   Exemptions. Solid waste customers, commercial generators, and
large event and large venues that can document using the methods described in
division (C) of this section that the circumstances described in divisions
(A) and (B) of this section pertain to their operations shall be exempt from
the requirements of this chapter.



      (1)   No generation of recyclable materials. Solid waste
customers, commercial generators, and large event and large venues may be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter if the solid waste customer,
commercial generator, or large event and large venue demonstrates to the city
that no recyclable material or organic materials are generated on site.



      (2)   Space constraints and zoning considerations. Solid waste
customers may be exempt from the requirements of this chapter if the city
determines that either:



         (a)   There is inadequate space for a solid waste
customer to store containers for recyclable materials or organic materials on
site and that it is infeasible for the solid waste customer to share
recyclable materials or organic material containers with adjacent commercial
facilities or multi-family dwellings; or



         (b)   Compliance with this chapter will result in
violating city zoning or other regulations.



      (3)   Commercial generators, multi-family generators, and
large event and large venues may be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter if the city determines that either:



         (a)   There is inadequate space for the commercial
generator or large event and large venue to store receptacles for recyclable
materials or organic materials on site and that it is infeasible for the
commercial generator or large event and large venue to deposit recyclable or
organic material directly into containers without an intermediate receptacle;
or



         (b)   Compliance with this chapter will result in
violating city zoning or other regulations.



      (4)   Verification of exemption. The solid waste customer
shall petition the city with a written request for an exemption documenting
the circumstances of a claimed exemption. The city may visit the solid waste
customer's site; examine the receptacles for garbage, recyclable materials,
or organic materials; or take other actions to verify the circumstances
identified in the petition. The solid waste customer, commercial generator,
or large event and large venue requesting an exemption shall not be granted
an exemption from the requirements of this chapter if the city determines
that: (1) recyclable material or organic material are generated on site; (2)
it is feasible for containers and receptacles for recyclable materials, and
necessary, for organic materials to be place on site; and (3) it is feasible
to share recycling containers with an adjacent commercial facility or
multi-family dwelling. The city may require the solid waste customer or
commercial generator that is granted exemption for the requirements of this
chapter to submit a renewal of its petition for an exemption every two years
from the date the exemption was granted by the city.



   (H)   City authority. The city or its designee is authorized to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. To the extent
permitted by law, the city or its designee may inspect any collection
container at a commercial facility, multi-family dwelling, or large event and
large venue and any solid waste collector's load for garbage, recyclable
materials, or organic material. To the extent permitted by law, the city or
its designee may also inspect the premises of any commercial facility,
multi-family dwelling, or large event and large venue to determine compliance
with provisions of this chapter.



   (I)   Administrative appeal. Unless otherwise expressly provided by
this municipal code, any person adversely and directly affected by any
determination made or action taken by the city pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter may file an administrative appeal with the City Clerk. If no
appeal is filed within ten days the determination of the city shall be final.



   (J)   Enforcement goals. The city shall enforce this chapter with
the goal of maximizing participation in the program and ensuring that
recyclable materials and organic material that haven’t been property
segregated by the solid waste customer, commercial generator, multifamily
generator, or large event and large venue are correctly collected and
delivered to recycling and organics processing facilities. The city or its
designee shall conduct the following activities to enforce this chapter.



      (1)   Develop and disseminate public education and promotional
materials relating to the importance of recycling and organics processing and
the availability of recycling and organics processing opportunities available
to solid waste customers, commercial generators, multifamily generators, and
large event and large venues;



      (2)   Provide technical assistance and training to solid waste
customers, commercial generators, multifamily generators, and large event and
large venues to increase recycling;



      (3)   Enforce provisions of the franchise agreement for
collection of recyclable materials, organic materials, and garbage with
franchisee to stimulate demand for recyclable material and organic material
collection service.



   (K)   Enforcement for contamination.



      (1)   Enforcement of this chapter regarding contamination in
containers for garbage, recyclable material, and organic material shall be
carried out by the waste hauler. The waste hauler will notify city of
customers with excessive or ongoing contamination.



      (2)   Solid waste collectors shall not be held liable for the
failure of solid waste customers to comply with this chapter, unless
specified in the franchise, contract, registration certificate, or permit
issued by the city.



   (L)   Penalties. The city may issue administrative fines for
violating this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city's procedures
on imposition of administrative fines are hereby incorporated in their
entirety and shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review
of administrative citation issued to enforce this chapter and any rule or
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.



   (M)   Implementation schedule. The schedule for enforcement of this
chapter shall be implemented in accordance with the timeline specified in
Table 1.



 


Date

 
Entities Affected
 
Material Covered


Effective immediately upon adoption
 
Recyclable materials: All commercial and multi-family solid waste customers
that subscribe to four cubic yards or more of garbage collection service per
week.
 
Recyclable materials


April 1, 2016
 
Organic materials: All commercial and multi- family solid waste customers
that generate eight cubic yards of organic waste per week shall arrange for
organic waste recycling services.
 
Organic materials


January 1, 2017
 
Organic materials: All commercial and multi- family solid waste customers
that generate four cubic yards of organic waste per week shall arrange for
organic waste recycling services.
 
Organic materials


January 1, 2019
 
Organic materials: Businesses that generate four cubic yards or more of
commercial solid waste per week shall arrange for organic waste recycling
services.
 
Organic materials



 



   (N)   Other provisions.



      (1)   No other power affected. This chapter does not do any of
the following:



         (a)   Otherwise affect the authority of the city or its
designee to take any other action authorized by any other provision of law.



         (b)   Restrict the power of a City Attorney, District
Attorney, or the Attorney General to bring in the name of the people of
California any criminal proceeding otherwise authorized by law.



         (c)   Prevent the city or designee from cooperating
with, or participating in, a proceeding.



         (d)   Affect in any way existing contractual
arrangements including franchises, permits, or licenses previously granted or
entered into between the solid waste collectors and city.



      (2)   Cumulative remedies. Any remedy provided under this
chapter is cumulative to any other remedy provided in equity or at law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of the city or its
solid waste operators to bring a civil action; nor shall a conviction for
such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by the city or
its solid waste operators. The fees and penalties imposed under this chapter
shall constitute a civil debt and liability owning to the city from the
person, firms, or corporations using or chargeable for such services and
shall be collectible in the manner provided by law.



      (3)   Liability. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees
including without limitation under the Comprehensive Environmental Response,
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA).



   (O)   Disclaimer of liability. The degree of protection required by
this chapter is considered to be reasonable for regulatory purposes. The
standards set forth in this chapter are minimal standard and do not imply
that compliance will ensure safe handling of recyclable materials, organic
materials, or garbage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of
the city, or any of its officers or employees, for any damages that result
from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made in
accordance with this chapter. All persons handling solid waste within the
boundaries of the city should be and are advised to conduct their own inquiry
as to the handling of such materials. In undertaking the implementation of
this chapter, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general
welfare, It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officer and employees,
an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person
who claims that such breach proximately caused injury.



   (P)   Duties discretionary. Subject to the limitations of due
process and applicable requirement of state or federal laws, and
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever the words
"shall" or "must" are used in establishing a responsibility or duty of the
city, its elected or appointed officers, employees, or agents, it is the
legislative intent that such words establish a discretionary responsibility
or duty requiring the exercise of judgment and discretion.



(Ord. 1406, passed 5-2-18)



CHAPTER 51:  SEWERS



Section



General Provisions



   51.01   Connections across adjoining lots prohibited



Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Regulations



   51.10   Adoption



   51.11   Definitions



   51.12   Amendments



Sewer Permits



   51.25   Connection to sewer; permit required



   51.26   Application



   51.27   Sewer connection fees



   51.28   Appeal of decision



Statutory reference:



   Municipal sewers, see Cal. Gov. Code §§ 38900 et seq. and Health &
Safety Code §§ 5470 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 51.01  CONNECTIONS ACROSS ADJOINING LOTS PROHIBITED.



   No sewer connection from any building or structure shall hereafter be
made to any public sewer, which connection or any portion thereof shall be
in, under or upon any lot other than the lot on which the building or
structure is located.  Exceptions to this requirement may be allowed by the
Director of Public Works; provided, that recorded private easements exist
across adjoining properties for sewer house connection purposes and the
installation of the sewer connection will not, in the opinion of the Director
of Public Works, be excessively long or be in a location that may be
conducive to excessive maintenance.  The Director of Public Works shall be
provided with a copy of the conveyance granting the private easement after it
has been recorded in the office of the Los Angeles County Recorder.



('83 Code, § 13.04.100)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



SANITARY SEWER AND INDUSTRIAL
WASTE REGULATIONS



§ 51.10  ADOPTION.



   Except as provided in this subchapter, the "Los Angeles County Sanitary
Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance," the same being Ordinance 81-0043, is
adopted as the sanitary sewer and industrial waste regulations for the city,
hereinafter referred to as the "sewer ordinance" and on file in the
Department of Public Works.



('83 Code, § 13.04.010)  (Ord. 849, passed -  -83)



§ 51.11  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever, in the sanitary sewer and industrial waste ordinance adopted
in § 51.10, the following words and phrases are used, they respectively
shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:



   BOARD.  The City Council of the city.



   COUNTY ENGINEER.  The City Engineer of the city.



   COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER.  The Health Office of the city.



   COUNTY or COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES.  The city.



   COUNTY SEWER MAINTENANCE DISTRICT.  The city.



   PUBLIC SEWER.  All sanitary sewers and appurtenances thereto, lying
within streets or easements dedicated to the city, which are under the sole
jurisdiction of the city.



   TRUNK SEWER.  A sewer under the jurisdiction of a public entity other
than the city. 



('83 Code, § 13.04.020)  (Ord. 849, passed -  -83)



§ 51.12  AMENDMENTS.



   The sewer ordinance is amended in the manner set out as follows:



   (A)   Damaged public sewer reimbursement.  Section 20.32.690 of the
sewer ordinance is amended to include the following paragraph:



      In the event that the damaged public sewer is not in a County
Sewer Maintenance District, the violator shall reimburse the City within
thirty days after the City Engineer renders an invoice for the same.  The
amount when paid shall be deposited within the General Fund.



   (B)   Fees and charges. 



   (1)  Chapter 20.28, Sections 20.28.020 through 20.28.050, Chapter
20.32, Part 2, of the sewer ordinance are deleted.



   (2)   The provisions of Sections 20.36.230, 20.36.240, 20.36.245,
20.36.250, 20.36.260, 20.36.265, 20.36.270, 20.36.280, 20.36.290, 20.36.295
of Division 2 of Title 20 of the Los Angeles Code, in effect on August 14,
1998, fully express the will and intention of the City Council of the City of
Baldwin Park as to those matters relating to fee and deposits which are
contained therein, and are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference. Chapter 20.28, Sections 20.28.02 through 20.28.05, Chapter 20.32,
Part 2 of the sewer ordinance are deleted.



   (C)   The penalty provision set forth in Part 2 of Chapter 20.36 of
Division 2 of Title 20 is as follows:



   20.36.280  Annual Inspection fee,waste-water sampling and analysis fee
and miscellaneous service fee - Payment times - Penalties for delinquency. 
All inspection fees required by Section 20.36.250 or Section 20.36.270 of
this code, wastewater sampling and analysis fees required by Section
20.36.265 and applicable miscellaneous fees required by Section 20.36.270
shall be due and payable on the billing date as established by those sections
or by the due date indicated on any invoices issued. Fees not paid within 30
calendar days from the billing date shall be considered delinquent.
Delinquent fees shall be subject to a 10-percent penalty fee for each 30-day
period beyond the billing date that the fee is due. Permits for which the
inspection fee is delinquent for 90 days or more subject to suspension as
provided in Section 20.36.160.



('83 Code, §§ 13.04.030 - 13.04.050)  (Ord. 849, passed -  -83; Am. Ord.
1136, passed 11-18-98)



SEWER PERMITS



§ 51.25  CONNECTION TO SEWER; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Notwithstanding any provisions of the sewer ordinance to the contrary,
no person shall make any connection to any public sewer without first
obtaining a sewer connection permit therefor, from the Director of Public
Works as provided in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 13.04.060)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 51.26  APPLICATION.



   An application for a sewer connection permit shall be made in writing
upon a form to be furnished by the Director of Public Works giving such
information as he may require, and accompanied by the required fee.  If it
appears that the provisions of this subchapter will be complied with and
guaranteed, the Director shall issue the permit.



('83 Code, § 13.04.070)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 51.27  SEWER CONNECTION FEES.



   Whenever the Director of Public Works finds that a sewer connection
permit has been requested, by, or on behalf of, the owner of any real
property within the city, which property has not borne its just share of the
original cost of the installation and construction of the public sewer to
which the sewer hookup is desired, either by means of an assessment district
proceeding, contract, voluntary contribution, or otherwise, a fee shall be
charged for the permit, as set by ordinance of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 13.04.080)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 51.28  APPEAL OF DECISION.



   Any person aggrieved either by the decision of the Director, pursuant
to this subchapter, or with respect to the amount of the fees set by
resolution of the City Council in the case of a sanitary sewer connection fee
district, shall have the right of appeal from the determination, to the City
Council.  The appeals shall be taken in the time and manner set forth in §
30.04.



('83 Code, § 13.04.090)



CHAPTER 52:  STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Purpose and intent



   52.03   Statutory authority



   52.04   Responsibility for administration



   52.05   Illicit discharges, dumping and non-storm water discharges



   52.06   Illicit connections



   52.07   Reduction of pollutants in runoff



   52.08   Control of pollutants from commercial facilities



   52.09   Control of pollutants from industrial activities



   52.10   Control of pollutants from other industrial facilities



   52.11   Control of pollutants from state permitted construction
activities



   52.12   Control of pollutants from other construction activities



   52.13   Control of pollutants from new developments/redevelopments



   52.14   Fees



   52.15   Inspections and enforcement



   52.16   Notices of violation



   52.17   Nuisance



   52.18   Remedies not exclusive



   52.19   Compliance with chapter is not compliance with other laws



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning water
quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be
construed to have the meanings set forth, unless it is apparent from the
context that a different meaning is intended.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE or BMP . Any program, technology, process,
citing criteria, operating method, measure, or device which controls,
prevents, removes, or reduces pollutants in storm water and non-storm water
runoff.



   CLEAN WATER ACT . The Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended,
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



   COMMERCIALFACILITY . Restaurants; automotive service facilities;
automotive dealerships, and retail gasoline station outlets or any other
definition provided in the municipal NPDES permit or Storm Water Quality
Management Plan. 



   EXECUTIVE OFFICER . Executive Officer of the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Los Angeles.



   ILLICIT CONNECTION . Any device through or by which an illicit
discharge is conveyed into the municipal storm water system without a permit,
including but not limited to floor drains, pipes or any fabricated or natural
conduits, excluding roof drains which convey only storm water.   



   ILLICIT DISCHARGE . The entry of any material other than storm water
unless such discharge is exempted under the municipal NPDES permit, is
allowed under a separate NPDES permit, including but not limited to a point
source permit, a General Industrial Activity Storm Water permit, or a General
Construction Activity Storm Water permit, or is allowed by the Executive
Officer.



   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY . Any of the ten classifications of industrial
facilities specified in 40 CFR § 122.26 (b)(14), defined by Standard
Industrial Classification (SIC) and which is required to obtain a NPDES
permit, not including construction activities.



   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE . Within the context of BMP selection,
choosing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only (i) where
effective BMPs will serve the same purpose, (ii) the BMPs would not be
technically feasible, or (iii) the cost would be prohibitive. 



   MUNICIPAL NPDES PERMIT . California Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Los Angeles Region, Order No. 01-182, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001,
Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Storm Water and Urban Runoff
Discharges Within the County of Los Angeles, and the Incorporated Cities
Therein, Except the City of Long Beach, and any amendment thereto or
re-issuance thereof.



   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (referred to herein as  MS4).
Those facilities within the city by which storm water discharge is conveyed
to waters of the United States, including but not limited to flood control
channels, roads with drainage systems, alleys, streets, catch basins, grates,
inlets, curbs, gutters, ditches, storm drains, canals, pipes, and fabricated
and natural channels. 



   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE . Any fluid discharge to the storm drain
system and/or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of storm water
but may not necessarily be an illicit discharge.



   NPDES PERMIT or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT
. A permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the
State Water Resources Control Board or a California Regional Water Quality
Control Board pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known
as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., that
authorizes discharges to waters of the United States.



   OWNER . Any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part
of such building or real property. 



   PERSON . Any natural person, firm, association, organization,
partnership, business trust, corporation, or company. 



   POLLUTANT . The same as it is defined in Cal. Water Code § 13373 and
includes but is not limited to garbage, debris, lawn clippings, leaves, fecal
waste, biological waste, sediment, sludge, manure, fertilizers, pesticides,
oil, grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid
containing toxic or non-toxic chemicals, metals, including batteries. 



   RECEIVING WATERS . Rivers, lakes, oceans, or other bodies of water that
receive runoff.



   REDEVELOPMENT . Land-disturbing activity that results in the creation,
addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface
area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited
to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a
structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a
routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related to
structural or impervious surfaces.  It does not include routine maintenance
to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose
of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required
to immediately protect public health and safety.



   REGIONAL BOARD . The appointed members of the California Regional Water
Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.



   RUNOFF . The portion of rainfall or irrigation water or other water
activities also known as dry-weather flows that flow across the ground
surface and eventually to receiving waters. Runoff can pick up pollutants
from the air or the land and carry them to receiving waters.



   STATE BOARD .  The State Water Resources Control Board of the
California Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter "SWRCB").



   STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM . The Los Angeles Countywide
Storm Water Quality Management Program, which includes descriptions of
programs, collectively developed by the Permittees in accordance with
provisions of the NPDES Permit, to comply with applicable federal and state
law, as the same is amended from time to time.



   STORM WATER RUNOFF . Any surface water flow produced by rain or snow
melt.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to protect and improve water quality of
receiving waters by:



   (A)   Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal storm water
system to the maximum extent practicable;



   (B)   Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal storm water
system;



   (C)   Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant
materials into the municipal storm water system;



   (D)   Reducing pollutant loads in storm water and urban runoff, from
land uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit.



   (E)   The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect the water
quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is
consistent with the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; the municipal
NPDES permit and any amendment, revision, or re-issuance thereof.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.03  STATUTORY AUTHORITY.



   The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended,
33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.04  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   The responsibility for the Administration, oversight and implementation
of this chapter is delegated to the Director of Public Works ("Director") for
the City of Baldwin Park, and his or her authorized agent, deputy or
representative.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.05  ILLICIT DISCHARGES, DUMPING, AND NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGES.



   (A)   No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to enter
the municipal storm water system.



   (B)   No person shall place, dump, dispose, litter, accumulate,
maintain, discharge, or cause to enter into the MS4 any pollutant or any
foreign object such as batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris,
refuse, rubbish, food waste, chemicals, animal waste or oil cans, which are
also considered illicit discharges.



   (C)   Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be
required to pay for the cost of clean-up and remediation.



   (D)   Any owner of any private property from which a non-storm water
discharge is observed may be required to pay for the cost of collecting and
analyzing the discharge to determine if it is an illicit discharge.



   (E)   The following non-storm water discharges are not considered
illicit discharges:



      (1)   Discharges determined by the Executive Officer not to be
significant sources of pollution, including but are not limited to: natural
springs and rising ground water; flows from riparian habitats or wetlands;
stream diversions, permitted by the State Board; and uncontaminated ground
water infiltration [as defined by 40 CFR § 35.2005(20)]; reclaimed and
potable landscape irrigation runoff; potable drinking water supply and
distribution system releases (consistent with American Water Works
Association guidelines for dechlorination and suspended solids reduction
practices); drains for foundations, footings, and crawl spaces; air
conditioning condensate; dechlorinated/debrominated swimming pool discharges;
dewatering of lakes and decorative fountains; non-commercial car washing by
residents or by non-profit organizations; and sidewalk rinsing.



      (2)   Discharges specifically allowed under a separate NPDES
permit, including but not limited to, a General Industrial Storm Water
Activity Permit or General Construction Storm Water Activity Permit.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.06  ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection
that operates to convey an illicit discharge to the municipal storm water
system. 



   (B)   Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or
operating such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of
conveying an illicit discharge.



   (C)   If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after
being called upon by the city to do so, the Chief Executive Officer or his or
her designee shall impose appropriate measures to remove or disable the
illicit connection and may recover such costs from the owner of the illicit
connection.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.07  REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN RUNOFF.



   No person shall cause or threaten to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to storm water runoff.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.08  CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM COMMERCIAL FACILITIES.



   Subject commercial facilities shall implement BMPs prescribed by the
regional board or its Executive Officer, through programs or actions made
pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, as more particularly described in the
city's Storm Water Quality Management, or any revisions made thereto.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.09  CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any industry in
the city which engages in industrial activity within the meaning of this
chapter that is subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the
SWRCB Water Quality Order No. 97-03-DWQ, Permit No. CAS00001, any revision or
a re-issuance thereof, to operate without a General Industrial Activities
Storm Water NPDES Permit. 



   (B)   Industries that engage in industrial activity within the
meaning of this chapter and therefore require a General Industrial Activities
Storm Water NPDES permit shall retain on-site the following documents: (i) a
copy of the Notice of Intent for General Permit to Discharge Storm Water
Associated with Industrial Activity; (ii) a waste discharge identification
number issued by the SWRCB; and/or (iii) a Storm Water Pollution Prevention
Plan and Monitoring Program plan.



   (C)   Any industry in the city requiring a General Industrial
Activities Storm Water NPDES Permit shall, upon reasonable request from a
duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents described
in division (B) above.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.10  CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM OTHER INDUSTRIAL FACILITIES.



   Industrial facilities not subject to the General Industrial Activities
Storm Water NPDES Permit but are subject to pollution control requirements
under the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the
regional board or its Executive Officer, through programs or actions made
pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.11 CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM STATE PERMITTED CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No person shall be granted a grading permit by the city or
shall commence or continue any construction activity within the city that is
subject to an General Construction Activity Storm Water NPDES Permit without
showing proof of having applied for such permit.



   (B)   Any person engaged in a construction activity requiring an
NPDES General Construction Activity Storm Water NPDES Permit construction
permit shall retain at the construction site the following documents: (i) a
copy of the Notice of Intent to Comply with Terms of the General Permit to
Discharge Water Associated with Construction Activity; (ii) a waste discharge
identification number issued by the SWRCB; (iii) a Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan and Monitoring Program Plan for the construction activity
requiring the construction permit; and (iv) records of all inspections,
compliance and non-compliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good
housekeeping practices.



   (C)   Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city
requiring an NPDES General Construction Storm Water Activity permit shall,
upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide
any of the documents specified in division (B) and shall retain said
documents for at least three years after completion of construction.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.12  CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM OTHER CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.



   Any person engaged in a construction activity that is not subject to
the General Construction Storm Water Activity NPDES Permit but is subject to
the municipal NPDES Permit, shall be required to comply with requirements
contained therein as specified in the city's Storm Water Quality Management
Program, including any revisions made thereto.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.13  CONTROL OF POLLUTANTS FROM NEW DEVELOPMENTS/REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.



   (A)   Definitions. Except as specifically provided herein, any term
used in this section shall be defined as that term in the current Municipal
NPDES permit, or if it is not specifically defined in either the Municipal
NPDES permit, then as such term is defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as
amended, and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder. If the definition of
any term contained in this chapter conflicts with the definition of the same
term in the current Municipal NPDES permit, then the definition contained in
the Municipal NPDES permit shall govern. The following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:



      AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE FACILITY.   A facility that is categorized in
any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes. For inspection
purposes, Permittees need not inspect facilities with SIC codes 5013, 5014,
5541, 5511, provided that these facilities have no outside activities or
materials that may be exposed to stormwater (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      BASIN PLAN.  The Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region,
Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties,
adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent
amendments (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP).  Practices or physical devices
or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or
non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the
volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water
(Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      BIOFILTRATION.  A LID BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant
discharges by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through
incidental infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental
infiltration is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load
reduction. Therefore, the term BIOFILTRATION as used in this section is
defined to include only systems designed to facilitate incidental
infiltration or achieve the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration
BMPs with an underdrain (subject to approval by the Regional Board’s
Executive Officer). Biofiltration BMPs include bioretention systems with an
underdrain and bioswales. (Modified from: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      BIORETENTION.  A LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by
intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration
and infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum
two-foot top layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a
gravel-filled temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in
the Municipal NPDES permit, a bioretention BMP may be designed with an
overflow drain, but may not include an underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is
designed or constructed with an underdrain it is regulated by the Municipal
NPDES permit as biofiltration (Modified from: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      BIOSWALE.  A LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with
grass or other dense, low-growing vegetation. BIOSWALES are designed to
collect stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the
dense vegetation for a period of several minutes (Source: Order No.
R4-2012-0175).



      CITY.  The City of Baldwin Park.



      CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA).  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act
enacted in 1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act
of 1987. The CLEAN WATER ACT prohibits the discharge of pollutants to Waters
of the United States unless the discharge is in accordance with an NPDES
permit.



      COMMERCIAL MALLS.  Any development on private land comprised of
one or more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various
merchandise, with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk
from store to store, along with parking area(s). A COMMERCIAL MALL includes,
but is not limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and
enclosed shopping malls or shopping centers (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.  Any construction or demolition activity,
clearing, grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity that result
in land disturbance. Construction does not include emergency construction
activities required to immediately protect public health and safety or
routine maintenance activities required to maintain the integrity of
structures by performing minor repair and restoration work, maintain the
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of the
facility. See “Routine Maintenance” definition for further explanation.
Where clearing, grading or excavating of underlying soil takes place during a
repaving operation, state general construction permit coverage by the State
of California general permit for storm water discharges associated with
industrial activities or for stormwater discharges associated with
construction activities is required if more than one acre is disturbed or the
activities are part of a larger plan (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      CONTROL.  To minimize, reduce or eliminate by technological,
legal, contractual, or other means, the discharge of pollutants from an
activity or activities (Source: Order No. R4-20l20175).



      DEVELOPMENT.  Construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether
single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial,
commercial, retail, and other non-residential projects, including public
agency projects; or mass grading for future construction. It does not include
routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity,
or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction
activities required to immediately protect public health and safety (Source:
Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      DIRECTLY ADJACENT.  Situated within 200 feet of the contiguous
zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural
stability of the environmentally sensitive area (Source: Order No.
R4-2012-0175).



      DISCHARGE.  Any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape,
dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance.



      DISTURBED AREA.  An area that is altered as a result of
clearing, grading, and/or excavation (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      FLOW-THROUGH BMPs.  Modular, vault type “high flow
biotreatment” devices contained within an impervious vault with an
underdrain or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain (Modified
from: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      GENERAL CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES STORM WATER PERMIT (GCASP).  The
general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the
discharge of stormwater from construction activities under certain conditions.



      GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES STORM WATER PERMIT (GIASP).  The
general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the
discharge of stormwater from certain industrial activities under certain
conditions.



      GREEN ROOF.  A LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to
intercept rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation
leaves and through evapotranspiration. GREEN ROOFS may be designed as either
a bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a
bioretention BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of
sufficient depth to provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain
the design storm depth and may not be designed or constructed with an
underdrain (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL(S).  Any material(s) defined as hazardous by
Cal. Health & Safety Code Division 20, Chapter 6.95.



      HILLSIDE.  A property located in an area with known erosive soil
conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope
that is 25% or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes
(Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE.  Any man-made or modified surface that
prevents or significantly reduces the entry of water into the underlying
soil, resulting in runoff from the surface in greater quantities and/or at an
increased rate, when compared to natural conditions prior to development.
Examples of places that commonly exhibit IMPERVIOUS SURFACES include parking
lots, driveways, roadways, storage areas, and rooftops. The imperviousness of
these areas commonly results from paving, compacted gravel, compacted earth,
and oiled earth.



      INDUSTRIAL PARK.  Land development that is set aside for
industrial development. INDUSTRIAL PARKS are usually located close to
transport facilities, especially where more than one transport modalities
coincide: highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes
office parks, which have offices and light industry (Source: Order No.
R4-2012-0175).



      INFILTRATION BMP.  A LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by
capturing and infiltrating the runoff into in-situ soils or amended onsite
soils. Examples of INFILTRATION BMPs include infiltration basins, dry wells,
and pervious pavement (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      LID.  Low impact development. LID consists of building and
landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff (Source:
Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      MS4.  Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) . The MS4 is a
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels,
or storm drains):



         (a)   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough,
county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or
pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage,
industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts
under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage
district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian
tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under §
208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;



         (b)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater;



         (c)   Which is not a combined sewer; and



         (d)   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment
works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2.  (40 CFR § 122.26(b)(8))
(Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175)



      NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES).  means
the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing,
terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing
pretreatment requirements, under CWA § 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term
includes an “approved program” (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      NATURAL DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  A drainage system that has not been
improved (e.g., channelized or armored). The clearing or dredging of a
natural drainage system does not cause the system to be classified as an
improved drainage system (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      NEW DEVELOPMENT.  Land disturbing activities; structural
development, including construction or installation of a building or
structure, creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision (Source:
Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE.  Any discharge to a municipal storm
drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater (Source: Order No.
R4-2012-0175).



      PARKING LOT.  Land area or facility for the parking or storage
of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use,
with a lot size of 5,000 square feet or more of surface area, or with 25 or
more parking spaces (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, state,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the
feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.



      PLANNING PRIORITY PROJECTS.  Development projects subject to
permittee conditioning and approval for the design and implementation of
post-construction controls to mitigate stormwater pollution, prior to
completion of the project(s) (Modified from: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      POLLUTANT.  Any “pollutant” defined in § 502(6) of the
Federal Clean Water Act or incorporated into the Cal. Water Code § 13373.
POLLUTANTS may include, but are not limited to the following:



         (a)   Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels,
solvents, detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers,
pesticides, slag, ash, and sludge).



         (b)   Metals (such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper,
silver, nickel, chromium, and non- metals such as phosphorus and arsenic).



         (c)   Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants,
surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants, and grease).



         (d)   Excessive eroded soil, sediment, and particulate
materials in amounts that may adversely affect the beneficial use of the
receiving waters, flora, or fauna of the state.



         (e)   Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement
facilities, kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables, and show
facilities).



         (f)   Substances having characteristics such as pH less
than six or greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or
excessive levels of fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus.



      PROJECT.  All development, redevelopment, and land disturbing
activities. The term is not limited to “Project” as defined under CEQA
(Pub. Resources Code § 21065) (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      RAINFALL HARVEST AND USE.  A LID BMP system designed to capture
runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from
elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the
harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested
water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes
disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building
department (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      RECEIVING WATER.  Water of the United States into which waste
and/or pollutants are or may be discharged (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      REDEVELOPMENT.  Land-disturbing activity that results in the
creation, addition, or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious
surface area on an already developed site. REDEVELOPMENT includes, but is not
limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of
a structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of
routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activity related to
structural or impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to
maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of
facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to
immediately protect public health and safety (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      REGIONAL BOARD.  The California Regional Water Quality Control
Board, Los Angeles Region.



      RESTAURANT.  A facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for
consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands
selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC Code 5812)
(Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      RETAIL GASOLINE OUTLET.  Any facility engaged in selling
gasoline and lubricating oils (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE.  Routine maintenance projects include, but
are not limited to projects conducted to:



         (a)   Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, or original purpose of the facility;



         (b)   Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the
original design grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control
facilities;



         (c)   Includes road shoulder work, re-grading dirt or
gravel roadways and shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts;



         (d)   Update existing lines* and facilities to comply
with applicable codes, standards, and regulations regardless if such projects
result in increased capacity; and



         (e)   Repair leaks.



      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE does not include construction of new** lines
or facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and
regulations.



*   Update existing lines includes replacing existing lines with new
materials or pipes.



**   New lines are those that are not associated with existing facilities
and are not part of a project to update or replace existing lines (Source:
Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      SIGNIFICANT ECOLOGICAL AREAS (SEAs).  An area that is determined
to possess an example of biotic resources that cumulatively represent
biological diversity, for the purposes of protecting biotic diversity, as
part of the Los Angeles County General Plan. Areas are designated as SEAs ,
if they possess one or more of the following criteria:



         (a)   The habitat of rare, endangered, and threatened
plant and animal species;



         (b)   Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and
habitat of plant and animal species that are either one of a kind, or are
restricted in distribution on a regional basis;



         (c)   Biotic communities, vegetative associations, and
habitat of plant and animal species that are either one of a kind or are
restricted in distribution in Los Angeles County;



         (d)   Habitat that at some point in the life cycle of a
species or group of species, serves as a concentrated breeding, feeding,
resting, migrating grounds and is limited in availability either regionally
or within Los Angeles County;



         (e)   Biotic resources that are of scientific interest
because they are either an extreme in physical/geographical limitations, or
represent an unusual variation in a population or community;



         (f)   Areas important as game species habitat or as
fisheries.



         (g)   Areas that would provide for the preservation of
relatively undisturbed examples of natural biotic communities in Los Angeles
County; or



         (h)   Special areas (Source: Order No. R4-2012-0175).



      SITE.  Land or water area where any “facility or activity”
is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in
connection with the facility or activity (Source: Order No. R42012-0175).



      STORM DRAIN SYSTEM.  Any facilities or any part of those
facilities, including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial
drains, channels, and watercourses that are used for the purpose of
collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater and are located
within the City of Baldwin Park.



      STORM WATER or STORMWATER.  Water that originates from
atmospheric moisture (rain or snow) and that falls onto land, water, or other
surfaces. Without any change in its meaning, this term may be spelled or
written as one word or two separate words.



      STORMWATER RUNOFF.  That part of precipitation (rainfall or
snowmelt) which travels across a surface to the storm drain system or
receiving waters.



      SUSMP.  The Los Angeles Countywide Standard Urban Stormwater
Mitigation Plan. The SUSMP was required as part of the previous Municipal
NPDES Permit (Order No. 01-182, NPDES No. CAS004001) and required plans that
designate best management practices (BMPs) that must be used in specified
categories of development projects.



      URBAN RUNOFF.  Surface water flow produced by storm and
non-storm events. Non-storm events include flow from residential, commercial,
or industrial activities involving the use of potable and non-potable water.



   (B)   Stormwater pollution control measures for development planning
and construction activities.



      (1)   Objective. The provisions of this section contain
requirements for construction activities and facility operations of
development and redevelopment projects to comply with the current
“Municipal NPDES permit,” lessen the water quality impacts of development
by using smart growth practices, and integrate LID design principles to mimic
predevelopment hydrology through infiltration, evapotranspiration and
rainfall harvest and use. LID shall be inclusive of SUSMP requirements.



      (2)   Scope. This section contains requirements for stormwater
pollution control measures in development and redevelopment projects and
authorizes the City of Baldwin Park to further define and adopt stormwater
pollution control measures, develop LID principles and requirements,
including but not limited to the objectives and specifications for
integration of LID strategies, grant waivers from the requirements of the
Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan, and collect funds for projects
that are granted waivers. Except as otherwise provided herein, the City of
Baldwin Park shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
section.



      (3)   Applicability. The following development and
redevelopment projects, termed “planning priority projects,” shall comply
with the requirements of this chapter:



         (a)   All development projects equal to 1 acre or
greater of disturbed area that adds more than 10,000 square feet of
impervious surface area.



         (b)   Industrial parks 10,000 square feet or more of
surface area.



         (c)   Commercial malls 10,000 square feet or more of
surface area.



         (d)   Retail gasoline outlets with 5,000 square feet or
more of surface area.



         (e)   Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) of 5812) with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.



         (f)   Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of
impervious surface area, or with 25 or more parking spaces.



         (g)   Streets and roads construction of 10,000 square
feet or more of impervious surface area.



         (h)   Automotive service facilities (Standard Industrial
Classification (SIC) of 5013, 5014, 551 1, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539)
5,000 square feet or more of surface area.



         (i)   Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or
discharging directly to an environmentally sensitive area (ESA), where the
development will:



            1.   Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to
impact a sensitive biological species or habitat; and



            2.   Create 2,500 square feet or more of
impervious surface area.



         (j)   Single-family hillside homes.



         (k)   Redevelopment projects.



            1.   Land disturbing activity that results in the
creation or addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of
impervious surface area on an already developed site on planning priority
project categories.



            2.   Where redevelopment results in an alteration
to more than 50% of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development,
and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater
quality control requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.



            3.   Where redevelopment results in an alteration
of less than 50% of impervious surfaces of a previously existing development,
and the existing development was not subject to post-construction stormwater
quality control requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not
the entire development.



            4.   Redevelopment does not include routine
maintenance activities that are conducted to maintain original line and
grade, hydraulic capacity, original purpose of facility or emergency
redevelopment activity required to protect public health and safety.
Impervious surface replacement, such as the reconstruction of parking lots
and roadways which does not disturb additional area and maintains the
original grade and alignment, is considered a routine maintenance activity.
Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing roads to maintain
original line and grade.



            5.   Existing single-family dwelling and accessory
structures are exempt from the Redevelopment requirements unless such
projects create, add, or replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surface
area.



      (4)   Effective date. The Planning and Land Development
requirements contained in § 7 of Order No. R4-2012-0175 shall become
effective March 1, 2014. This includes planning priority projects that are
discretionary permit projects or project phases that have not been deemed
complete for processing, or discretionary permit projects without vesting
tentative maps that have not requested and received an extension of
previously granted approvals within 90 days of March 1, 2014. Projects that
have been deemed complete within 90 days of March 1, 2014 are not subject to
the requirements of § 7.



      (5)   Stormwater pollution control requirements. The site for
every planning priority project shall be designed to control pollutants,
pollutant loads, and runoff volume to the maximum extent feasible by
minimizing impervious surface area and controlling runoff from impervious
surfaces through infiltration, evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or
rainfall harvest and use.



         (a)   A new single-family hillside home development
shall include mitigation measures to:



            1.   Conserve natural areas;



            2.   Protect slopes and channels;



            3.   Provide storm drain system stenciling and
signage;



            4.   Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before
discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and



            5.   Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before
discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability.



         (b)   Street and road construction of 10,000 square feet
or more of impervious surface shall follow USEPA guidance regarding Managing
Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green Streets (December 2008
EPA-833-F-08-009) to the maximum extent practicable.



         (c)   The remainder of planning priority projects shall
prepare a LID plan to comply with the following:



            1.   Retain stormwater runoff onsite for the
stormwater quality design volume (SWQDv) defined as the runoff from:



               a.   The 85th percentile 24-hour runoff
event as determined from the Los Angeles County 85th percentile precipitation
isohyetal map; or



               b.   The volume of runoff produced from a
0.75 inch, 24-hour rain event, whichever is greater.



            2.   When, as determined by the City Engineer,
100% onsite retention of the SWQDv is technically infeasible, partially or
fully, the infeasibility shall be demonstrated in the submitted LID plan. The
technical infeasibility may result from conditions that may include, but are
not limited to:



               a.   The infiltration rate of saturated
in-situ soils is less than 0.3 inch per hour and it is not technically
feasible to amend the in-situ soils to attain an infiltration rate necessary
to achieve reliable performance of infiltration or bioretention BMPs in
retaining the SWQDv onsite.



               b.   Locations where seasonal high
groundwater is within five to ten feet of surface grade;



               c.   Locations within 100 feet of a
groundwater well used for drinking water;



               d.   Brownfield development sites or other
locations where pollutant mobilization is a documented concern;



               e.   Locations with potential geotechnical
hazards;



               f.   Smart growth and infill or
redevelopment locations where the density and/ or nature of the project would
create significant difficulty for compliance with the onsite volume retention
requirement.



            3.   If partial or complete onsite retention is
technically infeasible, the project site may biofiltrate 1.5 times the
portion of the remaining SWQDv that is not reliably retained onsite.



               a.   Biofiltration BMPs must adhere to the
design specifications provided in the Municipal NPDES permit.



               b.   Additional alternative compliance
options such as offsite infiltration may be available to the project site.
The project site should contact the Department of Public Works to determine
eligibility. Alternative compliance options are further specified in city’s
Living Street Manual.



            4.   The remaining SWQDv that cannot be retained
or biofiltered onsite must be treated onsite to reduce pollutant loading.
BMPs must be selected and designed to meet pollutant-specific benchmarks as
required per the Municipal NPDES Permit. Flow-through BMPs may be used to
treat the remaining SWQDv and must be sized based on a rainfall intensity of:



               a.   0.2 inches per hour; or



               b.   The one year, one-hour rainfall
intensity as determined from the most recent Los Angeles County isohyetal
map, whichever is greater.



            5.   A multi-phased project may comply with the
standards and requirements of this section for all of its phases by: (a)
designing a system acceptable to the Department of Public Works to satisfy
these standards and requirements for the entire site during the first phase,
and (b) implementing these standards and requirements for each phase of
development or redevelopment of the site during the first phase or prior to
commencement of construction of a later phase, to the extent necessary to
treat the stormwater from such later phase. For purposes of this section,
MULTI-PHASED PROJECT shall mean any planning priority project implemented
over more than one phase and the site of a multi-phased project shall include
any land and water area designed and used to store, treat or manage
stormwater runoff in connection with the development or redevelopment,
including any tracts, lots, or parcels of real property, whether developed or
not, associated with, functionally connected to, or under common ownership or
control with such development or redevelopment.



      (6)   Other agencies of the City of Baldwin Park. All City of
Baldwin Park Departments, offices, entities and agencies, shall establish
administrative procedures necessary to implement the provisions of this
article on their development and redevelopment projects and report their
activities annually to the Department of Public Works.



      (7)   Validity. If any provision of this code is found to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any cdurt of competent jurisdiction,
such invalidity shall not affect remaining provisions of this code are
declared to be severable.



      (8)   Certification. The City Clerk shall certify to the
passage of this code and have it published inaccordance with Council policy.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02; Am. Ord. 1363, passed 2-19-14)



§ 52.14  FEES.



   Fees to be charged for plan checking, inspection, enforcement and any
other activities carried out by the city under this chapter shall be
specified by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.15  INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Inspections. The Chief Executive Officer or the Director, or
any designee thereof, may, on 24 hour oral or written notice, unless exigent
circumstances justify a shorter time period, enter upon and inspect any
private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter. Such inspection may include, but is not limited
to:



      (1)   Identifying products produced, processes conducted,
chemicals and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises;



      (2)   Identifying points of discharge of all waste water,
non-storm water, processed water systems and pollutants;



      (3)   Investigating the natural slope of the premises,
including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems;



      (4)   Establishing location of all points of discharge from
the premises, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;



      (5)   Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge;



      (6)   Inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank or other
mobile equipment;



      (7)   Inspecting all records of the owner or occupant of
public or private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or
previously stored or occurring on the property, including material and/or
chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material
safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution
prevention plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm
water pollution prevention plans, state general permits, storm water
pollution prevention plans, and any and all records relating to illicit
connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or
potential contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system;



      (8)   Inspecting, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils
area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials with any
waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment
system discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for
contribution of pollutants the municipal storm drain system;



      (9)   Inspecting the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary
sewer systems any connection to other pipelines on the property, including
the use of dye and smoke tests, video surveys, photographs or videotapes, and
the taking of measurements, drawings, or any other records reasonably
necessary to document conditions as they exist on the premises;



      (10)   Installing and maintaining of monitoring devices for
the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to
the municipal storm drain system;



      (11)   Evaluating compliance with this chapter or the Clean
Water Act.



   (B)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable by either a fine of up to $1,000 or six months in the County
Jail, or both.



      (2)   Any person who may otherwise be charged with a
misdemeanor as a result of a violation of this chapter may be charged, at the
discretion of the Prosecuting Attorney, with an infraction punishable by a
fine of not more than $100 for the first violation, $200 for the second
violation, and $250 for each additional violation thereafter.



      (3)   As a part of any sentence or other penalty imposed or
the award of any damage, the Court may also order that restitution be paid to
the city or any injured person, or, in the case of a violator who is a minor,
by the minor's parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian.
Restitution may include the amount of any reward.



      (4)   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter
shall reimburse the city for any and all costs incurred by the city in
responding to, investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning,
removing, or remediating any illicit discharge or pollutant from the
municipal storm drain system; rectifying any illicit connection; or
remediating any violation of this chapter. Such costs to be paid to the city
include all administrative expenses and all legal expenses, including costs
and attorneys' fees, in obtaining compliance, and in litigation including all
costs and attorneys' fees on any appeal. The costs to be recovered in this
section shall be recoverable from any and all persons violating this chapter.



      (5)   In the event any violation of this chapter constitutes
an imminent danger to public health, safety, or the environment, the Chief
Executive Officer or Director, or any authorized agent thereof, may enter
upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and
danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any
premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from
the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include but
is not limited to exigent circumstances created by the discharge of
pollutants, where such discharge presents a significant and immediate threat
to the public health or safety, or the environment.



      (6)   Any person acting in violation of this chapter may also
be acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the California
Porter-Cologne Act (Cal. Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.) and the regulations
thereunder, and other laws and regulations, and may be subject to damages,
fines and penalties, including civil liability under such other laws. The
City Attorney is authorized to file a citizen's suit pursuant to the Clean
Water Act, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and
appropriate relief.



      (7)   The City Attorney is authorized to file in a court of
competent jurisdiction a civil action seeking an injunction against any
violation or threatened or continuing violation of this chapter. Any
temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may
include an order for reimbursement to the city for all costs incurred in
enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation,
monitoring, treatment, abatement, removal or remediation undertaken by or at
the expense of the city, and may include all legal expenses and fees and any
of all costs incurred relating to the restoration or remediation of the
environment.



      (8)   Each separate discharge in violation of this chapter and
each day a violation of this chapter exists, without correction, shall
constitute a new and separate violation punishable as a separate infraction,
misdemeanor and/or civil violation.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.16  NOTICES OF VIOLATION.



   (A)   Immediate notification. Any person who intentionally,
negligently or otherwise violates any provision of this chapter resulting in
a discharge of a pollutant or pollutants to the municipal storm drain system
shall immediately notify the Director or his or her designee by telephone or
in person, and shall identify at that time the location of the discharge, the
date and time of the discharge, the type and concentration of the volume of
pollutant discharged, as well as any collective action taken as a result of
the illicit discharge. Written notification of such discharge information
shall thereafter be provided to the Director or his or her designee within 48
hours of the discharge.



   (B)   Written report. All persons violating this chapter shall,
within ten calendar days after any such discharge of a pollutant or
pollutants, file with the Director a detailed written report describing the
cause of the discharge, the date and time of the discharge, the type,
concentration and volume of material discharged, the location of the
discharge, any specific information necessary in connection with the location
to fully explain the potential impacts from the discharge, and any corrective
action or other measures taken in connection with the discharge, including
any measures taken to prevent similar discharges in the future. Submission of
this written report shall not be deemed to be a waiver or release of any
person for liability, fines or other obligations imposed under this chapter,
or otherwise in the city's code or under state or federal law.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.17  NUISANCE.



   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, violations of
this chapter may further be deemed to be a public nuisance, which may be
abated by administrative, civil, or criminal action in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this code and state law.



   (B)   All costs and fees incurred by the city as a result of any
violation of this chapter which constitute a nuisance, including all
administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a
lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated and a
personal obligation against the owner, in accordance with Cal. Gov't Code
§§ 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the premises subject to any
lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording, as required by Cal.
Gov't Code § 38773.1. The City Attorney is authorized to collect nuisance
abatement costs and enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money
judgment, or by delivery to the County Assessor of a special assessment
against the premises in accordance with the conditions and requirements of
Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.18  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.



   Any remedies provided to the city in this chapter are not exclusive,
and the city may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided by
law.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



§ 52.19  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER IS NOT COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.



   Compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this chapter
shall not relieve any such person or entity from complying with other
applicable local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements.



(Ord. 1193, passed 8-21-02)



CHAPTER 53:  CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   53.01   Definitions



   53.02   Threshold of covered projects



Materials Management Plan



   53.10   Submission



   53.11   Diversion security deposits



   53.12   Review



   53.13   Compliance



   53.14   Exemptions



   53.15   Appeal



   53.16   Violation



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 53.01     DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meaning
ascribed by Cal. Pub. Res. Code, §§ 40000, Chapter 2, Part 1, Division 30
et seq., and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management
Board, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions found in the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901, et
seq. and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended from time
to time.



   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, limited liability company, association,
partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality,
industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who
applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction,
demolition, or renovation project within the city.  An APPLICANT must comply
with this chapter.



   CITY-SPONSORED PROJECT. A project constructed by the city or a project
receiving 50% or more of its financing from the city.



   CONSTRUCTION. The building of any facility or structure or any portion
thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or
structure. Construction does not include a project limited to interior
plumbing work, interior electrical work or interior mechanical work.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DIVERSION SECURITY DEPOSIT or DIVERSION
SECURITY DEPOSIT. Any performance bonds, surety bond, money order, letter of
credit, cash, certified check or certificate of deposit in a form acceptable
to the city, submitted to the city as pursuant to § 53.04.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN or C&DMMP.  A
completed C&DMMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance
with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project.



   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTES OR MATERIALS or C&D WASTES OR
MATERIALS. Waste building materials, packaging and rubble resulting from
construction, remodeling, renovation, repair and demolition operations on
pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures.



   CONVERSION RATE. The rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate
table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the
volume or weight of materials identified in a Construction and Demolition
Materials Management Plan.



   COVERED PROJECT. All projects which require a permit pursuant to
Chapter 150 of this Code, unless exempted by § 53.14(B).



   DECONSTRUCTION. A process to dismantle or remove useable materials from
structures, in a manner that maximizes the recovery of building materials for
reuse and recycling and minimizes the amount of waste transported for
disposal in landfills and transformation facilities.



   DEMOLITION. The destruction, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking
of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in
part, whether interior or exterior.



   DIVERSION REQUIREMENT. The diversion of at least 50% of the total
construction and demolition materials generated by a covered project by reuse
or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to
§ 53.14.  If the applicant has been granted an exemption, the diversion
requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the
Environmental Compliance Official for the project.



   DIVERT or DIVERSION. The activities, which reduce or eliminate the
amount of C&D material from disposal in a landfill or transformation
facility. 



   ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL. The designee of the Director of
Public Works.



   EXEMPT PROJECT shall have the meaning set forth in § 53.14(B).



   FEASIBLE shall have the meaning ascribed by Cal. Pub. Res. Code §
21061.1, as it, from time to time, may be amended.



   PROJECT. Any activity, for which a permit for building, demolition,
parking area construction or other permit is required. See also COVERED
PROJECT.



   RECYCLING.  The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating,
and reconstituting materials that would otherwise be solid waste, and the
return of those materials to the economic mainstream in the form of materials
which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace for
new, reused, or reconstituted products. 



   RENOVATION. Any change, addition, or modification in an existing
structure that requires a building permit or demolition permit but does not
include a project limited to interior plumbing work, electrical work or
mechanical work. 



   REUSE. Further or repeated use of construction or demolition materials.



   SALVAGE.  The controlled removal of construction or demolition
materials from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of
recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



§ 53.02  THRESHOLD OF COVERED PROJECTS.



   (A)   Covered projects. Except as otherwise provided in this Code,
each applicant for a permit required by Chapter 150 of the Baldwin Park
Municipal Code shall also complete and submit a Construction and Demolition
Materials Management Plan (C&DMMP), unless the project is an exempt project,
as defined below. On and after September 1, 2003 no building or demolition
permit shall be issued by the Building Official unless the applicant for a
construction or demolition permit for a covered project has submitted to the
Building Official a Construction and Demolition Materials Management Plan
approved by the City’s Environmental Compliance Official pursuant to §
53.12.



   (B)   City-sponsored projects. Except as provided herein, all
city-sponsored construction, demolition, and renovation projects shall be
considered “covered projects” and shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter. Prior to the start of any city-sponsored
construction or demolition activities, a Construction and Demolition
Materials Management Plan shall be prepared by the contractor.  The city is
not required to submit a diversion security deposit for city-sponsored
covered projects. City-sponsored demolition or construction required to
protect public health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Cal. Pub. Res.
Code § 21060.3, as it, from time to time, may be amended, is not a covered
project.



   (C)   Compliance as a condition of approval. Compliance with the
provisions of this chapter shall be included as a condition of approval on
any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLAN



§ 53.10  SUBMISSION.



   (A)   Plan contents. Each applicant for a permit for any covered
project shall complete and submit a Construction and Demolition Materials
Management Plan (C&DMMP), on a C&DMMP form approved by the city for this
purpose with any application for the building or demolition permit for a
covered project.  The completed C&DMMP shall indicate all of the following:



      (1)   The estimated volume or weight of the project C&D
material, by material type, to be generated;



      (2)   The maximum volume or weight of C&D materials that is
feasible to divert; 



      (3)   The vendor or facility where the applicant proposes to
use to collect, divert, market, reuse or receive that material; and



      (4)   The estimated volume or weight of residual C&D materials
that would be transported for disposal in a landfill or transformation
facility.



   (B)   Calculating volume and weight of material. In estimating the
volume or weight of materials identified in the C&DMMP, the applicant shall
use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city of this purpose.



   (C)   Deconstruction. In preparing the C&DMMP, applicants for
building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an
existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent
feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for
salvage prior to being transported for disposal in a landfill or
transformation facility.  Deconstruction can be used to meet the 50%
diversion requirement provided it is accounted for in the C&DMMP.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



§ 53.11  DIVERSION SECURITY DEPOSITS.



   Except as set forth in division (C) below, each applicant for a permit
for a covered project shall submit, along with the C&DMMP, a diversion
security deposit in accordance with  the following:



   (A)   For a covered project with a valuation of $10,000 to $200,000,
the amount of the diversion security deposit shall be equal to 0.5% of the
total project valuation, but not less than $250.



   (B)   For a covered project with a valuation of greater than
$200,000, the amount of the diversion security deposit shall be equal to 3%
of the total project valuation.



   (C)   For city projects, no deposit shall be required, but the
contractor must show evidence of compliance and adherence to the C&DMMP prior
to receiving payment of the final retention amount for the project.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03; Am. Ord. 1288, passed 8-2-06; Am. Ord. 1357,
passed 3-20-13)



§ 53.12  REVIEW.



   (A)   Approval. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code,
no building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project
unless and until the Environmental Compliance Official has reviewed the
C&DMMP.  Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency
demolition is required to protect public health or safety as deemed so by the
City Building Official. The Environmental Compliance Official shall only
approve a C&DMMP if he or she determines that all of the following conditions
have been met:



      (1)   The C&DMMP provides all of the information set forth in
§ 53.10(A);



      (2)   The C&DMMP indicates that at least 50% of all C&D
materials generated by the project will be diverted, or an exemption has been
approved pursuant to § 53.14(D); and



      (3)   The applicant has submitted an appropriate diversion
security deposit in compliance with § 53.11.



      (4)   If the Environmental Compliance Official determines that
these three conditions have been met, they shall mark the C&DMMP
“approved,” return a copy of the C&DMMP to the applicant, and notify the
Building Official and the Environmental Services Division that the C&DMMP has
been approved.



   (B)   Nonapproval. If the Environmental Compliance Official
determines that the C&DMMP is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least
50% of all C&D materials generated by the project will be reused or recycled,
the Environmental Compliance Official shall either:



      (1)   Return the C&DMMP to the applicant marked “denied,”
including a statement of reasons, and so notify the Building Official, which
shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit
application;



      (2)   Return the C&DMMP to the applicant marked “further
explanation required,” including a statement of reasons, and so notify the
Building Official, which shall then immediately stop processing the building
or demolition permit application. If, during the course of the project, the
applicant determines that the estimated tonnage of C&D material to be
generated and/or recovered from the project is substantially different from
the C&DMMP, the applicant shall submit an addendum to the original C&DMMP.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



§ 54.13  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Documentation of C&D material diversion. Within 90 days after
the completion of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the
Environmental Compliance Official documentation that it has met the diversion
requirement for the project.  The applicant shall provide a summary of
efforts used to meet the diversion requirement and also provide the following
documentation:



      (1)   Receipts and gate tickets from the vendor or facility,
which collected or received C&D material showing the actual weight or volume
of that material;



      (2)   A copy of the previously approved C&DMMP for the project
adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and transported
for disposal in a landfill or transformation facility; and



      (3)   Any additional information the applicant believes is
relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.



   (B)   Weighing of C&D materials. Applicants shall make reasonable
efforts to ensure that all C&D material diverted or landfilled are measured
and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available.  To
the extent feasible, all C&D materials shall be weighed by measurement of
scales.  Such scales shall be in compliance with all state and county
regulatory requirements of accuracy and maintenance. For C&D materials for
which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a
volumetric measurement shall be used.  For conversion of volumetric
measurements by weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion
rates approved by the city for this purpose.



   (C)   Determination of compliance and release of diversion security
deposit. The Environmental Compliance Official shall review the information
submitted under division (A) above, and determine whether the applicant has
complied with the Construction and Demolition Materials Management Plan as
follows:



      (1)   Full compliance. If the Environmental Compliance
Official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the
Construction and Demolition Materials Management Plan applicable to the
project, the Environmental Compliance Official shall cause the full diversion
security deposit to be released to the applicant.



      (2)   Good faith effort to comply. If the Environmental
Compliance Official determines that the Construction and Demolition Materials
Management Plan has not been complied with, the Environmental Compliance
Official shall determine whether the applicant made a good faith effort to
comply with this chapter.  In making this determination, the Environmental
Compliance Official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D
materials transported for disposal in a landfill or transformation facility,
the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to
divert C&D materials.  If the Environmental Compliance Official determines
that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter,
the Environmental Compliance Official shall approve the release of the
diversion security deposit, or a portion thereof, to the applicant. Any
portion of the diversion security deposit not released to the applicant shall
be forfeited to the city, and shall be used for the purposes of promoting
recycling within the city.



      (3)   Noncompliance. If the Environmental Compliance Official
determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with
this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required
by division (A) above, within the required time period, then the diversion
security deposit shall be retained by the city.



      (4)   Partial refund. The Environmental Compliance Official
may authorize a partial refund when less than 50% by weight of the
construction and demolition material generated by the project was diverted
from disposal at a landfill or transformation facility.  Any partial refund
shall be in the same ratio as the demonstrated amount of diverted waste bears
to 50% by weight of the total.



      (5)   Issuance of certificate of occupancy. The Building
Department may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy prior to submittal
by the applicant of all documentation required by this section.  The
certificate of occupancy may be finalized upon receipt of all documentation.



      (6)   Refund of diversion security deposit. The Environmental
Compliance Official shall authorize the refund of any diversion security
deposit if the building or demolition permit application is withdrawn or
cancelled before any work has begun.



      (7)   All diversion security deposits retained by the city
shall be used only for:



         (a)   Payment of diversion security deposit refunds;



         (b)   Costs of administration of the program established
by this chapter; and



         (c)   Cost of programs to achieve diversion of C&D
materials from disposal at landfill or transformation facilities.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



§ 53.14  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Application for an exemption. If an applicant
believes it is not feasible to comply with the diversion requirements of this
chapter due to the circumstances delineated in this section, the applicant
may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the required
C&DMMP. Exemptions may be granted based on the approval of the Environmental
Compliance Official and the following considerations:



         (a)   Lack of storage space onsite;



         (b)   Contamination by hazardous substances; or



         (c)   Low recyclability of specific materials.



      (2)   The applicant shall indicate on the C&DMMP the maximum
rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the
specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply
with the diversion requirement.



   (B)   Exempt projects. No Construction and Demolition Materials
Management Plan shall be required for any of the following:



      (1)   Work for which a building permit is not required by this
Code;



      (2)   Work for which a demolition permit is not required by
this Code;



      (3)   Projects for which only a plumbing permit, electrical
permit or mechanical permit is required;



      (4)   Roofing projects that do not include removal of the
existing roof; or



      (5)   Demolition or construction required to protect public
health or safety in an emergency, as defined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code §
21060.3.



   (C)   Meeting with the Environmental Compliance Official. The
Environmental Compliance Official shall review the information supplied by
the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of
meeting the division requirement.  The Environmental Compliance Official may
request that staff from the Environmental Services Division attend this
meeting or may require the applicant to request a separate meeting with
Environmental Services Division staff.  Based on the information supplied by
the applicant and, if applicable, Environmental Services Staff, the
Environmental Compliance Official shall determine whether it is possible for
the applicant to meet the division requirement.



   (D)   Granting of exemption. If the Environmental Compliance
Official determines that it is in-feasible for the applicant to meet the
diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine
the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this
rate on the C&DMMP submitted by the applicant.  The Environmental Compliance
Official shall return a copy of the C&DMMP to the applicant marked
“approved exemption” and shall notify the Building Official that the
C&DMMP has been approved.



   (E)   Denial of exemption. If the Environmental Compliance Official
determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion
requirement, he or she shall inform the applicant in writing. The applicant
shall have 30 days to resubmit a C&DMMP form in full compliance with §
53.10(A). If the applicant fails to resubmit the C&DMMP, or if the
resubmitted C&DMMP does not comply with § 53.10(A), the Environmental
Compliance Official shall deny the C&DMMP.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



§ 53.15  APPEAL.



   (A)   Right to appeal. Each applicant shall have the right to appeal
any decision made by the Environmental Compliance Official to the Director of
Public Works, in accordance with § 53.14(C). Notice of any appeal from the
ruling of the Environmental Compliance Official must be filed within ten days
of the date that such ruling is made.



   (B)   Decision by chief executive officer. Each applicant shall have
the right to appeal any decisions made by the Director of Public Works to the
Chief Executive Officer, in accordance with § 53.14(C).  The decision made
by the Chief Executive Officer shall be in writing, stating the legal and
factual basis for the decision.  The decision shall be final and conclusive,
and shall not be appealable to the City Council or to any other city body or
official.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



§ 53.16  VIOLATION.



   (A)   Civil action. Violation of any provision of this chapter may
be enforced by any means available to the city, including, but not limited
to, an action for injunctive relief.  In any civil enforcement action,
administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its
attorney’s fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of
competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.



   (B)   Infraction. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
is hereby declared an infraction punishable in accordance with § 10.99 of
this Code.    An applicant shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted by the applicant.  Where the violation is the
failure to achieve the diversion requirement applicable to the project and
the C&D materials from the project have already been landfilled, the
violation shall be deemed to have ceased after a period of ten days.



   (C)   Enforcement.  The city through its Environmental Compliance
Official and the City Attorney may undertake enforcement.



(Ord. 1214, passed 10-15-03)



TITLE VII:  TRAFFIC CODE



Chapter



   70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS



   71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



   72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



   73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



   74.   PARKING SCHEDULES



CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General Provisions



   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Obstruction or interference with police or authorized
officers



   70.03   Public employees to obey traffic regulations



   70.04   Exemption of certain vehicles



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.15   Authority to install traffic-control devices



   70.16   Installation of traffic signals



   70.17   Lane marking



   70.18   Distinctive roadway markings



   70.19   Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue
traffic-control signals



   70.20   Hours of operation



   70.21   Unauthorized painting of curbs



   70.22   Authority to place turning markers



   70.23   Authority to place restricted turn sign



   70.24   Right turns at signal controlled intersections



   70.25   Sign erection for one-way streets and alleys



   70.26   Stop sign erection



   70.27   Regulation of speed by traffic signals



   70.28   Establishment of marked crosswalks



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see Ch. 90



   Emergency response cost recovery for accidents in which alcohol or
drugs involved, see §§ 38.30 et seq.



   Taxicabs, see Ch. 123



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Whenever any words and phrases used in this title are not defined, but are
defined in the Vehicle Code of the state and amendments thereto, such
definitions shall apply.



   CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER.  The Director of Public Works.



   COACH.  Any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger
stage used as a common carrier of passengers.



   CURB.  The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked
by curbing, construction, or is not so marked.  CURB, as used in this title,
includes the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the
center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility
companies.



   DIVISIONAL ISLAND.  A raised island located in the roadway and
separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.



   HOLIDAYS.  Those designated pursuant to § 33.21.



   LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers or materials. 



   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in this
title, they mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current
use in this city.



   PARKING METER.  A mechanical device installed within or upon the curb
or sidewalk area, immediately adjacent to a parking space, for the purpose of
controlling the period of time occupancy of such parking meter space by any
vehicle. 



   PARKWAY.  That portion of a street other than a traveled roadway.



   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE.  The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot. 



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Police Department of this city
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests
for violations of traffic regulations.



   STOP.  Complete cessation of movement.



   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings and devices
placed on or adjacent to a street or highway for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, in accordance with Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21400 et
seq. 



   VEHICLE CODE.  The Vehicle Code of the state, as it now exists or may
hereinafter be amended.



('83 Code Ch. 10.04)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.02  OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OR AUTHORIZED OFFICERS.



   No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police
officer or other officer or employee of this city in his enforcement of the
provisions of this title.  The removal, obliteration or concealment of any
chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other
employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the
parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading
the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction.



('83 Code § 10.08.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.03  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this title shall apply to the operator of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state,
any county or city, and it is unlawful for any operator to violate any of the
provisions of this title except as otherwise permitted by law.



('83 Code § 10.08.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.04  EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the Police
or Fire Department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any
private ambulance which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle,
when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner
specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.



   (B)   The exemptions provided in division (A) of this section shall
not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from the obligation to
exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful
disregard of the safety of others.



   (C)   The provisions of this title, regulating the parking or
standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or
public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or
any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department
while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States
mail.



('83 Code § 10.08.030)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.15  AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall have the power and duty to
place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official
traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions
of this title.



   (B)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, for the effectiveness of
any provisions thereof, that the traffic-control devices be installed to give
notice to the public of the application of such law the Director of Public
Works is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices
subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable
thereto.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works may also place and maintain or
cause to place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may
deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but
he shall make the determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with the standards,
limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title.



('83 Code § 10.12.010)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



Statutory reference:



   Traffic signs, signals and markings, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21351 et
seq.



§ 70.16  INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is directed, subject to the
approval of the City Manager, to install and maintain official traffic
signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are
such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and
released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life
or property from exceptional hazard.



   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall ascertain and determine the
locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic
counts and other information as may be pertinent, and his determinations
therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and
safety standards and instructions set forth in the California Planning Manual
­ Part 8, Traffic, issued by the State Department of Transportation.



   (C)   Whenever the Director of Public Works installs and maintains
an official traffic signal at any intersection he shall likewise erect and
maintain at the intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic
approaching from all directions unless the street name signs have previously
been placed and are maintained at any such intersection.



('83 Code § 10.12.020)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.17  LANE MARKING.



   The Director of Public Works is authorized to mark centerlines and lane
lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled
by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the
highway.



('83 Code § 10.12.030)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.18  DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS.



   The Director of Public Works is authorized to place and maintain
distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those
streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or
other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side
of the markings or signs and markings.  The markings or signs and markings
shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department
of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.



('83 Code § 10.12.040)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.19  AUTHORITY TO REMOVE, RELOCATE AND DISCONTINUE TRAFFIC-CONTROL
SIGNALS.



   The Director of Public Works is authorized to remove, relocate or
discontinue, subject to the approval of the City Manager, the operation of
any traffic control signal not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or
this title whenever he determines in any particular case that the conditions
which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or obtain.



('83 Code § 10.12.050)



§ 70.20  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The Director of Public Works shall determine the hours and days during
which any traffic-control signal shall be in operation or be in effect,
except in those cases where the hours or days are specified in this title.



('83 Code § 10.12.060)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.21  UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS.



   (A)   No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any
street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply
to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied
with the provisions of this code relating thereto.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.12.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Curb markings, Cal. Veh. Code § 21458



§ 70.22  AUTHORITY TO PLACE TURNING MARKERS.



   When determined to be necessary by the Director of Public Works, he
shall place and maintain markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to
intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at
such intersections, and he shall locate and indicate more than one lane of
traffic from which vehicles may make right or left turns.



('83 Code § 10.16.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



Statutory reference:



   Turning movements, Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22101 and 22113



§ 70.23  AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGN.



   The Director of Public Works shall determine those intersections at
which vehicles should or should not make right, left or U-turns, and he shall
place proper signs at such intersections regulating the turns.



('83 Code § 10.16.020)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.24  RIGHT TURNS AT SIGNAL CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS.



   When the Director of Public Works determines that the making of right
turns against a traffic signal "STOP" indication would seriously interfere
with the safe and orderly flow of traffic, he shall place appropriate signs
prohibiting this traffic movement.



('83 Code § 10.16.030)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.25  SIGN ERECTION FOR ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.



   Whenever the Council designates any street or alley, for one-way
traffic, the Director of Public Works shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof.



('83 Code § 10.20.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



Statutory reference:



   One-way street designations, see Cal. Veh. Code § 21657



§ 70.26  STOP SIGN ERECTION.



   Whenever any street or portion thereof is designated as a through
street, or when the Council directs the installation of special stop signs,
the Director of Public Works shall erect and maintain stop signs on each and
every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof, and at such
other locations as may be designated by Council resolution.  Every such sign
shall conform with, and be placed as provided for in the Vehicle Code.



('83 Code § 10.24.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.27  REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.



   The Director of Public Works is authorized to regulate the timing of
traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and
safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise
applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect
appropriate signs giving notice thereof.



('83 Code § 10.56.020)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 70.28  ESTABLISHMENT OF MARKED CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall establish, designate and
maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices,
marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway where the Director of Public
Works determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the
roadway subject to the limitation contained in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be
established in any block which is less than 400 feet in length except by
direction of the City Manager.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works may place signs at or adjacent to
an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall
not cross except in the crosswalk so indicated.



('83 Code § 10.32.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



Statutory reference:



   Establishment of crosswalks, see Cal. Veh. Code § 21106



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   71.01   Driving through funeral procession



   71.02   New pavement and markings



   71.03   Entrance into intersection



   71.04   Limited access



   71.05   Driving on flood control channels prohibited



   71.06   Railway gates ­ driving through



Private Property



   71.15   Speed limit on private property



   71.16   California Vehicle Code ­ application



   71.17   Signs; erection



   71.18   Commercial vehicles using private driveways



Trucks and CommercialVehicles



   71.30   Advertising vehicles



   71.31   Designation of streets as truck routes



   71.32   Use required



   71.33   Exempt vehicles



Trains



   71.45   Trains not to block crossings



Pedestrians



   71.55   Use of crosswalks required



Statutory reference:



   Local traffic rules and regulations, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21100 et
seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 71.01  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.



   (A)   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles
comprising a funeral procession or a parade; provided, that the vehicles are
conspicuously so designated.  The directing of all vehicles and traffic on
any street over which the funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall
be subject to the orders of the Police Department.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.28.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.02  NEW PAVEMENT AND MARKINGS.



   (A)   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over
or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street
when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning
persons not to drive over or across the pavement or marking, or when any such
device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is
closed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.28.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  ENTRANCE INTO INTERSECTION.



   (A)   No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a
marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.28.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  LIMITED ACCESS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited
access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.28.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  DRIVING ON FLOOD CONTROL CHANNELS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall operate any vehicle upon any flood control
channel within the city which is owned, operated or under the control of
either the Los Angeles County Flood Control District or the United States
Corps of Engineers.  This section shall not apply to vehicles owned or in
the service of the United States Corps of Engineers, the Los Angeles County
Flood Control District or the city, nor shall it apply to the driving or
operating of a motor vehicle on the traveled portion of any public highway
crossing any such flood control channel.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.28.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.06  RAILWAY GATES ­ DRIVING THROUGH.



   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under
any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.52.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Trains not to block crossings, see § 71.45



PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 71.15  SPEED LIMIT ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle in a
private driveway in excess of 15 miles per hour when the owner of the drive
way or property has erected a sign giving notice thereof.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.60.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.16  CALIFORNIA VEHICLE CODE ­ APPLICATION.



   The provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to all of the
following private roads:



   (A)   Maine Park Plaza, located at the northeast corner of Ramona
Boulevard and Maine Avenue.



   (B)   Towne Center, located north of I-10 freeway and southeast of
Puente Avenue.



('83 Code § 10.64.010)  (Ord. 1043, passed -  -90)



§ 71.17  SIGNS; ERECTION.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply unless and until
signs are erected giving notice of the application thereto of the Vehicle
Code, as required pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 21107.6.



('83 Code § 10.64.020)  (Ord. 1043, passed -  -90)



§ 71.18  COMMERCIAL VEHICLES USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on
or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway
itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if the
owner has placed a sign or markings indicating that the use of the driveway
is prohibited.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, COMMERCIAL VEHICLE means a
vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.28.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Trucks and commercial vehicles, see §§ 71.30 et seq.



TRUCKS AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES



§ 71.30  ADVERTISING VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive any vehicle used for
commercial advertising purposes which is equipped with a sound-amplifying or
loud-speaking device upon any street or alley at any time.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.44.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.31  DESIGNATION OF STREETS AS TRUCK ROUTES.



   Whenever the City Council of this city designates and describes any
street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the Director of
Public Works is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate
signs as "Truck Routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum
gross weight limit of three tons.



('83 Code § 10.44.020)



Cross-reference:



   Commercial vehicles using private driveways, see § 71.18



   Parking of trucks, special use vehicles and the like, see § 72.21



   Loading and unloading, see §§ 72.35 et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Weight limits, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 35700 et seq.



§ 71.32  USE REQUIRED.



   When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross
weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none
other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons coming from a "Truck
Route" having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted
streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of
goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on
such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used
in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of
any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building
permit has previously been obtained therefor.



('83 Code § 10.44.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.33  EXEMPT VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission; or



   (B)   Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use
in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.



('83 Code § 10.44.040)



TRAINS



§ 71.45  TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK CROSSINGS.



   (A)   No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway
cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a
manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purpose of travel for a
period of time longer than ten minutes, except that this provision shall not
apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or
obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of
the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of
the accident.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.52.020)  (Ord. 925, passed -  -86)



Cross-reference:



   Railway gates ­ driving through, see § 71.06



PEDESTRIANS



§ 71.55  USE OF CROSSWALKS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, other than in a crosswalk
or at an intersection, if no crosswalk has been established.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.32.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Pedestrians, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 21950 et seq.



CHAPTER 72:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Application of regulations



   72.02   Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited



   72.03   Maintenance of no stopping zones and restricted parking zones



   72.04   No parking areas



   72.05   Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited



   72.06   Parking for demonstration



   72.07   Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets



   72.08   Washing or polishing vehicles



   72.09   Parking prohibited on narrow streets



   72.10   Parking on grades



   72.11   Parking adjacent to schools



   72.12   Emergency parking signs



   72.13   Parking time regulated



   72.14   Parking parallel



   72.15   Diagonal parking



   72.16   Parking space markings



   72.17   No stopping zones



   72.18   Parking on city property



   72.19   Parking for handicapped persons



   72.20   Parking of vehicles for sale or repair



   72.21   Parking of trucks, special use vehicles and the like



Loading and Unloading



   72.35   Authority to establish loading zones



   72.36   Curb markings to indicate stopping and parking regulations



   72.37   Effect of permission to load or unload



   72.38   Stopping, standing or parking



   72.39   Coach zones to be established



Parking on Private Property



   72.50   Prohibited



   72.51   Removal of vehicle



Parking Meters



   72.60   Parking meter zones



   72.61   Manner of installation



   72.62   Time of operation



   72.63   Operational procedure



   72.64   Parking meter fees



   72.65   Parking after time has expired



   72.66   Extension of time beyond limit



   72.67   Improper use of meter



   72.68   Deposit of coins in meter by unauthorized person



   72.69   Meters and standards free from obstructions



   72.70   Rule of evidence



   72.71   Use of money deposited in meters



Statutory reference:



   Stopping, standing and parking, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22500 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.



   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in
this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer
or official traffic-control device.



('83 Code § 10.36.010)



§ 72.02  STOPPING OR STANDING IN PARKWAYS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any
parkway.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.03  MAINTENANCE OF NO STOPPING ZONES AND RESTRICTED PARKING ZONES.



   The Director of Public Works is directed to maintain, by appropriate
signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking
areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.



('83 Code § 10.36.030)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 72.04  NO PARKING AREAS.



   No owner and/or operator of any motor vehicle shall stop, stand, park
or leave standing the vehicle in any of the following places, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or
signal:



   (A)   Within or along side of any divisional island, unless
authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs and markings.



   (B)   On any street or alley where the restricted use of the street
or alley or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or
construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground
utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the
use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the
movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the
parking of the vehicle would prohibit or interfere with the use or
movement.  Whenever authorized signs or markings are in place giving notice
that parking is prohibited on any street or alley, at any time during certain
hours on certain days, it shall be unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle at such locations during the prohibited times.  Any vehicle parked
in violation of this section shall be removed by towing and impounded at the
expense of the vehicle owner.



   (C)   At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately
opposite the midblock end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by
appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.



   (D)   At any place within 20 feet of the crosswalk at an
intersection when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface except that a bus may stop at a designated bus
stop.



   (E)   At any location where the Director of Public Works determines
that parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or
would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate
signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.



   (F)   At any location established by resolution of the Council as a
no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red
paint upon the curb surface.



   (G)   At the approaches to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign,
or official electric flashing device within a distance determined by the
Director of Public Works to be sufficient to permit a safe orderly movement
of traffic at the location of the traffic devices.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.040)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 923, passed - 
-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.05  USE OF STREETS FOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of
any vehicles shall store the vehicle upon any street or alley, for more than
a consecutive period of 72 hours.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.06  PARKING FOR DEMONSTRATION.



   (A)   No operator of any vehicle shall park the vehicle upon any
street in this city for the purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.07  REPAIRING OR GREASING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   (A)   No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, repair,
or cause to be repaired, grease, or cause to be greased, dismantle, or cause
to be dismantled, any vehicle or any part thereof, upon any public street or
alley in this city; except for temporary emergency repairs.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.08  WASHING OR POLISHING VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to
be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street or alley
in this city.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.09  PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to place signs or
markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway
does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such
signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.10  PARKING ON GRADES.



   (A)   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended
on a highway when upon any grade exceeding 3% without blocking the wheels of
the vehicles by turning them against the curb or by other means.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.11  PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to erect signs
indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.110)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 72.12  EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS.



   (A)   Whenever the Director of Public Works determines that an
emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public
or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the
Director shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Director of Public
Works directs during the time the temporary signs are in place.  The signs
shall remain in place only during the existence of the emergency and the
Director shall cause signs to be removed promptly thereafter.



   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any
vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of the signs.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.130)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.13  PARKING TIME REGULATED.



   (A)   Twenty-minute parking.



      (1)   Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a
period of time longer than 20 minutes at any time between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays.



      (2)   When authorized signs or curb markings have been placed
in areas designated by the Director of Public Works, giving notice thereof,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle
adjacent to any such area for a period of time in excess of 20 minutes.



('83 Code, § 10.36.140)



   (B)   One-hour parking.  When authorized signs or curb markings
have been placed in areas designated by the Director of Public Works, giving
notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the
vehicle in such areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day
except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than one hour.



('83 Code § 10.36.150)



   (C)   Two-hour parking.



      (1)   When authorized signs and curb markings have been placed
in areas designated by the Director of Public Works, giving notice thereof,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park the vehicle in such
areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., of any day except Sundays
and holidays, for a period of time longer than two hours, unless the vehicle
displays a valid city permit, as provided for by this section.



      (2)   The residents of any area designated as limited to
two-hour parking may apply to the city for a permit to park without
limitation or restriction regardless of time of day or duration of said
stopping, standing or parking.



      (3)   The areas designated as restricted to two-hour parking
pursuant to this section are set forth in Chapter 74, Schedule I.



('83 Code § 10.36.160)



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



(Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1165, passed 8-16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 72.14  PARKING PARALLEL.



   (A)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle
shall be stopped or parked within 18 inches of the curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any street unless signs are in place
prohibiting such stopping or standing.



   (B)   In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways
and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person
shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway
unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.



   (C)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to determine when
standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any
one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the
left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more
separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.



   (D)   The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section
shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in
the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case the
vehicle does not extend beyond the centerline of the street and does not
block traffic thereby.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.170)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.15  DIAGONAL PARKING.



   (A)   On any of the streets or portions of streets established by
resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement
markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it is unlawful for
the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle except:



      (1)   At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement
markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of
the allotted space; and



      (2)   With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches
of the curb.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when the
vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading
passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions of division (A)
of § 72.16 shall be complied with.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.180)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.16  PARKING SPACE MARKINGS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to install and
maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to
curbings where parking is permitted.



   (B)   When such parking space markings are placed on the highway,
subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be
stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the
size or shape of the vehicle makes compliance impossible.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.190)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 72.17  NO STOPPING ZONES.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall designate established no
stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that
stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when
stopping is prohibited.



   (B)   During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it
is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop the vehicle on any of the
streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the City Council as
no stopping zones.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.200)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 72.18  PARKING ON CITY PROPERTY.



   (A)   Whenever the City Manager determines, that the orderly,
efficient conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of
vehicles on city property be prohibited, limited or restricted, he shall have
the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating
that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted.



   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in
place, giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.210)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.19  PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED PERSONS.



   (A)   When any curb is painted blue, no person shall stop, stand or
park any vehicle in the street adjacent thereto, unless the vehicle displays
a license plate, issued to a handicapped person or a disabled veteran
pursuant to the California Vehicle Code.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.220)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.20  PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE OR REPAIR.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle upon a public or private
parking lot or area for the purpose of offering the vehicle for sale.



   (B)   The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to any
property which is occupied by one who possesses a valid business license from
the city to carry on a commercial activity upon such real property, which
activity includes the sale and/or repairing of motor vehicles.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.36.230)  (Ord. 952, passed -  -86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.21  PARKING OF TRUCKS, SPECIAL USE VEHICLES AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Trucks and the like parking restrictions. No person shall
park, cause to be parked or otherwise leave standing, any vehicle exceeding a
maximum gross weight of three tons on any street of this city other than
those streets or parts of streets identified as truck routes in Chapter 73,
Schedule I. Parking time shall not exceed two hours on these designated
streets.



(‘83 Code § 10.44.060) (Ord. 873, passed - -84)



   (B)   Special use vehicles.



      (1)   No person shall park or leave standing any trailer,
semitrailer, trailer coach, pipe or pole dolly, special construction
equipment or special mobile equipment on any street unless attached to a
vehicle capable of moving the trailer, semi-trailer, trailer coach, pipe or
pole dolly, special construction equipment, or special mobile equipment in
normal manner upon the street.



      (2)   The provisions of division (B)(1) of this section shall
not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor
while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any
public utility, or to any commercial vehicle actually being used for the
pickup or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the delivery of
materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of
any building.



   (C)   Housecar parking restrictions. No person shall park, cause to
be parked or otherwise leave standing, any housecar or camper on any street
in this city for a period of more than two hours. Except a resident may be
issued a permit for parking a vehicle in accordance with the following
requirements: The police chief or the police chief’s designee may issue a
permit to a resident providing the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Insufficient on-site parking exists on the property of
the applicant.



      (2)   The application is limit to one permit per dwelling unit.



      (3)   Permits are free.



      (4)   Permits are issued on a permanent basis with replacement
upon loss or destruction.



      (5)   Each permit is registered for a specific address and
vehicle.



      (6) The permit allows for parking of a housecar or camper on the
same block as registered address.



      (7) All other parking restrictions must be observed. Housecar
parking restrictions are enforceable by impoundment.



   (D)   Other vehicle parking restrictions.



      (1)   Except as provided for in Vehicle Code Section 21100(p),
no person shall park, cause to be parked or otherwise leave standing, a motor
vehicle with the name of a business enterprise or establishment or a sign
advertising a product or service painted, attached or otherwise affixed on or
to the exterior thereof on any street in this city for a period of more than
two hours. Except a resident may be issued a permit for parking a vehicle in
accordance with the following requirements: The police chief or the police
chief’s designee may issue a permit to a resident providing the following
conditions are met:



         (a)   Insufficient on-site parking exists on the
property of the applicant.



         (b)   The application is limited to one permit per
dwelling unit or commercial unit.



         (c)   Permits are free.



         (d)   Permits are issued on a permanent basis with
replacement upon loss or destruction.



         (e)   Each permit is registered for a specific address
and vehicle.



         (f)   The permit allows for parking on the same block as
the registered address.



         (g)   All other parking restrictions must be observed.
These parking restrictions are enforceable by impoundment.



      (2)   The provisions of division (D)(1) of this section shall
not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor
while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any
public utility, or to any commercial vehicle actually being used for the
pickup or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise, or for the delivery of
materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of
any building.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of division (A) of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



   (F)   Fines and penalties for violation of divisions (C) and (D) of
this section shall the same as for violation of division (B) of this section.



(‘83 Code § 10.36.240)  (Ord. 1025, passed -  -89; Am. Ord. 1365, passed
10-1-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Loading and unloading, see §§ 72.35 et seq.



   Trucks and commercial vehicles, see §§ 71.30 et seq.



LOADING AND UNLOADING



§ 72.35  AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to determine and
mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:



      (1)   At any place adjacent to a commercial area where traffic
safety permits.



      (2)   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of
business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public
assembly, where traffic safety permits.



   (B)   In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length
in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.



   (C)   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top
of and face of all curbs in the zones.



   (D)   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon
the top of and face of all curbs in the zones.



('83 Code § 10.40.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 72.36  CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE STOPPING AND PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized and required,
subject to the provisions and limitations of this subchapter, to place the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and the
curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:



      (1)   Red.  No stopping, standing, or parking at any time
except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a
red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.



      (2)   Yellow.  No stopping, standing or parking at any time
between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for
any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials;
provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more
than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than 20
minutes.



      (3)   White.  No stopping, standing or parking for any
purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes
and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day
except Sundays and holidays and except as follows.



         (a)   When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front
of a mail box, the restrictions shall apply at all times.



         (b)   When such zone is in front of a theater, the
restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.



   (B)   When the Director of Public Works, as authorized under this
subchapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in
violation of any of the provisions of this section.



('83 Code § 10.40.020)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.37  EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD.



   (A)   Permission granted in this subchapter to stop or stand a
vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor,
and in no event for more than 20 minutes.



   (B)   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to
commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post
packages and United States mail.



   (C)   Permission granted in this subchapter to stop or park for
purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or
unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary
therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.



   (D)   Within the total time limits specified above, the provisions
of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and
reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the
privileges granted in this subchapter.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.40.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.38  STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.



   (A)   Yellow loading zone.  No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or
unloading passengers or materials for such time as is specified in § 72.37.



('83 Code § 10.40.040)



   (B)   Passenger loading zone.  No person shall stop, stand or park
a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the
loading or unloading of passengers except for such time as is specified in §
72.37.



('83 Code § 10.40.050)



   (C)   Alley.  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any
purpose, other than for the purpose of loading or unloading of persons or
materials, in any alley.



('83 Code § 10.40.060)



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.39  COACH ZONES TO BE ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to establish bus
zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common
carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof.



   (B)   Coach zones shall be established at locations adjacent to
intersections in a manner consistent with traffic safety.



('83 Code § 10.40.070)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 72.50  PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, park or leave standing, any motor
vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, whether
attended or unattended, on any private property within the city, except with
the consent of the owner or person in possession of such private property. 
Such consent, for the purpose of this section, shall be deemed, for all
purposes, not to have been given if the private property has displayed
thereon, in plain view, a sign which:



      (1)   States that public parking is prohibited;



      (2)   Refers to this code section; and



      (3)   Contains the telephone number of the city Police
Department.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.60.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.51  REMOVAL OF VEHICLE.



   The owners or persons in lawful possession of such private property may
cause vehicles parked in violation of § 72.50, to be removed in accordance
with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state.



('83 Code § 10.60.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PARKING METERS



§ 72.60  PARKING METER ZONES.



   The parking of vehicles on streets or portions of streets as designated
by the City Council, by resolution, as parking meter zones, shall be
controlled as provided in this subchapter.



('83 Code § 10.48.010)



§ 72.61  MANNER OF INSTALLATION.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall cause parking meters to be
installed and maintained in all parking meter zones.



   (B)   Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk
area immediately adjacent to each parking space.  Each meter shall be placed
in such manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking
space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.



   (C)   Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the
operational procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal
parking for that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time as
indicated on the meter.  Each parking meter shall indicate the limit of
parking time in the parking space adjacent to the parking meter, and shall
continue to operate from the time of the completion of the operational
procedure until the expiration of the time fixed as the parking limit or a
portion thereof for the part of the street upon which the meter is placed. 
Each meter shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of the legal
parking time it will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal
that the lawful parking period has expired.



('83 Code § 10.48.020)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 72.62  TIME OF OPERATION.



   The provisions of this title relating to the operation of parking
meters shall be effective during the hours set by Council resolution.



('83 Code § 10.48.030)



§ 72.63  OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE.



   Immediately after occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a
vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in the parking meter and if
necessary turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the instructions
posted on the face of the parking meter.



('83 Code § 10.48.040)



§ 72.64  PARKING METER FEES.



   The parking meter fees for the parking meter zones established in this
subchapter shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.



('83 Code § 10.48.050)



§ 72.65  PARKING AFTER TIME HAS EXPIRED.



   (A)   No operator of any vehicle shall permit the vehicle to remain
parked in any parking space during any time that the meter is showing a
signal indicating that the space is illegally in use other than the time
immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the meter
to show legal parking.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.48.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.66  EXTENSION OF TIME BEYOND LIMIT.



   (A)   No person shall follow the operational procedure or any part
of the operational procedure for the purpose of increasing or extending the
parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been
established for the parking space adjacent to which the parking meter is
placed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.48.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.67  IMPROPER USE OF METER.



   (A)   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any
parking meter any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic
substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with,
open or wilfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.48.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.68  DEPOSIT OF COINS IN METER BY UNAUTHORIZED PERSON.



   (A)   No person, other than the owner or operator of a vehicle,
shall deposit any coin in any parking meter without the knowledge or consent
of the owner or operator of the vehicle using the parking space immediately
adjacent to the meter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.48.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.69  METERS AND STANDARDS FREE FROM OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle,
newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a
parking meter standard.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code § 10.48.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.70  RULE OF EVIDENCE.



   The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space at
which space the parking meter displays the sign or signal indicating illegal
parking, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been
parked or allowed to stand in such space for a period longer than permitted
by this subchapter.



('83 Code § 10.48.110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.71  USE OF MONEY DEPOSITED IN METERS.



   All moneys collected from parking meters in this city shall be placed
in a special fund, which fund shall be devoted exclusively to the following
purposes.



   (A)   For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing,
maintaining, operating, removing, regulating and policing of parking meters
in this city and for the payment of any and all expenses relating or
incidental thereto.



   (B)   For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating,
and maintaining of off-street parking facilities in this city.



   (C)   For the installation and maintenance of traffic-control
devices and signals.



   (D)   For the painting and marking of streets and curbs required for
the direction of traffic and parking of motor vehicles.



   (E)   For the proper regulation, control and inspection of parking
and traffic upon the public streets.



   (F)   To be pledged as security for the payment of principal of and
interest on off-street parking revenue bonds issued by this city, or any
parking district organized within the city.



('83 Code § 10.48.120)



CHAPTER 73:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Truck routes; streets designated



   II.   Speed limits



SCHEDULE I.  TRUCK ROUTES; STREETS DESIGNATED.



   Those streets and parts of streets enumerated in this schedule are
declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum
gross weight of three tons.



 


Street

 

Location

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed






Badillo Street

 

All points within the city

 

864

 

- -83




Baldwin Park Boulevard

 

Between Arrow Highway and the southerly city limits

 

864

 

- -83




Dalewood Street

 

Between the eastbound on-ramp and off-ramps for Puente Avenue and Puente
Avenue

 

864

 

- -83




Dalewood Street

 

Between the eastbound San Bernardino Freeway off-ramp for Frazier Street and
the eastbound on-ramp and off-ramps at Baldwin Park Boulevard

 

864

 

- -83




Dalewood Street

 

Between the eastbound San Bernardino Freeway off-ramp for Francisquito Avenue
and Francisquito Avenue

 

864

 

- -83




Francisquito Avenue

 

Between Baldwin Park Boulevard and the southerly city limits

 

864

 

- -83




Garvey Avenue

 

Between the westbound San Bernardino Freeway on-ramp and off-ramps for
Francisquito Avenue and Francisquito Avenue

 

864

 

- -83




Garvey Avenue

 

From the westbound San Bernardino Freeway on-ramp and off-ramps for Puente
Avenue and Puente Avenue

 

864

 

- -83




Los Angeles Street

 

All points within the city

 

864

 

- -83




Puente Avenue

 

Between Ramona Boulevard and Badillo Street

 

864

 

- -83




Puente Avenue

 

Between Merced Avenue and the southerly city limits

 

864

 

- -83




Ramona Boulevard

 

All points within the city

 

864

 

- -83




Rivergrade Road

 

All points within the city

 

864

 

- -83





 


 


 











('83 Code § 10.44.050)



SCHEDULE II.  SPEED LIMITS.



 



 

No.

 

Limits

 





From

 

To

 

Speed





Badillo St.
 

1

 
Ramona Blvd.
 
East City Limit
 

40



Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

2

 
Live Oak
 
Olive St.
 

40




3

 
Olive St.
 
Los Angeles St.
 

40




4

 
Los Angeles St.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

40




5

 
Ramona Blv.
 
Merced Ave.
 

40




6

 
Merced Ave.
 
Francisquito Ave.
 

40




7

 
Francisquito Ave.
 
I-10
 

40




8

 
I-10
 
South City Limit
 

40



Bess
 

9

 
I-10
 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

30




10

 
Syracuse Ave.
 
Frazier St.
 

25



Big Dalton
 

11

 
Pacific Ave.
 
I-10
 

30



Center St.
 

12

 
Olive St.
 
Los Angeles St.
 

30




13

 
Los Angeles St.
 
Ramona Pkwy
 

30



Commerce Dr.
 

14

 
Rivergrade Rd.
 
Live Oak Ave.
 

40



Francisquito Ave.
 

15

 
Ramona Blvd.
 
Frazier St.
 

35




16

 
Frazier St.
 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

35




17

 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 
South City Limit
 

35



Frazier
 

18

 
Bess Ave.
 
Francisquito Ave.
 

35



Harlan Ave.
 

19

 
Los Angeles St.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

25



Live Oak Ave.
 

20

 
Rivergrade Rd.
 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

45



Los Angeles St.
 

21

 
West City Limit
 
Center St.
 

40




22

 
Center St.
 
Maine Ave.
 

40




23

 
Maine Ave.
 
East City Limit
 

40



Maine Ave.
 

24

 
Arrow Hwy
 
Olive St.
 

35




25

 
Olive St.
 
Los Angeles St.
 

35




26

 
Los Angeles St.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

35




27

 
Pacific Ave.
 
Merced Ave.
 

35




28

 
Merced Ave.
 
Francisquito Ave.
 

35



Merced Ave.
 

29

 
Olive St.
 
Los Angeles St.
 

35




30

 
Los Angeles St.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

35




31

 
Ramona Blvd.
 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

35




32

 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 
Vineland Ave.
 

35




33

 
Vineland Ave.
 
Puente Ave.
 

35



Olive St.
 

34

 
West City Limit
 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

30




35

 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 
East City Limit
 

30



Pacific Ave.
 

36

 
Ramona Blv.
 
Big Dalton Ave.
 

40




37

 
Big Dalton Ave.
 
South City Limit
 

40



Puente Ave.
 

38

 
South City Limit
 
Merced Ave.
 

40




39

 
Merced Ave.
 
Root St.
 

40




40

 
Root St.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

30



Ramona Blvd.
 

41

 
I-605
 
Francisquito Ave.
 

40




42

 
Francisquito Ave.
 
Merced Ave.
 

40




43

 
Merced Ave.
 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 

40




44

 
Baldwin Park Blvd.
 
Badillo St.
 

35




45

 
Badillo St.
 
East City Limit
 

35



Rivergrade Rd.
 

46

 
Brooks Dr.
 
Live Oak Ave.
 

40



Root St.
 

47

 
Puente St.
 
East City Limit
 

40



Stewart Ave.
 

48

 
Live Oak Ave.
 
Olive St.
 

30




49

 
Olive St.
 
Los Angeles St.
 

30




50

 
Los Angeles St.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

30



Syracuse Ave.
 

51

 
Bess Ave.
 
Ramona Blvd.
 

30



Vineland Ave.
 

52

 
South City Limit
 
Merced Ave.
 

30




53

 
Merced Ave.
 
Pacific Ave.
 

30




54

 
Pacific Ave.
 
Badillo St.
 

30





 



(‘83 Code § 10.56.010)  (Ord. 812, passed -  -80; Am. Ord. 886, passed
-  -85; Am. Ord. 892, passed -  85; Am. Ord. 1036, passed -  -90; Am. Ord.
1080, passed 5-4-94; Am. Ord. 1139, passed 6-2-99; Am. Ord. 1230, passed
4-21-04; Am. Ord. 1310, passed 7-1-09; Am. Ord. 1335, passed 8-4-10; Am. Ord.
1387, passed 5-18-16)



Statutory reference:



   Speed limits, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22348 et seq.



Editor’s note: Ord. 1387, passed May 18, 2016, amended this schedule by
restating it in its entirety. Consult the ordinance history above for
previous legislation affecting this schedule.



CHAPTER 74:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Two hour parking restriction.



Cross-reference:



   Parking time regulated, see § 72.13



SCHEDULE I.  TWO HOUR PARKING RESTRICTION.



   Those streets and parts of streets enumerated in this schedule are
declared to be areas where no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or
park the vehicle in such areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
of any day except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than two
hours, unless the vehicle displays a valid city permit.



 



Street
 
Location
 
Ord. No.
 
Date Passed


Bogart Avenue
 
Pacific Avenue to Ramona Boulevard
 
 
7/19/00


Central Avenue
 
Downing Avenue to Vineland Avenue
 
 
7/19/00


Chevalier Avenue
 
Downing Avenue to Vineland Avenue
 
 
8-16-00


Court de la Gair
 
Pacheco Drive to Lozano Drive including all off-street parking
 
1191
 
7-2-02


Downing Avenue
 
Pacific Avenue to Ramona Boulevard
 
 
8-16-00


Jeremie Avenue
 
Downing Avenue to Vineland Avenue
 
 
8-16-00


Lozano Drive
 
Badillo Street to Pacheco Drive
 
1191
 
7-2-02


Pacheco Drive
 
Lozano Drive to Court de la Gair
 
1191
 
7-2-02


Ramona Boulevard
 
Badillo Street to Park Avenue
 
1313
 
2-20-08


 
 
 




 



(Ord. 1165, passed 8-16-00)



TITLE IX:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Chapter



   90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES



   91.   ALARM SYSTEMS



   92.    ANIMAL CONTROL



   93.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



   94.   HEALTH AND SAFETY



   94.5   SMOKEFREE MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING



   95.   NUISANCES



   95.5.   SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES



   96.   PUBLIC PARKS



   97.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



   98.   UNATTENDED SHOPPING CARTS



   99.   PROHIBITION OF CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY



CHAPTER 90:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   90.01   Purpose; definition



   90.02   Declaration of nuisance; abatement



   90.03   Notice required



   90.04   Notice of removal



   90.05   Request for hearing



   90.06   Notice of hearing



   90.07   Hearing; determination of hearing officer



   90.08   Service on owner of order of abatement



   90.09   Abatement by owner



   90.10   Abatement by city



   90.11   Disposal of vehicles



   90.12   Identification of vehicles



   90.13   Exceptions



   90.14   Administration



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 95



   Traffic code, see Ch. 70



§ 90.01  PURPOSE; DEFINITION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the abatement and removal
of vehicles, or parts thereof, which are abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
in-operative.  VEHICLE, as used in this chapter, shall be defined as set
forth in Cal. Vehicle Code § 670.



('83 Code, § 8.16.010)



§ 90.02  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.



   (A)   Any vehicle which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative, or any part thereof, located on any private property, or public
property, excluding highways, in the city, is declared to be a public
nuisance.



('83 Code, § 8.16.020)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



   (B)   Abatement.  Where such vehicle is found to constitute a
public nuisance, by reason of its condition and location, as provided in this
chapter, the nuisance shall be abated and the vehicle, and all parts thereof,
shall be removed and disposed of as provided in this chapter.



('83 Code, § 8.16.030)



§ 90.03  NOTICE REQUIRED.



   Whenever the City Manager or his duly authorized representative finds
that any vehicle is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter by reason of its conditions and location, he shall give the notice
required in this chapter.



('83 Code, § 8.16.040)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.04  NOTICE OF REMOVAL.



   Prior to removal of any such vehicle, or part thereof, the City Manager
or his duly authorized representative shall give a ten-day notice of his
intention to abate the nuisance, by removal.  The notice shall contain the
information required pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22661, and shall describe
the vehicle involved, and the property whereon the vehicle is located,
including, but not limited to, the correct identification number and license
number thereof, if available.  The notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in Cal. Veh. Code § 22661.



('83 Code, § 8.16.050)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.05  REQUEST FOR HEARING.



   Within ten days after the filing of the notice, the owner of the lot
upon which such vehicle or part thereof is located, or the owner of the
vehicle, may file a written request, as provided in Cal. Veh. Code § 22661,
with the City Clerk, requesting a hearing on the matter.  If no such request
is made, the City Manager or his duly authorized representative shall abate
the nuisance as provided in the notice relating thereto.



('83 Code, § 8.16.060)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.06  NOTICE OF HEARING.



   Notice of the hearing, if requested within the time permitted, to
determine whether a vehicle or part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance,
shall be given by the City Clerk to the owner of the land whereon the vehicle
is located, whose name appears, as such, on the last equalized assessment
roll, and to the vehicle as shown on the last registration of the vehicle,
unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not
available to determine ownership.  The notice shall be given by United
States mail, certified or registered, with a five-day return requested and
postage thereon prepaid.  The failure of any person to receive the notice
shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter.



('83 Code, § 8.16.070)



§ 90.07  HEARING; DETERMINATION OF HEARING OFFICER.



   (A)   If a request for a hearing is made, the same shall be held
before the hearing officer.  At the time and place of hearing, the hearing
officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not
limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the
existence of the alleged public nuisance and the manner proposed for
abatement of the alleged nuisance.  The hearing may be continued from time
to time.



   (B)   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall,
based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, determine whether the
vehicle, or any part thereof, as maintained, constitutes a public nuisance,
as defined in this chapter.  If the hearing officer finds that a public
nuisance exists, he shall order the same abated within a reasonable time to
be set by him.



   (C)   The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may
appear in person at the hearing, or present a written statement in time for
consideration at the hearing, denying responsibility for the presence of the
vehicle on the land, together with his reasons for the denial.



   (D)   If the hearing officer determines that the vehicle was placed
upon the land without the consent of the landowner, and the landowner has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the cost of abatement thereof shall
not be levied against the property owner.



('83 Code, § 8.16.080)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.08  SERVICE ON OWNER OF ORDER OF ABATEMENT.



   A copy of the resolution ordering the abatement of the nuisance shall
be served upon the owners of the property in accordance with the provisions
of § 90.06.



('83 Code, § 8.16.090)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.09  ABATEMENT BY OWNER.



   After a final determination that a vehicle, or parts thereof,
constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this chapter, the owner
of the vehicle, or the owner of the property whereof the vehicle is located,
shall abate the public nuisance by removing the same in the time set forth in
the order of abatement relating thereto.  If the person or persons fail to
abate the public nuisance, the hearing officer shall abate the same by
private contract in the time and manner permitted by Cal. Veh. Code § 22661.



('83 Code, § 8.16.100)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.10  ABATEMENT BY CITY.



   Where the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter is
accomplished by city forces, the provisions of Chapter 95 of this code of
ordinances shall be applicable to the proceedings.



('83 Code, § 8.16.110)



§ 90.11  DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES.



   Vehicles or parts thereof, declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to
this chapter, shall be disposed of in the manner provided by Cal. Veh. Code
§ 22850; provided, that, after a vehicle has been declared to be a public
nuisance, and has been removed from the premises where located, the same
shall not be reconstructed or otherwise made operable, unless it is a vehicle
which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical
vehicle license plates pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 5004, in which case the
vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable.



('83 Code, § 8.16.120)  (Ord. 815, passed -  -80)



§ 90.12  IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES.



   Within five days after the date of removal of a vehicle or part
thereof, the authorized towing service shall cause to be forwarded to the
Department of Motor Vehicles of the state notice identifying the vehicle or
part thereof, and any evidence of registration available, including, but not
limited to, registration certificates of title or license plates on any such
vehicle.



('83 Code, § 8.16.130)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



§ 90.13  EXCEPTIONS.



   This chapter shall not apply:



   (A)   To a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner, where the same is not visible from the
street or other public or private property; or



   (B)   To a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a
lawful manner on private property in conjunction with the business of a
licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; provided,
however, that this latter exception shall not authorize the maintenance of
any premises contrary to the provisions of this code.



('83 Code, § 8.16.140)



§ 90.14  ADMINISTRATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City
Manager of the city or his duly authorized representative.



('83 Code, § 8.16.150)  (Ord. 828, passed -  -81)



CHAPTER 91:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   91.01   Short title; purpose



   91.02   Definitions



   91.03   Certain devices, systems, uses prohibited



   91.04   Mailing of notices



   91.05   No duty or obligation



   91.06   Powers of Chief of Police



Regulatory Provisions



   91.15   Alarm business permit or private alarm system permit required



   91.16   Alarm business permit and private alarm system permit
application



   91.17   Alarm system user permit required



   91.18   Alarm system user permit application



   91.19   Notice of installation of alarm system



   91.20   Term of alarm business permit or private alarm system
permit; renewal



   91.21   Term of alarm system user permit; renewal



   91.22   Current information required



Suspension; Revocation



   91.30   Suspension and revocation of alarm business, private alarm
system, or alarm system user permit



   91.31   Appeals of suspension and/or revocation orders



   91.32   Reinstatement after suspension



Fines



   91.40   False alarm administrative fines



   91.41   Penalties for failure to pay fines



   91.42   Appeals; contested fines



 



   91.99   Penalty



Statutory reference:



   Local regulation of Alarm Co. Operators, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 7592.8 et seq.



   Alarm Co. Act, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 7590 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 91.01  SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE.



   This chapter shall be known as the False Alarm Ordinance and may be
cited as such. The purpose of the False Alarm Ordinance is to regulate alarm
system users, alarm systems and each alarm company operator in order to
minimize the occurrence of false alarm activations within the city.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.010)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT. A permit validly issued pursuant to § 91.15.



   ALARM COMPANY OPERATOR. Any person, individual, partnership,
corporation, or other form of association that engages in business or accepts
employment to install, maintain, alter, sell on premises, monitor, or service
intrusion, property, burglary, robbery, panic alarms, or other alarm system
located in the city. This includes alarm company operators located outside
the city limits and which monitor alarms installed within the city limits.



   ALARM SYSTEM or ALARM DEVICE. Any system, device, or mechanism which,
when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other
form of message to an alarm company operator, or some other number, or emits
an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the
protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the premises in some other
fashion, except any system, device, or mechanism primarily protecting a motor
vehicle or a medical alert alarm.  An ALARM SYSTEM or ALARM DEVICE may
consist of one or more components (e.g., motion detector, window breach
detector, or similar components) all reporting to a central unit/system panel
which, in turn, is connected to or reports to an alarm company operator via
telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message.
NON-MONITORED ALARM SYSTEMS are also included in this definition.



   ALARM SYSTEM USER. The person having or maintaining a property,
intrusion, burglary, robbery, panic, or other alarm system.



   ALARM SYSTEM USER PERMIT. A permit validly issued pursuant to § 91.17.



   BURGLARY ALARM. See PROPERTY ALARM.



   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of the Baldwin Park Police Department, or
his or her designee.



   DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police or his or her designee or a vendor
approved by the City Council.



   FALSE ALARM. The reporting of the activation of any monitored or
non-monitored alarm system or private alarm system where police arrive at the
premises and determine there is no evidence of intrusion, commission of an
unlawful act, or emergency on the premises that would warrant a call for
police assistance or investigation.  An alarm shall be presumed to be false
if the responding police do not locate evidence of intrusion, commission of
an unlawful act, or emergency on the premises that might have caused the
alarm to sound. When responding police find unsecured doors or windows where
there is no evidence of forced entry or other evidence of criminal intent,
the alarm is presumed to be false. This definition includes signals activated
by negligence, accident, mechanical failure, electrical failure signals
activated intentionally in non-emergency situations and signals for which the
actual cause is unknown. An alarm is not false if the alarm system user,
alarm company operator or person operating or maintaining a private alarm
system proves:



      (1)   An individual activated the alarm based on a reasonable
belief an emergency or actual or threatened criminal activity requiring
immediate response existed; or



      (2)   The security system was activated by a violent condition
of nature, including, but not limited to, tornadoes, floods, earthquakes or
lightning, or by an electrical surge that caused physical damage to the alarm
system.



   FIRE ALARM. A signal initiated by a device such as a manual fire alarm
box, automatic fire detector, waterflow switch, smoke detector, or other
device which, when activated, is indicative of the presence of a fire or fire
signature. FIRE ALARMS shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter
except for fire alarms called in erroneously as an intrusion, burglary,
robbery, property, or other alarm.  In those situations, the alarm company
operator or operator of the private alarm system shall be assessed a false
alarm administrative fine.



   INTRUSION ALARM. See PROPERTY ALARM.



   MEDIC ALARM. Any system, device, or mechanism manually activated by an
individual for the sole purpose of notifying emergency services of a medical
emergency.



   MONITORED ALARM SYSTEM. Any system, device, or mechanism which, when
activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form
of message or communication to a private monitoring company, other number, or
person who can then notify police that an alarm has been activated. This
includes all systems which transmit telephonic, wireless, electronic, video,
or other form of message from an alarm installed within the city limits to
any location outside of the city limits (e.g., an alarm monitoring center
located in a state other than California). All alarms that are monitored,
except fire alarms, are included within the definition of MONITORED ALARM
SYSTEM; e.g., any monitored burglary, intrusion, panic, premises, property,
robbery, or other type of alarm device.



   NON-MONITORED ALARM SYSTEM. Any alarm system that emits an audible or
visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected
premises, but which is not monitored by an alarm company operator.



   PANIC ALARM. See ROBBERY ALARM.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated
or unincorporated entity, or other entity or group of persons, but excludes
the United States, the State of California; any political subdivision or
municipal corporation thereof.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT or POLICE. The Baldwin Park Police Department and
includes other law enforcement agencies assisting the Baldwin Park Police
Department.



   PREMISES or PROTECTED PREMISES. Any real property and any portion of
any real property, within the city, protected by an alarm system or private
alarm system.



   PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM. Any system, device, or mechanism which, when
activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, to some other
location, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by
persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the
premises in some other fashion, except:



      (1)   Any system, device, or mechanism primarily protecting a
motor vehicle or a medical alert alarm; and



      (2)   Any alarm system listed by an alarm system operator
pursuant to § 91.22(B).



   PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT. A permit validly issued pursuant to §
91.15.



   PROPERTY ALARM, INTRUSION ALARM, and BURGLARY ALARM. Any system,
device, or mechanism for detection and reporting of any unauthorized entry or
attempted entry or property damage upon real property protected by the system
which may be activated by sensors and, when activated, transmits a
telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message, or emits
an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the
protected premises, or transmits a signal beyond the protected premises. 
For purposes of this chapter, alarms on automatic teller machines (ATMs) are
included in this definition.



   RESPONDER. A private guard, alarm company guard, private entity, or
person contacted by an alarm company operator, or any other person, who
verifies there is evidence of intrusion, commission of an unlawful act, or
emergency on the premises that would warrant a call for police assistance or
investigation for a property alarm, intrusion alarm, or burglary alarm.  Any
responder for an alarm company operator requesting police response will
notify the police dispatcher what alarm company operator requested them to
respond and that responder will meet police at the premises.



   ROBBERY ALARM and PANIC ALARM. Any system, device, or mechanism
manually activated by an individual on or near a premises, to alert others a
robbery or any other crime is in progress, or the user is in need of
immediate assistance or aid in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm,
which meets the following criteria:



      (1)   It is designed to be manually activated by an individual
for the purpose of summoning assistance to the protected premises;



      (2)   It transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video,
or other form of message or emits an audible, visible, or electronic signal
that can be heard, seen, or received by persons outside the protected
premises.



   VALID ALARM. A property alarm, intrusion alarm, burglary alarm, robbery
alarm or panic alarm activation to which police respond and determine there
is evidence of intrusion, commission of an unlawful act, or emergency on the
premises that might have caused the alarm to sound.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.020)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.03  CERTAIN DEVICES, SYSTEMS, USES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall operate or use an alarm system or private
alarm system that emits an audible sound where such emission does not
automatically cease within ten minutes.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.100)



   (B)   No person shall operate or use an alarm system or private
alarm system, which automatically dials the Baldwin Park Police Department
directly and delivers a prerecorded message; provided, that this provision
does not apply to Medic Alarms.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.120)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory references:



   Noise control, see Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 46000 et seq.



§ 91.04  MAILING OF NOTICES.



   Any notice required by this chapter to be mailed shall be sent by
ordinary mail, addressed to the address as reflected in the records of the
Director. Failure to receive such notice shall not relieve the obligation to
pay any fee, interest, or penalty, nor shall such failure extend any time
limit. It is the responsibility of the alarm company operator or the person
operating or maintaining the private alarm system who was assessed the fine
to inform the Director in writing about a change in address, pursuant to §
91.22.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.05  NO DUTY OR OBLIGATION.



   Nothing in this chapter imposes or creates any express or implied
duties or obligations on the part of the city, its Police Department or any
other governmental agency. Nothing in this chapter creates any express or
implied duty or obligation for the Police Department to respond to an alarm
device activation of any sort, whether verified or not. Any and all liability
or consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to an alarm
device activation of any sort is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity
as provided by law is retained by the city.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.130)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.06  POWERS OF CHIEF OF POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall have broad discretion to promulgate, execute
and enforce policies, procedures and directives as may in his or her
discretion be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter,
including appointment of the Director.  Such powers of the Chief of Police
shall include, but are not limited to, the power to promulgate, execute and
enforce a policy, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter,
regarding dispatch of officers to any alarm device activation, whether or not
it is a valid alarm.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.040)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



REGULATORY PROVISIONS



§ 91.15  ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT OR PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any alarm company operator installing, maintaining, altering,
selling on premises, monitoring, or servicing alarm systems within the city
limits, whether that company is located within California or outside
California, is required to maintain an alarm business permit in order to
install, maintain, alter, sell on premises, monitor, or service alarm systems
within the city.



   (B)   An alarm business permit or private alarm system permit cannot
be assigned, sold or transferred and may be revoked or suspended pursuant to
§ 91.30.  Issuance of an alarm business permit or private alarm system
permit does not create any property right in that permit.



   (C)   No person shall use an alarm company operator for an alarm
system, unless that alarm company operator has a current, valid alarm
business permit.



   (D)   No person shall install or operate a private alarm system
until that person has obtained a valid private alarm system permit.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.030)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.16  ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT AND PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any alarm company operator installing, maintaining, altering,
selling on premises, monitoring, or servicing an alarm system within the city
limits, whether that company is located within California or outside
California shall, on or before April 1, 2010, apply to the Director, on a
form to be furnished by the Chief of Police, for a permit to operate as an
alarm company operator. The application shall (i) be signed by the individual
proprietor of such business, or by a partner, or by the proper corporate
official, as is appropriate for the form of the business seeking the permit,
(ii) set forth the owner’s name, age, business and residence address if a
natural person, the name, age, business and residence address of each partner
if a partnership, and the names of the principal officers and business
address if a corporation, and (iii) shall include a statement the applicant
will inform the Police Department within ten days after any substantial
change in the information required by this chapter.



   (B)   Applicants already doing business in the city before the date
set forth in division (A) above, may continue to do business while their
permit application is being processed. An applicant not doing business in the
city on the date set forth in division (A) above, shall not commence doing
business until its application is approved.



   (C)   Each application for an alarm business permit required under
this section shall be accompanied by a fee the amount of which shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



   (D)   Any person installing, maintaining, altering, monitoring, a
private alarm system within the city limits shall, on or before April 1,
2010, apply to the Director, on a form to be furnished by the Chief of
Police, for a permit to operate the private alarm system. The application
shall (i) be signed by the individual operating the private alarm system,
(ii) set forth that person’s name, age and business and residence address,
and (iii) shall include a statement the applicant will inform the Police
Department within ten days after any substantial change in the information
required by this chapter.



   (E)   Applicants already operating a private alarm system in the
city before the date set forth in division (D) above, may continue that
operation while their permit application is being processed. An applicant not
operating a private alarm system in the city on the date set forth in
division (D) above, shall not commence that operation until a private alarm
system permit is approved.



   (F)   Each application for a private alarm system permit required
under this section shall be accompanied by a fee the amount of which shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.030)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.17  ALARM SYSTEM USER PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any alarm system user within the city limits is required to
maintain an alarm system user permit for each alarm system used by that
person within the city.



   (B)   An alarm system user permit cannot be assigned, sold or
transferred and may be revoked or suspended pursuant to § 91.30. Issuance of
an alarm system user permit does not create any property right in that permit.



   (C)   No person shall use an alarm system unless that person has a
current, valid alarm system user permit.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.030)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.18  ALARM SYSTEM USER PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any alarm system user using an alarm system within the city
limits shall, on or before April 1, 2010, apply to the Director, on a form to
be furnished by the Chief of Police, for a permit to use an alarm system. 
The application shall:



      (1)   Be signed by the individual responsible for the use the
alarm system at the subject location,



      (2)   Set forth that person’s name, age, business and
residence address,



      (3)   Include the date of installation of that alarm system,



      (4)   Include the name, address, and telephone number of the
alarm company operator who installed the alarm system, the alarm company
operator who is monitoring the alarm system if different from the one who
installed that alarm system, and the alarm company operator responsible for
providing repair service to the alarm system, if different from the one who
installed or is monitoring that alarm system,



      (5)   Include a statement the alarm system user will inform
the Police Department within ten  days after any substantial change in the
information required by this chapter,



      (6)   Include a statement a set of written operating
instructions for that alarm system, including written guidelines on how to
avoid false alarms, have been left with the alarm system user by the alarm
company operator, and



      (7)   The alarm company operator has trained the alarm system
user in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to
avoid false alarms.



   (B)   Applicants already using an alarm system in the city before
the date set forth in division (A) above, may continue to use and have that
alarm system while their permit application is being processed. An applicant
not having or using an alarm system in the city on the date set forth in
division (A) above, shall not commence using or having an alarm system until
its application is approved.



   (C)   Each application for an alarm system user permit required
under this section shall be accompanied by a fee the amount of which shall be
established by resolution of the City Council.



   (D)   If an alarm company operator monitors or installed the alarm
system for which a permit is required pursuant to this section, then the fees
required by division (C) above, or § 91.065 shall be paid by that alarm
company operator.



   (E)   The alarm company operator referred to in division (D) above,
shall be jointly and severally responsible for the filing of the required
application.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.19  NOTICE OF INSTALLATION OF ALARM SYSTEM.



   Within seven days after installation of each alarm system in the city,
the alarm company operator referred to in § 91.055(D) above, shall notify
the Director that alarm system has been installed.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.030)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



§ 91.20  TERM OF ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT OR PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM PERMIT;
RENEWAL.



   (A)   An alarm business permit or private alarm system permit shall
expire on the first day of the calendar month following 11 full calendar
months after the month the permit was issued (the “expiration date”).



   (B)   An alarm business permit or private alarm system permit
renewal shall be dated the expiration date of permit being renewed. No
renewal permit will be issued until (i) a new signed and complete application
is submitted to the city, and (ii) the alarm business permit or private alarm
system permit fee and any administrative fines or penalties previously
imposed on the alarm company operator or person, as applicable are paid. A
late charge, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the
City Council, will be assessed on each permit holder who does not pay the
required renewal fee prior to expiration of its existing permit. A suspended
permit may be renewed only as provided in § 91.32.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.21  TERM OF ALARM SYSTEM USER PERMIT; RENEWAL.



   (A)   An alarm system user permit shall expire on each January 1
after the permit is first issued (the “user expiration date”).



   (B)   An alarm system user permit renewal shall be dated the user
expiration date of permit being renewed.  No renewal permit will be issued
until (i) a new signed and complete application is submitted to the city, and
(ii) the alarm system user permit fee and any administrative fines or
penalties previously imposed on the alarm system user are paid. A late
charge, the amount of which shall be established by resolution of the City
Council, will be assessed on each permit holder who does not pay the required
renewal fee prior to expiration of its existing permit. A suspended permit
may be renewed only as provided in § 91.32.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.22  CURRENT INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Within ten days following any change of circumstances which
renders obsolete any of the information submitted pursuant to § 91.16, the
permittee shall file an amendment to the application setting forth the
currently accurate information. No additional fee shall be required.



   (B)   Each alarm system operator shall keep on file with the Chief
of Police a current list of each protected premises serviced by that by that
alarm system operator.



   (C)   A person shall keep on file with the Chief of Police a current
list of each protected premises owned or controlled by that person at which
that person operates or maintains a private alarm system.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.030)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1329, passed
6-2-10)



SUSPENSION; REVOCATION



§ 91.30  SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF ALARM BUSINESS, PRIVATE ALARM SYSTEM,
OR ALARM SYSTEM USER PERMIT.



   (A)   The Chief of Police may suspend or revoke, in his or her
reasonable discretion, an alarm business permit, private alarm system permit
or alarm system user permit based upon one or more of the following grounds,
as applicable:



      (1)   If an applicable alarm system or private alarm system
results in more than five false alarms in any 12-month period.



      (2)   Any false or incomplete statement made on the permit
application.



      (3)   Programming of an automatic dialer to select any city
telephone line.



      (4)   Maintenance, installation or use of the alarm system or
private alarm system in violation of any applicable federal, state or local
law, ordinance or regulation, including the requirements of this chapter.



      (5)   Failure to provide current information as required in §
91.22.



      (6)   The failure of an alarm company operator employee or
person operating or maintaining a private alarm system to identify himself or
herself by operator number, company name, address and phone number at the
request of a police dispatcher.



      (7)   Failure to remit payment of fees, administrative fines
or penalties in accordance with this chapter.



      (8)   Failure of an alarm company operator to comply with any
applicable federal, state or local law, ordinance or regulation governing the
alarm company operator’s operations.



      (9)   Failure of the person operating or maintaining a private
alarm system to comply with any applicable federal, state or local law,
ordinance or regulation governing that person’s maintenance or operation of
a private alarm system.



      (10)   Failure of an alarm system user to comply with any
applicable federal, state or local law, ordinance or regulation governing
that person’s maintenance or operation of an alarm system.



      (11)   The criminal conviction of an owner, principal, officer
or operator of an alarm company operator for any felony whatsoever, or any
misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude. The Chief of Police’s
decision to either suspend or revoke an alarm business permit on the grounds
set forth in this division (A) shall be based upon the severity of the
violation, including, but not limited to, consideration of the following
factors:



         (a)   The materiality and nature of any false or
incomplete statement made on the permit application,



         (b)   The number and severity of any prior instances of
failure to comply with federal, state or local laws, ordinances or
regulations, including the provisions of this chapter, by the alarm company
operator,



         (c)   The amount of fees, administrative fines or
penalties owed and unpaid by the alarm company operator, or



         (d)   The nature of the criminal conviction of an owner,
principal, officer or operator of an alarm company operator.



   (B)   If the Chief of Police determines there is cause for the
suspension or revocation of a permit, then he or she shall mail a notice of
suspension or revocation to the principal of the alarm company operator, as
provided on the alarm business permit, or the person to whom a private alarm
system permit or alarm system user permit has been issued stating the
suspension or revocation will be effective 30 days after the date of mailing,
unless a notice of appeal is filed with the City Clerk in accordance with §
91.42.



   (C)   An alarm company operator operating an alarm system after the
alarm business permit has been suspended or revoked shall be a violation of
this chapter.



   (D)   A person operating or maintaining a private alarm system after
the private alarm system permit for that private alarm system has been
suspended or revoked shall be a violation of this chapter.



   (E)   A person using any alarm system after the alarm system user
permit has been suspended or revoked shall be a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.31  APPEALS OF SUSPENSION AND/OR REVOCATION ORDERS.



   Any alarm company operator, any alarm system user or the person to whom
a private alarm system permit has been issued aggrieved by the action of the
Chief of Police in suspending or revoking an alarm business permit, a private
alarm system permit or alarm system user permit, as applicable, under this
chapter may, within ten days after such action, appeal to the city by filing
written notice with the City Clerk and paying the fee established by
resolution of the City Council. The Chief Executive Officer or his or her
designee shall then review the determination or decision of the Chief of
Police in the matter appealed from and may approve, disapprove or modify such
determination or decision. Such review shall be conducted no later than 30
days after the date of the filing of the appeal, unless both the Chief of
Police and appellant agree in writing the Chief Executive Officer may decide
the matter at a later date, not to exceed 90 days after the date of the
filing of the written notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The action of the
Chief Executive Officer under this section shall be final and conclusive.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.32  REINSTATEMENT AFTER SUSPENSION.



   An alarm company operator whose alarm business permit, person whose
private alarm system permit or person whose alarm system user permit has been
suspended may have the permit reinstated upon proof, to the satisfaction of
the Chief of Police, the grounds for suspension no longer exist and upon
payment of a reinstatement fee in an amount established by resolution of the
City Council.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



FINES



§ 91.40  FALSE ALARM ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.



   (A)   False alarm administrative fine for alarm system user. An
alarm system user shall pay to the city, within 30 days after the date of an
invoice, an administrative fine for each false alarm generated by each alarm
system in excess of one false alarm per calendar year. An alarm system user
shall be responsible for the payment of the false alarm administrative fines
for all false alarms for monitored or non-monitored alarm systems. The amount
of the administrative fine for each false alarm shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   False alarm administrative fine for private alarm system. A
person operating or maintaining a private alarm system shall pay to the city,
within 30 days after the date of an invoice, an administrative fine for each
false alarm generated by that private alarm system in excess of one false
alarm per calendar year.  The amount of the administrative fine for each
false alarm shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   Fines cumulative. Administrative fines for each false alarm
are cumulative and not exclusive.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.060)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1111, passed
2-21-96; Am. Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10; Am. Ord. 1375, passed 7-15-15)



§ 91.41  PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO PAY FINES.



   (A)   Payment of any administrative fine under this chapter is due
within 30 days after the invoice date or within an extension of time granted
by the Director. If payment is not received on or before 30 days after the
date it became due, then a penalty in an amount established by resolution of
the City Council shall be imposed.



   (B)   The permittee shall be notified by mail of the amount of any
penalties so added or assessed; the same shall become due and shall be paid
within ten days after the date of such notice.



(‘83 Code, § 8.36.140)  (Ord. 887, passed -  -85; Am. Ord. 1111, passed
2-21-96; Am. Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.42  APPEALS; CONTESTED FINES.



   (A)   The manner of assessing administrative fines and methods to
appeal such fines shall comply with all the procedures specified in Chapter
15 of Title I of this code, unless in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)   A separate written request for an administrative hearing must
be filed for each administrative fine assessed. Multiple administrative
fines, even if assessed against the same alarm company operator, alarm system
user or the person to whom a private alarm system permit has been issued
cannot be appealed on a single request for hearing form.



   (C)   Within ten days after the filing of a request for an
administrative hearing and paying the appeal fee therefor, the City Clerk
shall give notice to the requesting party of the date, time and place of the
hearing. The hearing shall be set on a date that is no less than ten days and
no more than 60 days after the date of the notice.



   (D)   A request for an administrative hearing must be accompanied by
a deposit in the amount of the administrative fine. A request for a hearing
shall not be complete and shall not be accepted unless it is accompanied by
the deposit and fee required. If the requesting party prevails on appeal,
then the amount deposited will be refunded within ten days after the date of
decision.



   (E)   The hearing officer on all appeals of administrative fines
assessed pursuant to this chapter shall be the Director. A representative for
the alarm company operator that has been assessed the fine, the alarm system
user who has been assessed the fine or the person issued the private alarm
system permit who was assessed the fine must appear at the administrative
hearing. The failure of the alarm company operator representative, alarm
system user or the person issued the private alarm system permit who was
assessed the fine to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute a
waiver of the right to a hearing on the citation and any defenses to the
citation the alarm company operator, alarm system user or the person issued
the private alarm system permit who was assessed the fine may have had. The
alarm company operator’s or alarm system user’s deposit or the deposit
from the person operating or maintaining the private alarm system who was
assessed the fine shall be forfeited without further action. A failure to
appear at the administrative hearing shall also constitute a failure to
exhaust administrative remedies.



   (F)   The remedies set forth in this chapter are non-exclusive and
the city may seek any and all legal and equitable relief permitted by law in
addition to those remedies set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed an
infraction or a misdemeanor, in the city attorney’s discretion; shall be
punished as provided in § 10.99 of this code.  A violation of any provision
of this chapter shall also constitute a nuisance.



(Ord. 1329, passed 6-2-10)



CHAPTER 92:  ANIMAL CONTROL



Section



   92.01   Adoption of county ordinance



   92.02   Definitions



   92.03   License fees and penalties



Statutory references:



   Animals generally, see Cal. Food & Agric. Code §§ 16301 et seq.



   Cruelty to animals, see Cal. Penal Code §§ 597 et seq.



   Dogs, see Cal. Gov't Code § 38792



   Dogs, see Cal. Food & Agric. Code §§ 30501 et seq.



   Rabies control, see Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 1900 et seq.



§ 92.01  ADOPTION OF COUNTY ORDINANCE.



   (A)   Subject to the provisions of §§ 92.02 and 92.03, Title Ten
of the Los Angeles County Code, in effect as of the operative date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter, is adopted by this reference, as the
Baldwin Park animal Control Regulations.



   (B)   Copies of the Baldwin Park Animal Control Regulations are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the city and are available for
inspection by interested members of the public.



(‘83 Code, § 8.12.010)  (Ord. 844, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 994, passed
-  -88; Am. Ord. 1229, passed 6-2-04; Am. Ord. 1241, passed 9-1-04; Am. Ord.
1345, passed 11-2-11)



§ 92.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Wherever the following words or phrases are used in Title 10, they
respectively shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.



   COUNTY CLERK.  The City Clerk of the City of Baldwin Park.



   COUNTY or COUNTY OF LOS ANGELES. The City of Baldwin Park.



(‘83 Code, § 8.12.020)  (Ord. 994, passed -  -88; Am. Ord. 1229, passed
6-2-04; Am. Ord. 1241, passed 9-1-04; Am. Ord. 1345, passed 11-2-11)



§ 92.03  LICENSE FEES AND PENALTIES.



   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained to Title 10, license
fees and penalties applicable to the Baldwin Park Animal Control Regulations
shall be set by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1229, passed 6-2-04; Am. Ord. 1241, passed 9-1-04; Am. Ord. 1345,
passed 11-2-11)



CHAPTER 93:  FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS



Section




Fireworks




   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Sale of safe and sane fireworks



   93.03   Application for permit; information required



   93.04   Insurance



   93.05   Number of permits



   93.06   Issuance of permits



   93.07   Appeal



   93.08   Application of laws



   93.09   Dangerous fireworks prohibited



   93.10   Operation of stands



   93.11   Construction of stands



   93.12   Reporting of revenues and expenses



FIREWORKS



§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT. The qualified organization (as defined below) or the
qualified organizations, if a joint application is filed, upon whose behalf
an application for a permit (as defined below) is filed.



   DANGEROUS FIREWORKS.  Shall be defined as set forth in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 12505.



   FIREWORKS.  Shall be defined as set forth in Cal. Health & Safety Code
§ 12511.



   FIREWORKS BANK ACCOUNT.  An account at a financial institution used
solely for moneys related to the sale of safe and sane fireworks pursuant to
a permit granted pursuant to this chapter.



   FIREWORKS STANDS.  Temporary structures to be used exclusively for the
sale of safe and sane fireworks operated by qualified organizations having a
permit issued pursuant to this subchapter.



   QUALIFIED ORGANIZATION.  Any local nonprofit organization,
corporation, association, or group, consisting of ten or more persons
organized primarily to support veterans or youths, including through youth
sports, which meets at least once quarterly within the city.  The majority
of the members of the organization must either reside, or be employed by or
maintain a business, in the city.  To meet this definition, proof the
organization is organized primarily to support youths or veterans must be
provided prior to being deemed a qualified organization.  For a youth
organization, such proof shall be in the form of a report consisting of at
least one year of complete financial statements demonstrating at least 60% of
all gross expenditures for the immediately preceding fiscal year of that
organization were spent directly for the support of youths, including through
youth sports.  For a veteran organization, such proof shall be in the form
of a report consisting of at least one year of complete financial statements
demonstrating at least 60% of all gross expenditures for the preceding fiscal
year of that organization were spent directly for charitable causes
supportive of veterans.



   PERMIT.  A validly issued permit allowing a qualified organization to
conduct the sale, to the members of the general public, of safe and sane
fireworks.



   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS.  Shall be defined as set forth in Cal. Health
& Safety Code §12529.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.010)  (Ord. 1066, passed - - 93; Am. Ord. 1256, passed
2-16-05; Am. Ord. 1324, passed 4-1-09; Am. Ord. 1327, passed 4-29-09; Am.
Ord. 1328, passed 5-6-09; Am. Ord. 1372, passed 3-18-15)



§ 93.02  SALE OF SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS.



   No person shall sell or offer to sell any safe and sane fireworks
within the city:



   (A)   Without first having obtained a valid permit issued pursuant
to the terms of this subchapter; and



   (B)   Without complying with all state and local laws, rules and
regulations and all the conditions of approval applicable to that permit.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.020)  (Ord. 1066, passed - - 93; Am. Ord. 1256, passed
2-16-05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Applications for permits shall be accepted only from qualified
organizations, and shall be in writing upon the form prescribed therefore by
the Chief Executive Officer.  A filing and processing fee as set by
resolution of the City Council shall be paid at the time of filing the
application.  The application shall be submitted to the Business License
Division on or before the first day of May of the calendar year for which a
permit shall first be issued. The person named pursuant to division (B)(3) of
this section, shall sign the application and certify, under penalty of
perjury, it is accurate and complete. 



   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The exact location of the proposed stand, together with
the written permission of the owner of the property if the property is not
owned by the applicant;



      (2)   The name and location of the principal place of business
of the applicant (or applicants for joint applications), the names and
addresses of the members thereof (including any minors; provided, that to
assist with protection of individual privacy, to the extent permitted by law,
personal identifying information contained in the application, including, but
not limited to, home addresses, home/cell phone numbers and  the names of
minors, will not be disclosed to the public), the name and place of business
of the safe and sane fireworks vendor the applicant proposes to use and
whether that vendor has, within the immediately preceding five years, been
convicted of a violation of any laws or regulations related to safe and sane
or dangerous fireworks;



      (3)   The name of the person and an alternate to be
responsible for filing all financial reports required by this chapter.  Each
of those persons shall also be designated as the only individuals authorized
to withdraw money from the applicant’s applicable fireworks bank account;



      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the applicant is
organized;



      (5)   Acopy of the California Secretary of State certificate
approving the organization and a copy of the last annual information return
filed by the organization or othersimilar proof of the validity of the
organizationto operate within California;



      (6)   How and where the net proceeds from the sale of the
fireworks are to be expended;



      (7)   For joint applications:



         (a)   A designation of the single qualified organization
responsible for filing the reports required by § 93.12;



         (b)   The written agreement between the joint applicants
regarding the joint application;



         (c)   A designation as to which of the joint applicants
shall be the primary applicant and which shall be the secondary applicant; and



      (8)   Such other information as may be required by the Chief
Executive Officer.



   (C)   No person shall file an application which knowingly contains
false information.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.030)  (Ord. 1066, passed - - 93; Am. Ord. 1187, passed
6-19-02; Am. Ord. 1213, passed 8-20-03; Am. Ord. 1256, passed 2-16-05)



§ 93.04  INSURANCE.



   Prior to the issuance of any firework stands permit, the applicant
shall file with the City Clerk, a policy of liability insurance in coverage
amounts as set by the Chief Executive Officer.  The policy shall name the
city as a co-insured.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.040)  (Ord. 1256, passed 2-16-05)



§ 93.05  NUMBER OF PERMITS.



   Not more than 14 permits shall be issued during any calendar year. 
Not more than one permit shall be issued to any one qualified organization in
any calendar year.



('83 Code, § 8.20.050)  (Ord. 1066, passed -  -93)



§ 93.06  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.



   (A)   All timely filed applications for a fireworks permit shall be
reviewed by the Chief Executive Officer for the purpose of determining
whether an applicant is qualified to hold a permit.  An applicant qualifies
for a fireworks permit if the following criteria are satisfied:



      (1)   The application contains all the information required by
the provisions of this subchapter;



      (2)   The applicant is a qualified organization, as defined in
this subchapter;



      (3)   The applicant will conduct all operations in accordance
with all applicable laws;



      (4)   The safe and sane fireworks vendor proposed to be used
by the applicant has not, within the immediately preceding five years, been
convicted of a violation of any laws or regulations related to safe and sane
or dangerous fireworks; and



      (5)   At least 50% of the net proceeds from the sale of
fireworks will be expended in the city on a program or programs consistent
with the veteran, patriotic, religious, civic betterment or charitable
purpose for which the applicant is organized; and



   (B)   The City Council, by resolution, shall establish the policy
and procedure for the issuance of permits, to qualified applicants, for the
sale of fireworks.  Such policy and procedure shall be implemented by the
Chief Executive Officer.



   (C)   In the absence of an appeal filed as prescribed in this
subchapter, the determination of the Chief Executive Officer with reference
to the qualification of the applicants and the issuance of the fireworks
permits shall be final and conclusive.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.060)  (Ord. 1066, passed - - 93; Am. Ord. 1185, passed
3-27-02; Am. Ord. 1256, passed 2-16-05)



§ 93.07  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief Executive Officer with
reference to such application or permit may file an appeal therefrom in the
time and manner set forth in § 30.04.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.070)  (Ord. 1256, passed 2-16-05)



§ 93.08  APPLICATION OF LAWS.



   Issuance of a permit under this subchapter shall not be deemed to waive
any other requirement of law.



('83 Code, § 8.20.080)



§ 93.09  DANGEROUS FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or have in his possession, any
dangerous fireworks within the city.



('83 Code, § 8.20.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.10  OPERATION OF STANDS.



   (A)   Operation by permit only.  No person other than the licensed
organization shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued.



('83 Code, § 8.20.110)



   (B)   Persons participating in stand.  No person other than
individuals who are members of the licensed organization shall participate in
the operation of the stand.  There shall be at least one person, over 21
years of age, acting as the supervisor, on duty at all times.  No person
under the age of 18 years shall participate in the operation of the stand.



('83 Code, § 8.20.120)



   (C)   Adult in charge.  Each stand shall have an adult in charge
thereof, at all times when the stand is open for the sale of fireworks.



('83 Code, § 8.20.130)



   (D)   Payment for participation in stand prohibited.  No person
shall be paid any compensation for selling or otherwise participating in the
sale of fireworks at the stand.



('83 Code, § 8.20.140)



   (E)   Smoking or lighting prohibited.  No person shall light or
cause to be lighted or permit to be lighted any fireworks or other
combustible material, nor shall any person smoke within such stand or within
25 feet thereof.



('83 Code, § 8.20.230)



   (F)   Time and dates sale allowed.  Fireworks shall not be sold
prior to 12 noon on June 28, and such sale shall cease at 12:00 a.m. on July
5 of each calendar year.



('83 Code, § 8.20.240)



   (G)   Removal of stock and litter.  All unsold stock and
accompanying litter shall be removed from the stand and from the city limits
by 12 noon on July 6 of each calendar year.



('83 Code, § 8.20.250)



   (H)   Removal of stand.  Each firework stand shall be removed from
its temporary location no later than 12 noon on July 6 of each calendar year,
and all accompanying litter shall be cleared from the location by that time
and date.



('83 Code, § 8.20.260)



   (I)   Deposit required.  To insure compliance with divisions (G)
and (H) of this section and § 93.12, prior to the issuance of any permit,
the applicant shall deposit a cashier’s check, or cash in the amount of
$500 (the deposit), with the Chief Executive Officer or his or her
designee.  No earlier than August 31 of the calendar year for which the
permit is applicable, the deposit shall be returned to the applicant;
provided, that the Chief Executive Officer has reasonably determined the
applicant has complied with all the terms of the permit and this code.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 93.11  CONSTRUCTION OF STANDS.



   (A)   Construction requirements.  Firework stands need not comply
with the provisions of the Building Code of the city; provided, that all such
stands shall be erected under the supervision of the Director of Community
Services who shall require that the same be constructed in a manner which
will reasonably insure the safety of the attendants and patrons thereof;
provided, that the stand shall be constructed of metal.



(‘83 Code, § 8.20.150)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1256, passed
2-16-05)



   (B)   Location near buildings or flammable liquids.  No stand shall
be located within 25 feet of any other building or within 100 feet of any
gasoline service station, or other use which involves the use or storage of
any inflammable liquid or material.



('83 Code, § 8.20.160)



   (C)   Location from each other.  Firework stands shall be located
not less than 500 feet apart. 



('83 Code, § 8.20.170)



   (D)   Floor area.  No stand shall have a floor area in excess of
250 square feet.



('83 Code, § 8.20.180)



   (E)   Exits.  Each stand shall have exits at least 30 inches in
width at both ends of the structure, and one 30-inch exit every 20 feet on
the rear wall of the structure.  No supplies or other materials shall be
stored in front of exit doors.  Exit doors shall open outward from the stand.



('83 Code, § 8.20.190)



   (F)   Fire extinguishers.  Firework stands shall be provided with
two fire extinguishers of a type and size approved by the Fire Chief.



('83 Code, § 8.20.200)



   (G)   Weeds and combustible material.  All weeds and other
combustible materials shall be cleared from the location of the stand,
including a distance of at least 100 feet surrounding the stand. 



('83 Code, § 8.20.210)



   (H)   "No Smoking" signs.  "No smoking" signs shall be prominently
displayed on the exterior of each firework stand.



('83 Code, § 8.20.220)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Building Regulations, see Ch. 150



Statutory reference:



   For the state fireworks law, see Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 12500
et seq.



§ 93.12 REPORTING OF REVENUES AND EXPENSES.



     (A)   No later than August 6 of the year for which the permit is
applicable, the applicant shall file with the Business License Division a
written report ("Sale End Report"), which identifies the revenues and
expenses relating to the sale of fireworks conducted during that year and a
description of how the applicant intends to spend the revenues remaining
after deduction of expenses (the "net proceeds").  Proof the proposed
expenditure of the net proceeds has been officially approved by the applicant
shall be submitted with the sale end report and could be shown by official
minutes of the applicant.  The written report required by this division
shall, at a minimum, include copies of invoices for purchase of the fireworks
and receipts for all expenses.



   (B)   No later than October 31 of the year in which the sale end
report was required to be filed, the applicant shall file, with the Business
License Division, a written report showing proof the net proceeds have
actually been expended or allocated and of how the net proceeds identified in
the applicant's most recent sale end report were actually expended, with
proof the expenditure(s) were officially approved by the applicant, which
could be shown by official minutes of the applicant.  The written report
required by this division shall, at a minimum, include copies of checks for
any contributions made from net proceeds by the applicant showing the checks
have been deposited by the payee. 



   (C)   If the applicant fails to comply with division (A) of this
section, then the Chief Executive Officer shall retain $250 of the deposit;
and unless the applicant can provide sufficient reasons, as reasonably
determined by the Chief Executive Officer, why the applicant failed to comply
with division (A) of this section, the applicant will not be able to apply
for another permit during the 12-month period immediately following the
applicable August 6 deadline.



   (D)   If the applicant fails to comply with division (B) of this
section, then the Chief Executive Officer shall assess a fine of $250 on the
applicant.  The applicant will not be permitted to apply for another permit
or use a permit whose term has not yet expired unless and until that fine is
paid in full and will not be permitted to apply for another permit during the
12-month period immediately following the applicable October 31 deadline,
unless the applicant can provide sufficient reasons, as reasonably determined
by the Chief Executive Officer, why the applicant failed to comply with
division (B) of this section.  The fine may be collected through whatever
legal and equitable means are available, including, but not limited to,
rescinding a permit, or requesting equitable relief to prevent the applicant
from using a permit, whose term may not yet have expired.



   (E)   The person named pursuant to § 93.03(B)(3), shall sign all
reports required by this section and certify, under penalty of perjury, each
is accurate and complete.



(Ord. 1256, passed 2-16-05; Am. Ord. 1328, passed 5-6-09)



CHAPTER 94:  HEALTH AND SAFETY



Section



   94.01   Public health code; adopted by reference



   94.02   Capping of wells



§ 94.01  PUBLIC HEALTH CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted by reference, except as hereinafter
provided, the Los Angeles County Code, Title 11, Health and Safety as
currently in effect and as amended through Los Angeles County Ordinance No.
97-0071, and portions of Title 8, Consumer Protection as contained in Los
Angeles County Ordinance No. 97-0071. These ordinances and codes shall become
the Health and Safety Ordinance of the City of Baldwin Park protecting and
preserving the public health, safety and welfare by the enactment, inspection
and enforcement of the health regulations therein contained and providing
penalties for the violations of the Health Code.



   (B)   At least one copy of the Health Code shall be kept on file in
the office of the City Clerk or Code Enforcement Supervisor and shall be
maintained by the City Clerk or Code Enforcement Supervisor for use and
examination by the public.



   (C)   In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between the
provisions contained in the Health Code and any amendments thereto or
additions thereto contained in this chapter, the amendments or additions
thereto shall control.



   (D)   In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between any
provision contained in the Health Code and any other provision of the Baldwin
Park Municipal Code, the provisions of the Baldwin Park Municipal Code shall
have control.



(Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1171, passed 1-17-01)



§ 94.02  CAPPING OF WELLS.



   Every person who owns or controls any water well or oil well, which has
been abandoned, and every person owning or having possession of any premises
on which any such abandoned well exists, shall cap or otherwise close the
mouth of or entrance to the well in such a manner as to prevent persons from
falling therein, and in such a manner that the capping or covering cannot be
removed by accident or inadvertence.  Capping of water wells shall be
performed in accordance with standards and regulations set forth in the
public health code of the city.



('83 Code, § 8.28.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 94.5:  SMOKEFREE MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING



Section



   94.5.010   Definitions



   94.5.020   No smoking permitted in common areas, except in
designated smoking areas



   94.5.030   Nonsmoking buffer zones



   94.5.040   Smoking restrictions in new units of multi-unit residences



   94.5.050   Nonsmoking designations for existing units of a common
interest complex



   94.5.060   Nonsmoking designations for existing units of a rental
complex



   94.5.070   Required and implied lease terms for all new and existing
units in rental complexes



   94.5.080   Additional duties of a landlord of a rental complex with
less than 100% nonsmoking units



   94.5.090   Smoking prohibited by law in certain areas



   94.5.095   Smoking in family day care facilities



   94.5.100   Procedures and requirements for mandated submissions



   94.5.110   Smoking and smoke generally



   94.5.120   Penalties and enforcement



   94.5.130   Private enforcement



   94.5.140   Construction; severability



§ 94.5.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
govern unless the context clearly requires otherwise:



   COMMON AREA.  Every enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence that residents of more than one unit of that multi-unit residence
are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls and paths,
lobbies and courtyards, elevators and stairs, community rooms and
playgrounds, gym facilities and swimming pools, parking garages and parking
lots, shared restrooms, shared laundry rooms, shared cooking areas, and
shared eating areas.



   COMMON INTEREST COMPLEX.  A multi-unit residence that is a condominium
project, a community apartment project, a stock cooperative or a planned
development as defined by Cal. Civil Code § 1351.



   ENCLOSED AREA. An area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to
all parts of the area, and includes an area that has:



      (1)   Any type of overhead cover, whether or not that cover
includes vents or other openings, and at least three walls or other vertical
boundaries of any height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or
other openings; or



      (2)   Four walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six
feet in height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other
openings.



   FAMILY DAY CARE HOME.  Shall be defined as by Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 1596.78.



   LANDLORD.  Any person who owns property with a multi-unit residence
and lets that property for residential use, any person who lets residential
property used as multi-unit residences, and any person who manages such
property, except that LANDLORD does not include a master tenant who sublets a
unit, as long as the master tenant sublets only a single unit of a multi-unit
residence.



   MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCE.  Property containing two or more attached units,
except the following specifically excluded types of housing:



      (1)   A hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth
in Cal. Civil Code § 1940(b)(2), as amended;



      (2)   A mobile home park;



      (3)   A campground;



      (4)   A detached single-family dwelling; and



      (5)   A detached single-family dwelling with a detached or
attached “granny” or second unit, when permitted pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 65852.1, 65852.150 or 65852.2, or an ordinance of the city adopted
pursuant to those sections.



   NEW UNIT.  A unit that is issued a certificate of occupancy after June
2, 2012.



   NONSMOKING AREA.  Any enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence in which smoking is prohibited: (1) by this chapter or other law;
(2) by binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy or use of real
property; or (3) by designation of a person with legal control over the
enclosed or unenclosed area.  In the case of a smoking prohibition
established only by private agreement or designation and not by this chapter
or other law, it shall not be a violation of this chapter for a person to
engage in smoking or to allow smoking in a nonsmoking area unless: (1) the
person knows smoking is not permitted or (2) a reasonable person would know
smoking is not permitted.



   NONSMOKING UNIT.  A unit within a multi-unit residence designated
pursuant to and in accordance with §§ 94.5.040, 94.5.050 or 94.5.060.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, partnership, cooperative association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity, including government agencies.



   RENTAL COMPLEX.  A multi-unit residence for which 50% or more of the
units are let by or on behalf of the same landlord.



   SMOKE.  The gases, particles or vapors released into the air as a
result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent
or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is
human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing
material contains no tobacco or nicotine, and the purpose of inhalation is
solely olfactory or congestion relief, such as, for example, smoke from
incense or vapor from a congestion-relieving vaporizer.  The term SMOKE
includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors,
and marijuana smoke.



   SMOKING.  Engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for
example: possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar,
an operating electronic cigarette or a lighted cigarette of any kind, or
lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar or a cigarette of any
kind.



   SMOKING AREA. A location within a multi-unit residence designated
pursuant to and in accordance with § 94.5.020(B).



   UNENCLOSED AREA.  Any area that is not an enclosed area.



   UNIT. A personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities
or private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use
enclosed area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony,
porch, deck, or patio.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.020  NO SMOKING PERMITTED IN COMMON AREAS, EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED
SMOKING AREAS.



   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in all common areas pursuant to §
94.5.090, except that a person with legal control over a common area, such
as, for example, a landlord or homeowners’ association, may designate a
portion of the common area as a smoking area; provided, that at all times the
smoking area, at a minimum, complies with division (B) below.



   (B)   For a location to be considered a smoking area, at a minimum,
it:



      (1)   Must be an unenclosed area;



      (2)   Must be located at least 25 feet from any enclosed area
that is a nonsmoking area; provided, that a person with legal control over a
common area in which a smoking area has been designated shall modify,
relocate or eliminate that smoking area so as to maintain compliance with the
requirements of this division (B):



         (a)   As laws change;



         (b)   As binding agreements are created; and



         (c)   As nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are
established;



      (3)   Must be at least 25 feet from unenclosed areas primarily
used by children, and unenclosed areas with improvements that facilitate
physical activity, including, for example, playgrounds, tennis courts,
swimming pools and school campuses;



      (4)   Must be no more than 10% of the total unenclosed area of
the multi-unit residence for which it is designated;



      (5)   Must have a clearly marked perimeter;



      (6)   Must be identified by conspicuous signs.  The signs
shall have letters of no less than one inch in height.  Such signs shall be
maintained by the person or persons with legal control over the smoking area.



   (C)   No person with legal control over a common area in which
smoking is prohibited by this chapter or other law shall knowingly permit
within the common area the presence of any ash tray, ash can or other
receptacle designed for or primarily used for disposal of smoking waste.



   (D)   Clear and unambiguous “No Smoking" signs” shall be posted
in sufficient numbers and locations to make common areas where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter or other law obvious to a reasonable person.  The
signs shall have letters of no less than one inch in height or contain the
international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a
red bar).  Such signs shall be maintained by the person or persons with
legal control over the common areas.  The absence of signs shall not be a
defense to a violation of any provision of this chapter.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.030  NONSMOKING BUFFER ZONES.



   Smoking is prohibited in every unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence, including any balcony, porch, deck and patio, within 25 feet, in
any direction, of any doorway, window, opening or other vent into an enclosed
area that is a nonsmoking area.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.040  SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN NEW UNITS OF MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCES.



   Each new unit of a multi-unit residence is hereby designated a
nonsmoking unit, including, without limitation, each new unit in a rental
complex or in a common interest complex.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.050  NONSMOKING DESIGNATIONS FOR EXISTING UNITS OF A COMMON INTEREST
COMPLEX.



   (A)   Each unit of a common interest complex that is not a new unit
is hereby designated as a nonsmoking units as of December 2, 2014; provided,
that all the units of a common interest complex need not be designated as
nonsmoking units if the members of a common interest complex fully comply
with division (B) below.



   (B)   By a vote of the membership of the subject common interest
complex, as provided in division (B)(1) below, the members of a common
interest complex may choose to designate fewer than 100% of existing units as
nonsmoking units by fully complying with the requirements stated in division
(B)(1) through (4) below.  Otherwise, division (A) above shall apply.



      (1)   A vote by the membership of the subject common interest
complex on the threshold question of allowing less than 100% of units to be
designated nonsmoking units must take place before September 2, 2014.



      (2)   No less than 80% of units of the of the subject common
interest complex, that are not new units, shall be permanently designated as
nonsmoking units.



      (3)   Where possible, best efforts shall be made to group
nonsmoking units together, both horizontally and vertically, and physically
separate them from units where smoking may be allowed.



      (4)   No later than December 2, 2014, the final designations
must be made, and the following must be submitted in accordance with §
94.5.100:



         (a)   A description of each designated nonsmoking unit
sufficient to readily identify each one; and



         (b)   A diagram depicting the location of each
designated nonsmoking unit in relation to all other units of the of the
subject common interest complex.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.060  NONSMOKING DESIGNATIONS FOR EXISTING UNITS OF A RENTAL COMPLEX.



   (A)   All units of a rental complex that are not new units are
hereby designated nonsmoking units as of December 2, 2014; provided, that all
the units of a rental complex need not be designated nonsmoking units if the
applicable landlord fully complies with division (C) below.



   (B)   Unless a landlord fully complies with division (C) below, at
least 60 days before December 2, 2014, the landlord shall provide each tenant
with:



      (1)   A written notice clearly stating all units, including
the tenant's unit, are designated nonsmoking units and smoking in a unit will
be illegal as of December 2, 2014; and



      (2)   A copy of this chapter.



   (C)   A landlord may choose to designate fewer than 100% of existing
units, which are not new units, of a rental complex as nonsmoking units by
complying fully with the requirements stated in division (C)(1) through (7)
below.  However, division (A) above shall apply whenever a landlord takes no
action or only partially complies with the requirements of this division.



      (1)   The landlord shall permanently designate at least 80% of
units as nonsmoking units.



      (2)   To the maximum extent practicable, nonsmoking units must
be grouped together, both horizontally and vertically, and physically
separated from units where smoking may be allowed.  Where possible, all
units where smoking may be allowed shall be in a single building of a
multi-building, multi-unit residence.



      (3)   No later than December 2, 2012, a landlord who chooses
to designate fewer than 100% of the units of a multi-unit residence as
nonsmoking units shall submit the following in accordance with § 94.5.100:



         (a)   A description of each designated nonsmoking unit
sufficient to readily identify each one; and



         (b)   A diagram depicting the location of the designated
nonsmoking units in relation to all other units.



      (4)   At least 60 days before submitting the designation of
the nonsmoking units required by division (C)(3) above, the landlord shall
provide each tenant with:



         (a)   A written notice of the proposed designations,
clearly stating that smoking in a unit designated as a nonsmoking unit will
be illegal as of December 2, 2014, and inviting comments on the proposed
designations of nonsmoking units within the requisite timeline;



         (b)   A diagram depicting the location of the designated
nonsmoking units in relation to all other units: and



         (c)   A copy of this chapter.



      (5)   A landlord may modify the proposed designations based
upon comments received from tenants.



      (6)   At least 30 days before submitting the final
designations of nonsmoking units required by division (C)(3) above, the
landlord shall provide all tenants written notice of the final designations,
clearly stating smoking in a designated nonsmoking unit will be illegal as of
December 2, 2014, a copy of the final documents that will be submitted
pursuant to § 94.5.090 of this chapter, and a diagram depicting the location
of the designated nonsmoking units in relation to all other units shall be
posted on the premises. Those final designations may differ from the proposed
designations on which tenants were invited to comment.



      (7)   A unit in a rental complex for which a landlord is
required to submit information pursuant to § 94.5.090 of this chapter, but
for which such information, for any reason, is not fully and timely
submitted, is hereby designated as a nonsmoking unit as of December 2, 2014.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.070  REQUIRED AND IMPLIED LEASE TERMS FOR ALL NEW AND EXISTING UNITS
IN RENTAL COMPLEXES.



   (A)   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a
unit in a rental complex, including, for example, new units and existing
units, entered into, renewed or continued month-to-month after December 2,
2011, shall include the provisions set forth in division (B) below, on the
earliest possible date when such an amendment is allowable by law, when
providing the minimum legal notice.



   (B)   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a
unit in a rental complex, including, for example, new units and existing
units, entered into, renewed or continued month-to-month after December 2,
2011, shall be amended to include the following provisions:



      (1)   A clause providing that, as of December 2, 2014, it is a
material breach of the agreement to allow or engage in smoking in the unit
unless the landlord has supplied written notice the unit has not been
designated a nonsmoking unit and no other prohibition against smoking
applies.  Such a clause might state, “It is a material breach of this
agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant
or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in
the unit as of December 2, 2014, unless landlord has provided written notice
the unit has not been designated a nonsmoking unit and smoking in the unit is
not otherwise prohibited by this agreement, other agreements or by law.”



      (2)   A clause providing it is a material breach of the
agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant
or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in
any common area of the property other than a smoking area.  Such a clause
might state, “It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any
other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or
permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in any common area of the
property, except in an outdoor area designated for smoking, if one exists."



      (3)   A clause providing it is a material breach of the
agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant
or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate any law
regulating smoking while anywhere on the property.  Such a clause might
state, “It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or any other
person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation or
permission of the tenant to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere
on the property.”



      (4) A clause expressly conveying third-party beneficiary status
to all occupants of the rental complex as to the smoking provisions of the
agreement.  Such a clause might state, “Other occupants of the property
are expressly third-party beneficiaries of those provisions in this agreement
that concern smoking.  As such, other occupants of the property may seek to
enforce such provisions by any lawful means, including by bringing a civil
action in a court of law.”



   (C)   Whether or not a landlord complies with divisions (A) and (B)
above, the clauses required by those divisions shall be implied and
incorporated by law into every agreement to which division (A) or (B)
applies, and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on which
the landlord could have made the insertions pursuant to division (A) or (B).



   (D)   A tenant who breaches a smoking provision of a lease or other
rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex, or who
knowingly permits any other person subject to the control of the tenant or
present by invitation or permission of the tenant, shall be liable for the
breach to:



      (1)   The landlord; and



      (2)   Any occupant of the rental complex exposed to smoke or
suffering damages as a result of the breach.



   (E)   This chapter shall not create additional liability for a
landlord to any person for a tenant's breach of any smoking provision in a
lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental
complex, if the landlord has fully complied with this section and § 94.5.060.



   (F)   Failure to enforce any smoking provision required by this
chapter shall not affect the right to enforce such provision in the future,
nor shall a waiver of any breach constitute a waiver of any subsequent breach
or a waiver of the provision itself.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.080  ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF A LANDLORD OF A RENTAL COMPLEX WITH LESS
THAN 100% NONSMOKING UNITS.



   A landlord of a rental complex with less than 100% nonsmoking units
shall provide to every prospective tenant, prior to entering into a new lease
or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a rental complex, a
copy of the designation documents submitted pursuant to § 94.5.060,
describing each designated nonsmoking unit, with an accompanying diagram
depicting the location of nonsmoking units in relation to all other units and
every smoking area, if any.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.090  SMOKING PROHIBITED BY LAW IN CERTAIN AREAS.



   (A)   No person shall engage in smoking in a common area on or after
December 2, 2011, other than in a designated smoking area established
pursuant to § 94.5.020.



   (B)   Smoking in a new unit, after June 2, 2012, is a violation of
this chapter.



   (C)   Smoking in a designated nonsmoking unit, on or after December
2, 2014, is a violation of this chapter.



   (D)   No person shall engage in smoking in any nonsmoking area.



   (E)   No person with legal control over any nonsmoking area shall
permit smoking in any nonsmoking area.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.095  SMOKING IN FAMILY DAY CARE FACILITIES.



   State law prohibits smoking in a single-family dwelling licensed as a
family day care home during operations of that facility for that purpose. 
If smoking is permitted and occurring at a location licensed as a family day
care home during hours of non-operation of that facility for day care
purposes, then the person with legal control over the family day care home
must disclose, to the parents and guardians of the those potentially to be
serviced by that facility, that smoking is permitted and does occur at that
facility during those hours of non-operation.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.100  PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR MANDATED SUBMISSIONS.



   (A)   Submissions required by this chapter must be received by the
Community Development Department on or before any applicable due date.  The
submissions shall include all material and information required by this
chapter, and such other materials and information as the Community
Development Manager deems necessary for the administration and enforcement of
this chapter.



   (B)   All material and information submitted pursuant to this
chapter constitute disclosable public records and are not private or
confidential.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.110  SMOKING AND SMOKE GENERALLY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are restrictive only and
establish no new rights for a person who engages in smoking. 
Notwithstanding (1) any provision of this chapter or other provisions of this
code, (2) any failure by any person to restrict smoking under this chapter,
or (3) any explicit or implicit provision of this code that allows smoking in
any place, nothing in this code shall be interpreted to limit any person's
legal rights under other laws with regard to smoking, including, for example,
rights in nuisance, trespass, property damage and personal injury, or other
legal or equitable principles.



   (B)   For all purposes within the jurisdiction of the city,
non-consensual exposure to smoke is a nuisance, and the uninvited presence of
smoke on property is a nuisance and a trespass.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.120  PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.



   (B)   Subject to the remainder of this division, every instance of
smoking in violation of this chapter is an infraction subject to a fine of
$500; provided, that:



      (1)   A second instance of smoking in violation of this
chapter within 12 consecutive months after a prior instance is an infraction
subject to a fine of  $750; and



      (2)   A third or any additional instance of smoking in
violation of this chapter within 12 months after a second or any additional
instance is an infraction subject to a fine or $1,000.



   (C)   Any peace officer, code enforcement official or the City
Attorney may also enforce this chapter.



   (D)   Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action
brought by the city, punishable by a civil fine not less than $250 and not
exceeding $1,000 per violation.



   (E)   No person shall intimidate, harass or otherwise retaliate
against any person who seeks compliance with this chapter.  Moreover, no
person shall intentionally or recklessly expose another person to smoke in
response to that person's effort to achieve compliance with this chapter.
Violation of this division shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (F)   Causing, permitting, aiding or abetting a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (G)   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance,



   (H)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter, or
otherwise available at law or in equity, any violation of this chapter may be
remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney, including, without
limitation, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil
code enforcement proceedings and suits for injunctive relief.



   (I)   Except as otherwise provided, civil enforcement of this
chapter is at the sole discretion of the city.  Nothing in this chapter
shall create a right of action in any person against the city or its agents
to compel civil or criminal enforcement of this chapter against private
parties.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.130  PRIVATE ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Any person, including a legal entity or organization or a
government agency, acting for the interests of itself, its members or the
general public, may bring a civil action to enforce this chapter.  Upon
proof of a violation, a court shall award the following:



      (1)   Damages either:



         (a)   Upon proof, in the amount of actual damages; or



         (b)   With insufficient or no proof of damages, $500.00
for each violation of this chapter (hereinafter “statutory damages”). 
Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no person suing on
behalf of the general public shall recover statutory damages, based upon a
violation of this chapter, if a previous claim brought on behalf of the
general public by another person for statutory damages, and based upon the
same violation, has been adjudicated, whether or not the person bringing the
subsequent claim was a party to the prior adjudication.



      (2)   Exemplary damages, where it is proven by clear and
convincing evidence the defendant is guilty of oppression, fraud, malice,
retaliation or a conscious disregard for the public health, in the amount, as
determined by the fact-finder, necessary to further the public purpose of
this chapter.



   (B)   Any person may also bring a civil action to enforce this
chapter by way of a conditional judgment or an injunction.  Upon proof of a
violation, a court shall issue a conditional judgment or an injunction.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any legal or equitable bar against a person
seeking relief on its own behalf, a person may bring an action to enforce
this chapter solely on behalf of the general public.  When a person brings
an action solely on behalf of the general public, nothing about such an
action shall act to preclude or bar the person from bringing a subsequent
action, based upon the same facts but seeking relief on his, her or its own
behalf.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a person from bringing a
civil action in small claims court to enforce this chapter, so long as the
amount in demand and the type of relief sought are within the jurisdictional
requirements of that court.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



§ 94.5.140  CONSTRUCTION; SEVERABILITY.



   It is the intent of the City Council to supplement applicable state and
federal law, not to duplicate or contradict such law.  This chapter shall be
construed consistently with that intention.  If any section, division,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or its application to
any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid or
unenforceable, then such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the
validity or enforceability of the remaining sections, divisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter, or their application to any
other person or circumstance.  The City Council hereby declares it would
have adopted each section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this chapter, irrespective of the fact any one or more other sections,
divisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared
invalid or unenforceable.



(Ord. 1332, passed 11-2-11)



CHAPTER 95:  NUISANCES



Section



   95.01   Definitions



   95.02   Declaration of nuisance



   95.03   Violations



   95.04   Abatement



   95.05   Commencement of abatement proceedings



   95.06   Right to appeal



   95.07   Appeal procedure



   95.08   Recordation of notice of nuisance condition



   95.09   Abatement of nuisance by city



   95.10   Determination of cost of abatement



   95.11   Lien against property



   95.12   Special assessment against property



   95.13   Civil action to abate nuisance



   95.14   Treble costs



   95.15   Emergency abatement



   95.16   Abatement of graffiti



Cross-reference:



   Abandoned vehicles, see Ch. 90



   Removal of obstructions, see § 97.046



§ 95.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING CODE.  The building regulations adopted by the city as set
forth in Chapter 150 of this code and each other building code or regulation
which the city is deemed to have adopted or required to enforce pursuant to
state law.



   CODE or ORDINANCE.  This code, any code or ordinance which has been
adopted by the city by reference whether through this code or otherwise, any
other city ordinance, any regulation adopted by the City Council pursuant to
the authority of this code, any code or ordinance adopted by reference or any
other city ordinance, and any condition of approval imposed upon any license,
permit or other discretionary approval issued by the city pursuant to the
authority of this code, any code or ordinance adopted by reference or any
other city ordinance.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The city's Chief Executive Officer. When any
provision of this chapter refers to the Chief Executive Officer, it shall be
deemed to include any person designated by the Chief Executive Officer to
undertake the action so delegated.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Community Development. When any provision of
this chapter refers to the Director, it shall be deemed to include any person
designated by the Director to undertake the action so delegated.



   HEARING AUTHORITY.  The Chief Executive Officer. The Chief Executive
Officer may delegate the duty of hearing matters under this chapter to a
designee, including but not limited to a person retained on contract with the
city, provided, however, that the choice of designee shall be consistent with
all obligations of law relating to due process for the particular hearing to
be held by such designee.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, alley, court, sidewalk, park, or other
place owned by the city or any other governmental entity.



   REAL PROPERTY or PROPERTY.  Any lot and parcel in the city and every
part thereof, including, but not limited to that portion of the lot or parcel
which is subject to a public right-of-way, commonly referred to as the
parkway.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.02  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   It is declared a public nuisance for any person, owning, leasing,
occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property in this city:



   (A)   To maintain any building or structure on the property which is
structurally unsafe, or is not provided with adequate ingress and egress, or
which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life.



   (B)   To maintain the property, the topography or configuration of
which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, causes
or will cause erosion, subsidence, or surface water runoff problems which
will, or may, be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to
adjacent properties.



   (C)   To maintain upon such property clotheslines in any front yard
area visible from a public place or in any backyard area which is not
surrounded by a six-foot solid fence.



   (D)   To maintain upon such property trash, garbage or refuse cans,
bins, boxes, or other such containers:



      (1)   In any front or side yard where such container is
visible from any public place except as is otherwise permitted by a code or
ordinance; or



      (2)   In any rear yard where such container is visible to
adjacent properties, except as is otherwise permitted by a code or ordinance;
or



      (3)   In any place in such condition so as to cause offensive
odors on any other property.



   (E)   To maintain upon such property lumber, junk, trash, debris or
salvage materials visible from a public place or from any adjoining property,
except as is otherwise permitted by a code or ordinance.



   (F)   To maintain upon such property an attractive nuisance
dangerous to children. For purposes of this division, an attractive nuisance
includes, but is not limited to, abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment
and machinery, refrigerators and freezers, and hazardous pools, ponds, or
excavations.



   (G)   To maintain upon such property abandoned, discarded or unused
furniture, stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other household fixtures or
equipment stored so as to be visible from a public place or from any
adjoining property, except as is otherwise permitted by a code or ordinance.



   (H)   To maintain upon such property any building or structure:



      (1)   Which does not have paint, sealant, or other protective
coating appropriate to the material of the building or structure on all parts
of the building or structure not surfaced with stone, brick or other material
not requiring such coating; or



      (2)   Which has dry rot, warping or termite infestation; or



      (3)   Which has peeling, chipped, or cracked paint, sealant,
or other coating material upon any portion of such building or structure
which is visible from a public place or from any adjoining property.



   (I)     (1)   To maintain upon such property:



         (a)   Overgrown vegetation; or



         (b)   Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees; or



         (c)   Weeds and other vegetation likely to harbor rats,
vermin or nuisances or which may be a fire hazard.



      (2)   This division  shall not apply to trees in the parkways
which the city maintains pursuant to  §97.130.



   (J)   To maintain the property as a dumping ground or lot for
illegal parking. Whenever it has been determined that any unimproved real
property within the city has become a dumping ground for litter, garbage,
junk, debris, discarded furniture, appliances, vehicles, vehicle parts or
vehicle hulks, or has become a site for repeated illegal vehicle parking, the
Director may order the property owner(s) to secure the property to prevent
further dumping on the property by requiring the owner(s) to erect and
maintain a minimum six-foot high fence of chain link or such other material
as is determined by the Director to reduce or eliminate accessibility to the
property.



   (K)   To maintain upon such property a building or structure which
is not completed within a reasonable time or for which the permit for the
construction has expired.



   (L)   To maintain upon such property fences or walls:



      (1)   Which violate the requirements of a code or ordinance
regarding height, setbacks, or materials; or



      (2)   Which are in a hazardous condition; or



      (3)   Which are in disrepair; or



      (4)   Which hinder free access to public sidewalks.



   (M)   To maintain any building or structure which has been
constructed or is maintained in violation of any requirement or prohibition
applicable to the building or structure contained in any code or ordinance,
or contained in any statute, law, regulation, or order of the state relating
to the condition, location, or construction of buildings.



   (N)   To maintain any building or structure where by reason of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, or damage, the building
or structure is in such condition as to constitute a fire hazard or to
provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of fire
arising from any cause.



   (O)   To abandon or vacate any building or structure so that the
same becomes available to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited
to, juveniles.



   (P)   To maintain any building or structure in dangerous condition.
For the purpose of this section, a building or structure shall be deemed to
be in a dangerous condition under any of the following circumstances:



      (1)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to
provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.



      (2)   Whenever the load on any materials, member or portion
thereof, due to all dead and live loads, exceeds the allowable load for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.



      (3)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire,
earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, to such an extent that the
structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was
before the catastrophe.



      (4)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof
is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and
thereby injure persons or damage property.



      (5)   Whenever any portion of a building, or any member,
appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place
so as to be capable of resisting wind pressure.



      (6)   Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped,
buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions
have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in
the case of similar new construction.



      (7)   Whenever the building or structure, or any portion
thereof, is likely to partially or completely collapse because of
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; faulty construction; the removal,
movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the
purpose of supporting the building; the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of
its foundation; or any other cause.



      (8)   Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or
any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is
being used.



      (9)   Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural
members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumbline passing
through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of
the base.



      (10)   Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the
foundation, shows 25% or more damage or deterioration of its supporting
member or members, or 35% damage or deterioration of its non-supporting
members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.



      (11)    Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged
by fire, wind, earthquake, or flood, or has become so dilapidated or
deteriorated, as to become an attractive nuisance or to be capable of being
occupied by an unauthorized person.



      (12)   Whenever any building or structure has been
constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any requirement or
prohibition applicable to the building or structure contained in any code or
ordinance or contained in any statute, law, regulation, or order of the state
relating to the condition, location, or construction of buildings.



      (13)   Whenever any building or structure which, whether or
not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any
non-supporting part, member or portion, less than 65%, or in any supporting
part, member, or portion less than 75% of the strength, fire-resisting
qualities or characteristics, or weather-resisting qualities or
characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building
of like area, height and occupancy in the same location.



      (14)   Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to
be used for dwelling purposes because of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate
light, air or sanitation facilities or otherwise is determined by a city,
county or other governmental health officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease.



      (15)   Whenever any building or structure, because of
obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits,
lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas
connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the Fire
Marshal to be a fire hazard.



      (16)   Whenever any building or structure is in such a
condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in
equity jurisprudence.



      (17)   Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains
on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure.



      (18)   Whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six months so as to constitute the building or portion
thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.



   (Q)   To store or maintain any toxic or hazardous waste or material
on any such property in any manner which is not in full compliance with all
laws and regulations governing storage and maintenance of such waste or
material or which is, or may become, injurious to persons or to adjacent
properties.



   (R)   To maintain any such property which is vacant and located in
any commercial or industrial zone without lawn or groundcover over the
entirety thereof, or without an appropriate irrigation system to maintain
such lawn or groundcover. With the prior written approval of the Director,
xeriscape (i.e., drought tolerant landscaping for which irrigation is not
required) may be substituted for such lawn or groundcover.



   (S)   To maintain inadequate landscaping upon any portion of such
property that is visible from any public place if the property is located in
a residential zone; or to maintain inadequate landscaping upon any portion of
any such property in any commercial or industrial zone. For purposes of this
division, inadequate landscaping means such landscaping as results in a
diminution of the appearance of the subject property as compared with
adjacent property, or degrades the aesthetic quality of the subject property,
or reduces property values in the immediate neighborhood, and includes but is
not limited to the following:



      (1)   Lack of groundcover or lawns, shrubs, or other
vegetation on any portion of the property not otherwise developed with a
structure, paving, or landscaping hardscape;



      (2)   Insufficient groundcover, lawn, or other landscaping
material on the property, resulting in blowing dust ad/or soil erosion;



      (3)   Trees, shrubs, lawn, or other plants that are dying from
lack of water, fertilizer or maintenance, or from disease;



      (4)   Failure to comply with any landscaping plan approved by
the city in connection with the issuance of any land use approval for the
property.



   (T)   To maintain upon such property any operable vehicle in any
yard area visible from any public place other than on a paved driveway
installed in accordance with a code or ordinance.



   (U)   To maintain upon such property any trailer, camper shell,
boat, or inoperable vehicle in any yard area visible from any public place,
including but not limited to on any paved driveway, for any period in excess
of 72 hours.



   (V)   To maintain, for a period in excess of 48 hours, graffiti or
other inscribed material upon any building or structure on such property, or
upon any vehicle parked in any area of property which is visible from any
public place. For purposes of this division GRAFFITI OR OTHER INSCRIBED
MATERIAL includes any inscription, word, figure, mark, or design that is
written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on real property or any
building, structure, or other fixture thereon, or on any private property
placed on such real property, without the consent of the owner or lessee of
such property, or on any poster, paper or other support attached to real or
personal property by staples, glue or other means without the consent of the
owner or lessee of such property.



   (W)   To maintain upon such property any sign, notice or
announcement, where the matter or event to which such sign, notice or
announcement relates has passed, or the time period for which such sign,
notice or announcement is relevant has otherwise expired. The provisions of
this section shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of any other
provisions of a code or ordinance relating to signs, notices and/or
announcements.



   (X)   To maintain any property for which a discretionary approval
has been obtained, including but not limited to a subdivision map,
conditional use permit, or variance, in any manner which is not in compliance
with the conditions of approval established by such discretionary approval.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.03  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, owning, leasing, occupying, or
having charge or possession of any real property or any building or structure
thereon to maintain any public nuisance as declared by § 95.02.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to violate an order of abatement
made pursuant to this chapter.



   (C)   It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove any
notice or order posted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   It is unlawful for any person in possession of any building or
structure to fail to vacate the building or structure in accordance with an
order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere
with any representative of the city, or any person who owns or holds any
estate or interest in any real property or any building or structure thereon
which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished
and removed, whenever any such representative of the city, or person having
such interest or estate is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating, or
demolishing and removing any such property or building or structure pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, or is performing any necessary act
preliminary to or incidental to work authorized or directed pursuant to this
chapter.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.04  ABATEMENT.



   All or any part of any real property or building or structure located
thereon which constitutes a public nuisance as declared in § 95.02 may be
abated by the procedures set forth in this chapter. A criminal prosecution
may be brought pursuant to § 95.03(A) whether or not such abatement
proceedings having first occurred.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.05  COMMENCEMENT OF ABATEMENT PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Whenever the Director reasonably believes a nuisance exists,
he or she may issue an order of abatement.



   (B)   (1)   An order of abatement shall contain:



         (a)   A description of the real property in general
terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property;



         (b)   A description of the condition(s) creating the
nuisance(s);



         (c)   A description of the action(s) required to abate
the nuisance(s); and



         (d)   The time period for such abatement action(s) to
occur.



      (2)   The time period for abatement shall be not less than
seven calendar days, unless the Director determines the abatement may
reasonably be accomplished in a shorter period of time and the order is
personally served on the owner of the property not less than three days prior
to the date by which abatement must be completed.



   (C)   An order of abatement shall be served as follows:



      (1)   To the owner of the property as shown on the latest
equalized assessment roll by personal delivery or by mailing the order to the
address(es) indicated thereon by registered or certified mail, provided,
however, that if such registered or certified mail is refused, the order may
then be served by first class mail; and



      (2)   By conspicuously posting the order on the property.



   (D)   The failure of any person to receive an order of abatement
which has been served as set forth in division (C) shall not affect the
validity of any proceedings under this chapter.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.06  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   An order of abatement may be appealed by the property owner, the
property owner's authorized agent, or a person in legal possession of the
property. A written request for appeal must be filed with the City Clerk
prior to expiration of the time set forth in the order of abatement for
abatement of the nuisance. If a request for appeal is not filed within such
time, the order of the Director shall become final. Where a timely request
for appeal is filed, the order of abatement shall be suspended pending review
of the determination by the hearing officer pursuant to  § 95.07.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a timely request for appeal, the Chief
Executive Officer shall set a date and time for hearing the appeal and shall
give notice thereof to the appellant at the address set forth in the request
for appeal. A copy of said notice shall also be sent to the owner(s) of the
subject property, if the owner(s) is not the appellant. Such notices shall be
sent by registered or certified mail, provided, however, that if such
registered or certified mail is refused, the order may then be served by
first class mail.



   (B)   At the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all
relevant evidence and shall give all interested parties a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. An appellant's failure to attend the hearing shall
constitute an abandonment of the request for appeal and a failure to exhaust
administrative remedies.



   (C)   Within five working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the
hearing officer shall determine, based upon the evidence presented at the
hearing, whether then notice of abatement shall be upheld, and shall give
written notice of his or her decision to the appellant, to the owner of the
property (if such person is not the appellant), and to any other person who
has filed a written request for such notice. If the order of abatement is
upheld in whole or in part, the notice of such decision shall constitute a
revised order of abatement and shall contain:



      (1)   A description of the real property in general terms
reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property;



      (2)   A description of the condition(s) creating the
nuisance(s);



      (3)   A description of the action(s) required to abate the
nuisance(s); and



      (4)   The time period within which such abatement action(s)
must be completed. The revised order of abatement shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail, provided, however, that if such
registered or certified mail is refused, the revised order of abatement may
then be served by first class mail.



   (D)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and
conclusive.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.08 RECORDATION OF NOTICE OF NUISANCE CONDITION.



   At such time as an order of abatement is final, if the nuisance is not
abated within the time period set forth in the order, the Chief Executive
Officer may cause to be recorded against the property in the office of the
County Recorder a notice that a public nuisance has been determined to exist
on the property and that an order of abatement has been issued pertaining
thereto. The Chief Executive Officer shall cause a release of said notice to
be recorded only at such time as the nuisance has been abated.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.09  ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE BY CITY.



   (A)   If a nuisance is not completely abated by the date specified
in a final order of abatement, the Director may immediately cause the same to
be abated by city personnel or by persons under contract with the city. The
Director is authorized to grant reasonable extensions of the time period for
abatement provided in the order of abatement, based on a showing by the
property owner of extenuating circumstances, provided that the application
for extension is filed with the Director prior to the date the city abates
the nuisance or enters into an agreement for such work. The owner of the
property shall be liable to the city for all costs of such abatement.



   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above,
if abatement of the nuisance requires the demolition of all or any portion of
any building located on the property, before such demolition may be
accomplished, each owner and each holder of a security interest in the
property shall be given notice and an opportunity to remedy the nuisance by
means other than demolition. The persons to whom notice shall be given shall
be determined by a title report for the subject property which is not more
than one month old. The notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail,
and shall state:



         (a)   The address of the subject property;



         (b)   That a determination has been made that a building
on the subject property constitutes a public nuisance;



         (c)   That abatement proceedings were commenced pursuant
to this chapter and are now complete;



         (d)   That the nuisance has not been abated;



         (e)   That the city intends to abate the nuisance by
demolition of all or a portion of the building; and



         (f)   That any person to whom an order of abatement has
not previously been issued may, within 15 days from the date of the notice,
file with the Director a request to stay the demolition, which request must
be accompanied by a proposed schedule of performance for remediation of the
nuisance and a statement that such person will enter into an agreement to
effect such remediation in accord with such schedule.



      (2)   Upon receipt of a timely and complete request, the
Director shall stay the proposed demolition for such reasonable period as is
necessary to obtain from the person filing the timely request a written
agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, pursuant to which such
person shall perform the remediation. The Director may require as a condition
of such agreement that such person post security in the form of cash, a bond,
or a letter of credit to secure the performance of the remediation in accord
with the schedule of performance.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.10  DETERMINATION OF COST OF ABATEMENT.



   (A)   If the Director is required to cause the abatement of a public
nuisance pursuant to the provisions of § 95.09, he or she shall keep an
accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses for the
abatement. The term incidental expenses includes, but is not limited to, the
actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices,
specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, and the costs of
printing and mailings required by this chapter. The term incidental expenses
shall also include the recovery of attorneys fees in any action,
administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate the nuisance,
provided, however, that attorneys' fees shall be recoverable only if the city
elected upon initiation of the action to seek such recovery, in which case,
attorneys' fees will be payable to the prevailing party in such action. For
purposes of this section, the city shall be deemed the prevailing party if it
prevails on at least one claim of nuisance brought in connection with the
proceeding. Upon conclusion of the abatement, the Director shall submit an
itemized statement of costs to the Chief Executive Officer.



   (B)   The Chief Executive Officer shall set a time and place for his
or her consideration of the report and any objections or protests, and shall
cause notice of the time and place of said hearing to be given to the
owner(s) of the property to which the report relates by first class, United
States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner(s) at the address shown
on the latest equalized assessment roll. Such notice shall be mailed at least
five business days in advance of the scheduled hearing date. Mailed notice of
said hearing shall also be given to any other interested person who has filed
a written request for the same, at the address on such request.



   (C)   At the time and place fixed for consideration of the report,
the Chief Executive Officer shall hear and pass upon the report of the
Director, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the
persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating the nuisance. Upon
conclusion of said hearing, the Chief Executive Officer shall make such
revision, correction or modification to the report as he or she may deem
just, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or
modified, shall be confirmed. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
The decision of the Chief Executive Officer shall be final.



   (D)   The cost of abatement as so confirmed shall be a personal
obligation of the owner(s) of the property on which the nuisance was
maintained. The cost of abatement as so confirmed shall also be a lien
against the property as set forth in § 95.11 or a special assessment against
the property as set forth in § 95.12.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.11  LIEN AGAINST PROPERTY.



   The confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any property may be
made a lien against that property by recordation in the Los Angeles County
Recorders Office. Prior to recordation of the lien, notice shall also be sent
by certified mail to the owner(s) of record of the property based on the last
equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more
current, and notice of such lien shall also be served as set forth in
California Government Code § 38773.1. The nuisance abatement lien shall
state the amount of the lien, the fact the lien is imposed on the city's
behalf, the date of the order of abatement, the street address, legal
description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is
imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner(s) of the parcel. The
lien may be foreclosed upon in an action brought by the city for a money
judgment. In the event the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either
through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the
information required herein shall be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.12  SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AGAINST PROPERTY.



   As an alternative to making the confirmed cost of abatement of a
nuisance a lien against the property on which such nuisance was located, the
confirmed cost of abatement may be made a special assessment against that
property pursuant to the provisions of this section. Notice of such
assessment shall be sent by certified mail to the property owner at the
address as determined from the County Assessor's records. Said notice shall
specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector
for unpaid delinquent assessments. Notice of the special assessment shall
also be transmitted to the tax collector for the city, whereupon it shall be
the duty of the tax collector to add the amounts of the assessment to the
next regular bills of taxes levied against that lot or parcels of land.
Thereafter the assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the
same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes, except as provided in
California Government Code § 38773.5.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.13  CIVIL ACTION TO ABATE NUISANCE.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Council
from ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil action to abate a
nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with any
criminal proceeding or nuisance abatement proceeding brought pursuant to this
chapter. Should the City Attorney be directed to bring a civil action
pursuant to this section, the actual expenses and costs of maintaining such
action, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys' fees, shall be
recovered to the extent permitted by law, including but not limited to
pursuant to §§  95.10 and 95.11.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.14  TREBLE COSTS.



   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within
a two-year period finding that an owner of property, or a minor or other
person as defined in California Government Code § 38772(d)(3) is responsible
for a condition that may be abated pursuant to this chapter, except for
conditions abated pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code § 17980,
a court may order that person to pay treble the costs of abatement.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.15  EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter with reference to
the abatement of a public nuisance, whenever the Director determines that a
public nuisance, within the meaning of this chapter, exists on any property
in the city and constitutes an immediate hazard or danger to persons or
property, he or she may immediately and forthwith abate such public nuisance
without observing the provisions of this chapter. Where the abatement is
lawfully accomplished pursuant to this section, the costs thereof shall be a
determined and charged against the owner(s) of the property as set forth in
§§ 95.10 and 95.11.



(Ord. 1281, passed 3-1-06)



§ 95.16  ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI.



   (A)   Obligation to remove graffiti.  Notwith- standing any other
provision of this chapter or other abatement procedure set forth in this Code
or established by law, and as an available but not required alternative to
those provisions or procedures, if graffiti or other inscribed material
visible from any public place remains on any wall, fence, building,
structure, window, vehicle, equipment or other location on private property,
for a period in excess of 48 hours after the Director posts of a notice as
described in this section, then the city may remove or cause the removal of
that graffiti or other inscribed material and recover costs, including
administrative costs in accordance with this section.



   (B)   Notice of graffiti.  The notice described in division (A) of
this section shall include the information set forth in § 95.05(B) and shall
be securely attached, as reasonably determined by the Director, to the wall,
fence, building, structure, window, vehicle, equipment or other location on
private property where the graffiti or other inscribed material is located. 
The notice shall be on legal sized (8.5" X 14") card stock, in at least
14-point font, have the words "NOTICE OF IMMEDIATE ABATEMENT" in 20-point,
bolded font at the top of the page and shall be printed in English and
Spanish.  The posting shall be completed between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
If at the time notice is posted the Director reasonably determines a person
who controls the property is present, then the Director shall also hand
deliver a copy of the notice to that person.



   (C)   Appeal.  If the property owner does not file an appeal with
the City Clerk pursuant to § 95.06 and the graffiti or other inscribed
material remains for a period in excess of the time stated in the notice
provided pursuant to division (B) of this section, then the city may, but is
not required to, take any and all actions necessary to remove that graffiti
or other inscribed material and recover the costs of such removal, including
administrative costs, pursuant to §§ 95.11 or 95.12.



(Ord. 1323, passed 2-4-09)



CHAPTER 95.5:  SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES



Section



   95.5.01   Definitions



   95.5.02   Declaration of nuisance



   95.5.03   Vesting of title



   95.5.04   Seizure of vehicles subject to forfeiture; seizure
proceedings



   95.5.05   Seized vehicles as evidence



   95.5.06   Return of seized vehicles if no authorization to hold



   95.5.07   Forfeiture of vehicle; procedures



   95.5.08   Innocent parties; return of vehicle



   95.5.09   Claim procedures



   95.5.10   Forfeiture hearing



   95.5.11   Forfeiture of vehicles determined to be nuisances



   95.5.12   Alternative settlement procedures



   95.5.13   Proceeds of forfeiture



   95.5.14   Nonexclusive remedy



§ 95.5.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY. The City of Baldwin Park.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, substance or immediate precursor as
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11007, or any controlled substance
analog as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11401.



   DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the City of Baldwin Park.



   ILLEGAL DUMPING. The dumping, depositing, placing or burying of any
solid waste in or upon any lot, land or public place, or in any water or
waterway, unless such place of disposal is used by the city for a disposal or
reclamation site or such solid waste is deposited in a receptacle intended to
be used for the disposal of such solid waste.



   OWNER. The last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle
that is used to illegally dump solid waste or which is used by any person who
acquires, or attempts to acquire, a controlled substance or who solicits or
agrees to engage, or engages in, an act of prostitution, or who engages in
pimping or pandering, as such owner is shown on records of the Department of
Motor Vehicles or similar state entity.



   PANDERING. The acts prohibited by Cal. Penal Code § 266i.



   PIMPING. The acts prohibited by Cal. Penal Code § 266h.



   PROSTITUTION. The acts prohibited by Cal. Penal Code § 647(b).



   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, hazardous waste, refuse, and rubbish as those
terms are defined in § 50.01 of this Code.



   VEHICLE. A vehicle as defined in Cal. Vehicle Code § 670.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.02  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE. 



   Any person, or his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases,
conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle for the purpose of (1) acquiring or
attempting to acquire a controlled substance, (2) illegal dumping, or (3)
pandering, pimping, or prostitution, shall be guilty of committing a
nuisance.  Any vehicle used to (1) acquire or attempt to acquire a
controlled substance, (2) illegally dump, or (3) to commit acts of pandering,
pimping, or prostitution, is also declared to be a nuisance and shall be
subject to seizure and forfeiture as provided in this chapter.  This
declaration of nuisance is made according to the authority of Government Code
§ 38771.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.03  VESTING OF TITLE.



   Subject to the requirements of §§ 95.5.04 and 95.5.08, and except as
further limited by this chapter to protect innocent parties who claim an
interest in any vehicle, all right, title, and interest in any vehicle used
to (1) acquire or attempt to acquire a controlled substance, (2) illegally
dump, or (3) commit acts of pandering, pimping, or prostitution, shall vest
in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to forfeiture.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.04  SEIZURE OF VEHICLES SUBJECT TO FORFEITURE; SEIZURE PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   A vehicle subject to forfeiture under this chapter may be
seized by any peace officer of the city upon process issued by any court
having jurisdiction over the vehicle.  Seizure without process may be made
if any of the following situations exist:



      (1)   The seizure is incident to an arrest or a search under a
search warrant.



      (2)   There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was
used or is intended to be used for the purpose of acquiring or attempting to
acquire a controlled substance, illegal dumping, pandering, pimping, or
prostitution.



      (3)   There is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is
directly or indirectly dangerous to the health or safety of persons or
property.



   (B)   The city may notify the Franchise Tax Board of a vehicle
seized where there is reasonable cause to believe that the value of the
seized vehicle exceeds $5,000.



   (C)   Receipts for vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter shall be
delivered to any person out of whose possession such vehicle was seized, in
accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 1412.  There shall be a presumption
affecting the burden of proof that a person to whom a receipt was issued is
the owner thereof.  This presumption may, however, be rebutted at the
forfeiture hearing specified in § 95.5.09.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.05  SEIZED VEHICLES AS EVIDENCE.



   A vehicle seized pursuant to § 95.5.04, where appropriate, may be held
for evidence.  The City Attorney or District Attorney shall institute and
maintain the proceedings.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.06  RETURN OF SEIZED VEHICLES IF NO AUTHORIZATION TO HOLD.



   Within 15 days after seizure, if the peace officer does not hold the
vehicle for evidence or if the Department does not refer the matter in
writing for institution of forfeiture proceedings by the City Attorney or
District Attorney, the peace officer or Department shall comply with any
notice to withhold issued to the city with respect to the vehicle by the
Franchise Tax Board.  If no notice to withhold has been issued with respect
to the vehicle by the Franchise Tax Board, the peace officer or the
Department shall return the vehicle to the registered owner.  Alternatively,
the city may return the vehicle to the registered lienholder upon the
lienholder’s filing of a hold harmless agreement on behalf of the city. The
hold harmless agreement shall be acceptable to the Department and the City
Attorney.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.07  FORFEITURE OF VEHICLE; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (G), if the City Attorney or
District Attorney determines that factual circumstances warrant that the
vehicle is subject to forfeiture, and is not automatically made forfeitable
by another provision of this chapter, the City Attorney or District Attorney
shall file a petition for forfeiture with the Superior Court of Los Angeles
County.



   (B)   A petition for forfeiture under this division shall be filed
as soon as practicable, but in any case within one year of the seizure of the
vehicle which is subject to forfeiture.



   (C)   Physical seizure of the vehicle shall not be necessary in
order to have the vehicle alleged to be forfeitable in a petition pursuant to
this section.  The City Attorney or District Attorney may seek protective
orders for any such vehicle.



   (D)   The City Attorney or District Attorney shall cause notice of
the seizure and of the intended forfeiture proceedings, as well as a notice
stating that any interested party may file a verified claim with the Superior
Court of Los Angeles County, to be served by personal delivery or by
registered mail upon any person who has an interest in the vehicle. 
Whenever a notice is delivered pursuant to this section, it shall be
accompanied by a claim form as described in § 95.5.09, as well as directions
for the filing and service of a claim.  Notice shall also be published once
in a newspaper of general circulation in Los Angeles County.



   (E)   An investigation shall be made by the Department as to any
claimant to the vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in
the Department of Motor Vehicles or appropriate federal agency.  If the
Department finds that a person, other than the registered owner, is the legal
owner of the vehicle, and such ownership did not arise subsequent to the date
and time of arrest or notification of the forfeiture proceedings or seizure
of the vehicle, it shall forthwith send a notice to the legal owner at his or
her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles or
appropriate state agency.



   (F)   All notices shall set forth the time within which a claim of
interest in the vehicle seized or that is subject to forfeiture is required
to be filed pursuant to § 95.5.09.



   (G)   The City Attorney or District Attorney may, pursuant to this
section, order the forfeiture of the vehicle seized pursuant to this
chapter.  The City Attorney or District Attorney shall provide notice of the
proceedings under this section, including:



      (1)   A description of the vehicle.



      (2)   The date and place of seizure.



      (3)   The violation of law alleged with respect to the
forfeiture of the vehicle.



      (4)   The instructions for filing and serving a claim with the
City Attorney or District Attorney pursuant to § 95.5.09 and time limits for
filing a claim.



         (a)   If no claims are timely filed, the City Attorney
or District Attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the
vehicle to the city and dispose of the vehicle in accordance with this
chapter.  A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the City Attorney or
District Attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and
sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle.  The City Attorney or District
Attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of
the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the
forfeiture proceedings.



         (b)   If a claim is timely filed within 15 days, then
the City Attorney or District Attorney  shall file a petition for forfeiture
pursuant to this section within 30 days of receipt of the claim.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.08  INNOCENT PARTIES; RETURN OF VEHICLE.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Department shall
return a seized vehicle upon the filing of a timely claim pursuant to §
95.5.07 and upon a showing by the claimant that:



   (A)   The vehicle is owned by two or more persons and there is a
community property interest in the vehicle by a person other than the person
who used or maintained the vehicle for the purpose of acquiring or attempting
to acquire a controlled substance, illegal dumping, pandering, pimping, or
prostitution, and the vehicle is the sole vehicle available to the person’s
immediate family; or



   (B)   The vehicle is owned by the employer of the person who used or
maintained the vehicle for the purpose of acquiring or attempting to acquire
a controlled substance, illegal dumping, pandering, pimping or prostitution;
or



   (C)   The vehicle is owned by a rental car agency with a duly
executed contract with the person who used or maintained the vehicle for the
purpose of acquiring or attempting to acquire a controlled substance, illegal
dumping, pandering, pimping or prostitution.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.09  CLAIM PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Any person claiming an interest in the vehicle seized must at
any time within 15 days from the date of the notice of seizure, file with the
Superior Court of Los Angeles County a claim, verified in accordance with
Cal. Civil Procedure Code § 446, stating his or her interest in the
vehicle.  An endorsed copy of the claim shall be served by the claimant on
the City Attorney or District Attorney within ten days of the filing of the
claim.



   (B)   Court proceedings shall be in accordance with the following:



      (1)   If a verified claim is filed, the forfeiture proceeding
shall be set for a hearing on a day not less than 30 days therefrom.



      (2)   The hearing shall be before the court.



      (3)   The provisions of the Cal. Civil Procedure Code shall
apply to the proceedings under this chapter unless otherwise inconsistent
with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter.  However, there
shall be no joinder of actions or coordination of actions, except for
forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints and the issues shall be limited
strictly to questions related to this chapter.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.10  FORFEITURE HEARING.



   With respect to a vehicle for which forfeiture is sought and as to
which forfeiture is contested, the city shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used for acquiring or
attempting to acquire a controlled substance, illegal dumping, pandering,
pimping or prostitution, as those crimes are defined in this chapter.  Trial
shall be before the court or jury.  The presiding judge of the Superior
Court shall assign actions brought pursuant to this chapter for trial.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.11  FORFEITURE OF VEHICLES DETERMINED TO BE NUISANCES.



   Upon proof that a vehicle was used for any of the purposes set forth in
§ 95.5.02, the court shall declare that such vehicle is a nuisance and order
that the vehicle be seized, forfeited and sold and the proceeds distributed
in accordance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.12  ALTERNATIVE SETTLEMENT PROCEDURES.



   Any person, or his or her servant, agent or employee who owns, leases,
conducts, uses or maintains any vehicle for the purpose of acquiring or
attempting to acquire a controlled substance, illegal dumping, pandering,
pimping, or prostitution, and whose vehicle has been seized in accordance
with this chapter may request to execute a voluntary settlement agreement
with the city for the return of the vehicle.  Such request shall be made in
writing to the Department.  The minimum amount of the settlement agreement
shall be sufficient to cover all of the city’s reasonable administrative
costs, including attorney’s fees and personnel time for the seizure and
forfeiture action.  The actual amount shall be at the sole and absolute
discretion of the City Attorney.  The executed settlement agreement shall be
accompanied by the appropriate settlement fee amount in the form of a money
order or cashier’s check.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.13  PROCEEDS OF FORFEITURE.



   In all cases where a vehicle is seized and forfeited to the city, the
vehicle shall be sold, or if cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture
of the vehicle, the proceeds shall be distributed and appropriated as follows:



   (A)   To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional sales
vendor, mortgage or lien holder of the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of
his or her interest in the vehicle when the court or City Attorney or
District Attorney declares the forfeiture and orders a distribution for that
purpose.



   (B)   To the city for all expenditures made or incurred by it in
connection with the publication of notices set forth in this chapter, and
sale of the vehicle, including expenditures for any necessary repairs,
storage or transportation of any vehicle seized under this chapter.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



§ 95.5.14  NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDY.



   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation or penalty for acquiring
or attempting to acquire a controlled substance, illegal dumping, pandering,
pimping or prostitution.  It supplements and is in addition to the other
regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by
the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1218, passed 11-19-03)



CHAPTER 96:  PUBLIC PARKS



Section



General Provisions



   96.01   Definitions



   96.02   Conduct in parks



   96.03   Compliance required



   96.04   Parks to be drug-free zones



   96.05   Violations; additional remedies; injunctions



Permits



   96.15   Required



   96.16   Procedure



   96.17   Issuance or denial



   96.18   Referral of application



   96.19   Conditions of approval



   96.20   Suspension



   96.21   Notices of action



   96.22   Appeal



   96.23   Fees



   96.24   Applicant's responsibility



   96.25   Bicycles and other vehicles prohibited; skate parks



Statutory reference:



   Municipal parks, see Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 5181 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 96.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE.  Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every
liquid or solid containing ½ of 1% or more of alcohol by volume, and fit for
beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other
substances.



   COMMISSION.  The Human Services Commission of the city.



   DEPARTMENT.  The Human Services Department of the city.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Human Services, his deputy, or other
persons authorized by him to act in his stead.



   NOTICE.  Written notice, given by personal service or United States
Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified, at
his last-known address.  Notice shall be deemed given, for all purposes,
when the same is deposited in the course of transmission of the United States
Postal Service, or at the time of personal service.



   PARK.  Every park, roadside rest, and every other recreation facility,
designated as such, owned, managed or controlled by the city.



   PARK WATERS.  Any lake, reservoir, pond, swimming pool, or other body
of water or any source of domestic water within a park.



   PERMIT.  A park permit required pursuant to §§ 96.15 through 96.22
and § 96.24.



   PERMITTEE.  The holder of a permit.



   SKATE PARK.   A public park or that portion of a public park which has
been designated by the City of Baldwin Park as being a facility operated
primarily for skating.  A skate park shall be identified by signage located
on the site.



(‘83 Code, § 12.24.010)  (Ord. 845, passed - - 82; Am. Ord. 1219, passed
11-5-03; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 11-19-03)



§ 96.02  CONDUCT IN PARKS.



   (A)   Disposal of rubbish.  Carrying onto any park property any
garbage, trash or other refuse is prohibited.  No person shall throw, place,
bring to or deposit in any park or on an park area, any garbage, refuse,
bottles, recyclables, glass, crockery, rubber or plastic items, cans, boxes,
crates, broken-up or whole household furniture and equipment, household
appliances, automobile parts, tires, fluids or accessories, combustible or
noncombustible rubbish, miscellaneous debris or combined rubbish, yard and
garden waste, iron, wire, metal articles, bric-a-brac or cement, broken
concrete, broken plaster or any such trash or abandoned material, or anything
offensive or injurious to the public health, and place or deposit, or permit
to be thrown or deposited, the same in any park or park receptacle.



      (1)   Trash generated on the park must be deposited in
provided trash receptacles or carried off the park property.  Glass
containers are prohibited.



('83 Code, § 12.24.130)



   (B)   Weapons.  No person shall have in his possession in any
public park any firearms, air gun, illegal knives, slingshot, bow and arrow
or BB gun, nor shall any person discharge or shoot any firearm, air gun,
slingshot, bow and arrow or BB gun within any public park within the city,
except when permitted by the Director as a part of a city sponsored or
authorized recreational activity.



('83 Code, § 12.24.140)



   (C)   Firecrackers/fireworks.  No person shall have in his
possession, nor shall any person fire or discharge, in any public park, any
fireworks, as that phrase is defined in the Health and Safety Code of the
state, unless authorized by express provisions of this code, or as a part of
a city sponsored or authorized public fireworks display.



('83 Code, § 12.24.150)



   (D)   Flora.  No person shall dig, remove, destroy, injure,
mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower or any portion
thereof, growing in any public park; nor shall any person remove or deface or
destroy any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any public
park.



('83 Code, § 12.24.160)



   (E)   Park structures.  No person, other than a duly authorized
city employee or agent shall:



      (1)   Cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any rock,
building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench or any other structure,
apparatus or equipment or property of the city, or any portion thereof;



      (2)   Mark or place on any such structure or any portion
thereof, any mark, writing or printing;



      (3)   Attach thereto any sign, card display or other similar
device.



('83 Code, § 12.24.170)



   (F)   Fires.  No person shall light or maintain any fire unless he
or she first obtains written authorization from the Director, and such fire
is lighted and maintained in a stove, fire circle, or other place or
receptacle provided for that purpose.



      (1)   No person shall establish, maintain or store in any city
park, a temporary or permanent place for cooking, or set up or utilize any
cooking equipment, kitchen utensils or cookware; provided, however, that any
person may set up and use cooking equipment if he or she does so within an
area of a city park designated by the city for cooking and food preparation,
and he or she is participating in either a scheduled, city-sponsored event or
an approved, permitted event, which event has, as part of its stated purpose,
the limited preparation of food for human consumption.



      (2)   Individuals or groups obtaining permission to cook
and/or prepare food, or park users who are cooking or preparing food in an
area of a city park designated for that purpose, may not engage in cooking or
food preparation activities outside of regular park hours of operation.



('83 Code, § 12.24.180)



   (G)   Animals.  No person shall bring into any public park any
cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat or any animal of any other
kind, except that a dog or a cat may be permitted in the park if it is kept
on a leash under full control of its owner or person in possession.  The
Director may find and permit that, at certain times, under specified
restrictions and at designated places, a person can ride a horse, mule, burro
or donkey, or other similar animal, or can lead the animal without
interference with the use of a park.  No animal shall be allowed to graze or
run at large within the boundaries of a city park.  No animal shall be
killed, harmed or removed from any park unless by a city employee in the
performance of official duties.



('83 Code, § 12.24.190)



   (H)   Vehicles.  The operation and/or parking of motor vehicles
shall be restricted to the times of operation of the city park or facility. 
It is unlawful to remain or park upon the grounds of any city park, or any
part thereof, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.  Motorized
vehicles shall not be operated or parked on city property, or on any part of
any park, except on designated roadways or within designated markings,
without first obtaining a city permit.



      (1)   The Director may grant permission, at certain times,
under specified restrictions and at designated places, to operate a motorized
vehicle in restricted areas or outside of the normal hours of operation of
any city park or facility, so long as such use does not interfere in any way
with the use of any park.



('83 Code, § 12.24.200)



   (I)   Solicitations.  A person shall not solicit in any manner or
for any purpose, or sell or offer for sale, any goods, wares, or merchandise,
therein, except:



      (1)   By any city granted concession; or



      (2)   If a city authorized or supported sports team, which is
a member of a regular city authorized or supported league, admits all members
of the general public to the extent of capacity, without discrimination, and
without charge to any game played, the team may solicit voluntary
contributions from the spectators attending the game.



('83 Code, § 12.24.210)



   (J)   Alcoholic beverages.  No person shall enter, be, or remain in
any public park while consuming any alcoholic beverages. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this division (J) shall not apply to any person over the age of 21
attending a function at the Arts and Recreation Center or Julia McNeill
Senior Center if  the prior consent of the Director of Recreation and
Community Services to the consumption of alcohol at such function has been
obtained.



(‘83 Code, § 12.24.220)  (Am. Ord. 1092, passed 1-18-95; Am. Ord. 1354,
passed 9-19-12)



   (K)   Hours of use.  No person shall be, remain, stay, occupy or
loiter in any park, or building therein, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
5:00 a.m. of the following day, without first obtaining written permission
from the Director.



      (1)   The City Manager, Director or a duly authorized
representative may close a park area or recreation facility at any time there
is an apparent danger to the persons using the property itself, or for any
cause that would provide for the safety and protection of the public.  This
division may be enforced without concurrence of those individuals or groups
involved in the use of the parks.  Remaining in an area closed by the City
Manager or authorized representative is prohibited.



('83 Code, § 12.24.230)



   (L)   Overnight camping and sleeping.  No person shall establish or
maintain in any city park any living accommodations or temporary or permanent
place for sleeping by setting up any tent, lean-to or any other shelter-like
structure intended for human occupancy, or any bedding, sleeping bags, bed
rolls, blankets, sheets, luggage, backpacks, mattress, hammock or other
sleeping implements and/or equipment or materials, or use any park
furnishings or fixtures for prolonged or repeated periods of time not
associated with ordinary use of the park or public place, with one's
possessions or while storing one's possessions (including but not limited to,
clothing, kitchen utensils, cookware, and/or food or beverages), cooking or
consuming meals, or lodging in a parked vehicle.  These activities
constitute camping when it reasonably appears, in light of all the
circumstances, that a person is using the park or public property as a
living, lodging or sleeping accommodation, regardless of his or her intent,
or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be
engaged; provided, however, that any person may temporarily camp, or set up
and use bedding or sleeping bags, if he or she is participating in either a
scheduled, city-sponsored event or an approved, permitted event.



      (1)   The Director may permit any group to camp overnight at a
designated location in a park, and may require minors who are members of the
group to be supervised during the camping by an adequate number of
responsible adults; provided that the overnight camping will not interfere
with, or in any way be detrimental to the park, or interfere with the use
thereof.  Upon the granting of such approval, the members of the group and
its adult supervisors, if required by the Director, may camp at the time,
location, and under conditions specified in the permit.



('83 Code, § 12.24.240)



   (M)   Changing clothes.  A person shall not change clothes or
otherwise dress in any park areas, on the edges of park waters or in any
comfort station, except in that portion of a park building designated for
such purposes.



('83 Code, § 12.24.250)



   (N)   Washing and human waste.  A person shall not place in any
park waters any clothing, edible item, dish or utensil, or cleanse in any
park waters any such clothing, edible item, dish or utensil, or wash or
commit any nuisance in or near the waters, or pollute any park waters, wash
or cleanse in park waters any portion of the body.



      (1)   It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to
urinate, defecate or deposit any bodily fluids or debris in or upon any park,
or any place open to the public or exposed to public view.  This division
shall not be construed to prohibit the use for urination or defecation of
lawfully constructed restroom facilities designed for the sanitary disposal
of human waste.



(‘83 Code, § 12.24.260)



   (O)   Portable carts.  Shopping carts, carrying carts, wheeled
devices and/or other similar carrying devices used to transport personal
property, food items, camping, sleeping, or cooking equipment or materials,
are strictly prohibited within the confines of any city park.



   (P)   Swimming.  No person shall swim in any park waters or pool or
use any such waters for personal hygiene or cleansing, except at the places
and times designated by the Director.



(‘83 Code, § 12.24.270) 



   (Q)   Violation.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code,
a violation of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



   (R)   Disturbing the peace (as defined in the Cal. Penal Code §
415).  It is unlawful for a person to do any of the following within a park:



      Fight or challenge another person to fight;



      Use offensive words likely to incite imminent lawless action;



      Maliciously and willfully disturb another person by loud and
unreasonable noise; provided, however, where the noise is a result of
communications made in a loud manner, the communication shall be unlawful
only where it is likely to incite imminent lawless action, or where the
communication is not intended as such but is merely a guise to disturb
persons.



      (1)   When in the interest of public health, safety or
welfare, it is determined that it is in the best public interest to exclude
persons or groups from any city area and/or facility, such action may be
taken by the City Manager, Director, or his or her designated representative,
subject to appeal to the City Council.



   (S)   Vandalism.  Any person causing or committing vandalism, or
parents of persons under the age of 18 causing or committing vandalism, will
be held financially responsible for the full amount of damages, or the
maximum allowed under the Cal. Civil Code §§ 1714.1 and 1714.3 or
subsequent sections.  All provisions of the Cal. Penal Code § 594,
referring to malicious mischief, are applicable.



   (T)   Noise.  It shall be unlawful for any person within any park
or park area or park facility to use or operate any radio, musical
instrument, phonograph, television receiver, or other machine or device for
the producing, reproducing or amplifying of the human voice, music or any
other sound, in such a manner, as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
other park occupants or any reasonable person residing or working in the
area.  Any noise level caused by such use or operation exceeding the ambient
noise level on the premises of any other park space so as to disturb the use
and enjoyment of any other park user shall be a violation of the provisions
of this section.



   (U)   Gambling.  Gambling and gaming in any city park or city
facility is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Penal Code §§ 330
and 330A.  No person shall deal, play, carry on, open, cause to be opened,
or conduct any game, or bet at any game, played with cards, dice or any other
device, for money, checks, credits, chips, tokens or anything of value, or
for anything representative of anything of value on such premises.



(Am. Ord. 1304, passed 10-17-07; Am. Ord. 1344, passed 7-6-11)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 96.03  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall enter, be or remain, in any park unless he
complies with all of the regulations set forth in this code applicable
thereto.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.24.280)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.04  PARKS TO BE DRUG-FREE ZONES.



   All public parks and public libraries over which the City of Baldwin
Park has jurisdiction, including adjacent public parking lots and sidewalks,
are hereby designated “drug-free zones” pursuant to California Health and
Safety Code Section 11380.5. Signs shall be posted at such designated
drug-free zones which shall provide notice of California Health and Safety
Code Section 11380.5.



(Ord. 1138, passed 12-16-98)



§ 96.05  VIOLATIONS; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; INJUNCTIONS.



   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this
chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to
reasonable persons, or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace
of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is declared to be a public
nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court order of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1344, passed 7-6-11)



PERMITS



§ 96.15  REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall occupy, in a group, or as part of a group, of
25 or more persons, any portion of any public park, or any building or
structure located therein, for any purpose or activity, unless:



      (1)   The group has obtained the sponsorship of the department
for such activity or use, as a part of the city's comprehensive recreation
program; or



      (2)   The group has obtained a park permit from the Director
for such occupancy or use, in the manner set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.24.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 96.16  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   A park permit shall be obtained, except as provided in §
96.15, from the Director before any person shall:



      (1)   Occupy any part of any park within the city, in a group,
or as part of a group, in excess of 25 or more persons; or



      (2)   Occupy, as a part of any such group, any part of any
park or park facility, on a reserved or exclusive use basis.



   (B)   Applications for park permits shall be submitted to the
Director at least 15 days, but not more than 90 days, in advance of the
proposed date of use.  The applications shall be on forms prepared by the
Director, and each applicant shall submit the following information upon the
applications:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant;



      (2)   Name and address of the principals of the applicant, if
a corporation, unincorporated association or other type of group, together
with any individuals who sponsor the applicant;



      (3)   The day or days, and hours for which permit is desired;



      (4)   A description of that portion of park facility proposed
for the use;



      (5)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;



      (6)   Any other information which the Director shall deem
necessary and appropriated for the protection of park property and to assure
the public a reasonable use of the park.



('83 Code, § 12.24.030)



§ 96.17  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   (A)   Issuance.  Upon receipt of an application in the form
described in this chapter, the Director shall issue the park permit therein
requested, unless he finds any of the following to be present:



      (1)   The proposed activity or use will unreasonably interfere
with the general public enjoyment of the park or portion thereof.



      (2)   The proposed activity or use will unreasonably interfere
with the public health, welfare, safety, and interest.



      (3)   The proposed activity or use is unlawful.



      (4)   The proposed activity or use will entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense to the city, or involve extensive police
operations to the detriment of the general welfare.



      (5)   The facilities desired to be used have been previously
reserved for another use at the time and place requested in the application.



   (B)   Denial.  The Director shall deny the issuance of any park
permit if he finds, from the application and his investigation, that any of
the facts set forth in division (A) of this section are present. 



('83 Code, § 12.24.040)



§ 96.18  REFERRAL OF APPLICATION.



   The Director may refer any application to any other city department for
investigation and report, as may be necessary to allow him to properly
evaluate the application.



('83 Code, § 12.24.050)



§ 96.19  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   Conditions of approval may be imposed by the granting body upon the
issuance of a park permit, to insure compliance with the provisions of this
code, including, but not limited to, requiring the applicant to take out and
maintain liability insurance, in minimum amounts approved by the City
Manager, if the proposed activity appears hazardous so as to require such
insurance.  If so required, the policy shall name the city as co-insured.



('83 Code, § 12.24.060)



§ 96.20  SUSPENSION.



   The Director shall suspend any such park permit if he finds that
operations under the permit will or have, violated any provisions of this
code, or any other applicable law, regulation or any other good cause.  Such
suspension shall be deemed a revocation, if an appeal is not timely filed.



('83 Code, § 12.24.070)



§ 96.21  NOTICES OF ACTION.



   Notice of action by the Director, with reference to a permit
application, shall be given to the applicant and any other person requesting
the same.



('83 Code, § 12.24.080)



§ 96.22  APPEAL.



   Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the Director with respect
to the issuance, conditional issuance, denial or suspension, of a park
permit, may appeal the decision to the City Council.  The decision of the
Director shall be final and conclusive with the absence of the filing of such
an appeal, in the time and manner set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 12.24.090)



§ 96.23  FEES.



   Fees for the use of park facilities shall be as set by resolution of
the City Council.



('83 Code, § 12.24.100)



§ 96.24  APPLICANT'S RESPONSIBILITY.



   Each permittee shall observe all regulations applicable to conduct in
public parks as set forth in this code, and any other applicable law or
regulation.  Prior to the actual issuance of any permit the applicant shall
sign and file with the Director a statement agreeing to hold the city, its
officers and employees, free and harmless from any loss, damage or injury
sustained, arising out of, or by virtue of, the issuance of such permit and
the use and operation thereunder. In addition, the applicant shall also agree
that if any damage is done to any city property or equipment, the applicant,
upon receipt of a city invoice therefor, shall reimburse the city.  Should
litigation be necessary to enforce such a claim in favor of the city, the
applicant shall pay to the city reasonable attorney fees as determined by the
court. 



('83 Code, § 12.24.110)



§ 96.25  BICYCLES AND OTHER VEHICLES PROHIBITED; SKATE PARKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride or operate a unicycle, bicycle, tricycle,
four-wheeled cycle, scooter, or other motor or human powered vehicle within
the boundaries of any public park.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person
may ride or operate the following vehicles within any portion of a public
park which is not a skate park: a tricycle, stroller, or baby carriage.



   (B)   No person shall ride a skateboard, roller blades, or roller
skates within the boundaries of any public park, provided, however, that a
person may ride a skateboard, roller blades or roller skates in those
portions of a skate park designated for such use.



   (C)   Any person riding a skateboard, roller blades, or roller
skates in a skate park shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads, which
are in serviceable condition and properly fastened in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations for such equipment.



   (D)   The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to apply to
the following: (1) the operation or riding of any vehicle used to provide
mobility to any disabled person; or (2) the operation or riding of a motor
vehicle on a paved driveway from the street to a parking lot on the public
park; or (3) the wheeling of a bicycle or other human powered vehicle from
outside the boundaries of a public park to a place within the public park
designated for parking such vehicle if such transportation occurs solely on
paved paths within the public park and the vehicle is not ridden during such
operation.



   (E)   Any violation of this section shall be an infraction, subject
to the provisions of § 10.99 of this Code.



(Ord. 1219, passed 11-5-03; Am. Ord. 1220, passed 11-19-03)



CHAPTER 97:  STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Section



Construction, Excavation, Encroachment,Moving and Load Regulations



   97.001   Definitions



   97.002   Permits



   97.003   Permit applications; information required



   97.004   Preservation from liability



   97.005   Issuance of permit



   97.006   Conditions upon issuance



   97.007   Denial of application



   97.008   Notice of decision



   97.009   Appeal of decision



   97.010   Suspension of permit



   97.011   Expiration; time extension



   97.012   Permits nontransferable



   97.013   Issuance by other agency



   97.014   Permit fee



   97.015   Certificate of completion



   97.016   Driveway approach construction; permit required



   97.017   Type of construction



   97.018   Location of approaches



   97.019   Construction specifications



   97.020   Size of approaches; residential



   97.021   Size of approaches; commercial and industrial



   97.022   Compliance



   97.023   Street cut moratorium



Specifications and Standards



   97.040   Datum plane established



   97.041   Specifications for work on public streets



   97.042   Modifications, variations and additions



   97.043   Street work



   97.044   Unauthorized deposits



   97.045   Obstructions



   97.046   Removal of obstructions



   97.047   Closure or restriction of use



   97.048   Sidewalk and parkway repairs



   97.049   Maintenance of sidewalks and parkways



   97.050   Transport of material



Underground Utility Lines



Part 1. General Provisions



   97.060   Definitions



   97.061   Circumstances requiring undergrounding



   97.062   Exemption



   97.063   Appeal



Part 2. Underground Utility Districts



   97.070   Definitions



   97.071   Public hearings



   97.072   Council may designate underground utility districts by
resolution



   97.073   Unlawful acts



   97.074   Exception; emergency or unusual circumstances



   97.075   Additional exceptions



   97.076   Notice to property owners and utility companies



   97.077   Responsibility of utility companies



   97.078   Responsibility of property owners



   97.079   Responsibility of city



   97.080   Extension of time



House Numbers



   97.090   Assignment of house numbers



   97.091   Curb painted house numbers



Parade and Demonstration Permits



   97.105   Definitions



   97.106   Permit required



   97.107   Conditions to permit



   97.108   Permit application



   97.109   Permit approval



   97.110   Fees and cost recovery



   97.111   Indemnification; insurance



Parkway Trees



   97.125   Definitions



   97.126   List of varieties of trees



   97.127   Plan for planting and maintenance of trees



   97.128   Interference with plantings



   97.129   Maintenance by owner



   97.130   Maintenance by city



   97.131   Removal of trees



   97.132   Prohibition against injury to street trees



Street Banners



   97.145   Definitions



   97.146   Permit required; eligibility



   97.147   Application; fees



   97.148   Issuance of permit; conditions



   97.149   Regulations



   97.150   Suspension; revocation



   97.151   Appeal



   97.152   Removal of banners



   97.153   Expiration of permit



   97.154   Removal of hazardous and defective street banners



   97.155   Insurance



   97.156   Right to remove



Street Benches



   97.165   Definitions



   97.166   Permit



   97.167   Removal of benches by city



   97.168   New permit upon sale or transfer of title



   97.169   Advertising and signs on benches



   97.170   Enforcement



Blinder Racks



   97.180   Intent and purpose



   97.181   Definitions



   97.182   Identification



   97.183   Matter harmful to minors



   97.184   Removal and impoundment of newsracks



   97.185   Hearing on impoundment



   97.186   Disposition of impounded newsracks



   97.187   Fine for display of harmful matter to minors



Statutory references:



   Construction of sidewalks and curbs, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§
5870 et seq.



   Improvement Act of 1911, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 5000 et seq.



CONSTRUCTION, EXCAVATION, ENCROACHMENT, MOVING AND LOAD REGULATIONS



§ 97.001  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE MATERIAL.  That portion of the highway located between the
pavement and the native soil.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works.



   DRIVEWAY APPROACH.  That portion of the public right-of-way between
the property line and the pavement where vehicles enter and leave property
abutting the street.



   ENCROACHMENT.  Any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence,
wire, cable, conduit, stand or building, or any other structure or object of
any kind or character which is placed in, along, under, over or across a
highway.



   HEIGHT.  As the term relates to vehicles and their loads, means that
dimension measured from the level surface upon which the vehicle stands to
the highest projection thereof in a vertical line.



   HIGHWAY.  Any dedicated public right-of-way.



   LOAD.  Any object or thing, which when transported by a vehicle or
combination of vehicles, over, upon, along or across any highway is required
to have a special permit in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle
Code and includes, but is not limited to, any house, vessel, machine,
equipment, transformer, tree, girder, boat or airplane.



   MOVING CONTRACTOR.  Any person who for himself or for another moves or
causes to be moved, any load over, upon, along or across any highway.



   NATIVE SOIL.  The compacted soil that is "native" or "common" to the
site.



   OVERHEAD STRUCTURE.  Any structure other than franchise utility
facilities extending over the dedicated portion of a highway, but excluding
such projections from buildings as are permitted by this code.



   PAVEMENT.  The surfaced portion of the highway which is composed of
various size aggregates mixed with portland cement and asphaltic compounds.



   PERMIT.  A permit required pursuant to this subchapter.



   VEHICLE.  As that term relates to moving oversize or overweight
vehicles or equipment through the city, means a vehicle or combination of
vehicles as described in the Vehicle Code which:



      (1)   Whether laden or unladen is required by the Vehicle Code
to have a special permit to be on any highway; or



      (2)   Is so laden that it is required to have the special
permit.



   VEHICLE CODE.  The State of California Vehicle Code in effect at the
time of issuance of the permit.



   WIDTH.  As the term relates to vehicles and their loads, means the
dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the
conveyance upon which the load or portion thereof is, or is to be, loaded or
moved.



('83 Code, § 12.08.010)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 97.002  PERMITS.



   (A)   Required.  Every person shall obtain a permit from the
Director of Public Works for any of the following:



      (1)   Moving or causing to be moved over, along or across any
highway any "load" or "vehicle."



      (2)   Making or causing to be made any excavation or
encroachment in any highway.



      (3)   Placing, changing or relocating any encroachments.



      (4)   Placing, constructing, or repairing any curb, gutter,
sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain,
culvert, or other work of any nature, located on, in, over, under, along or
across any highway.



      (5)   Constructing, reconstructing, repairing or maintaining
any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility within any highway.



      (6)   Placing or leaving any impediment to travel upon any
highway.



   (B)   No person shall participate in, or perform or cause to be
performed any of the acts described in this section unless there is in full
force and effect a validly issued permit therefor.



   (C)   Each permittee shall present for inspection, a copy of the
permit to any public official upon his request therefor, made at any
reasonable time and place.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.08.020)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.003  PERMIT APPLICATIONS; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Applications for permits shall be made upon a form provided by the
Director of Public Works.  The applications shall clearly specify the
following.



   (A)   The nature of the activity;



   (B)   The location of the activity;



   (C)   The duration of the activity;



   (D)   The name, address and legal status of the applicant;



   (E)   The name and address of the person who will be in charge of
the activity; and



   (F)   Such other information as the Director of Public Works deems
necessary, including, but not limited to plans and specifications for the
project contemplated.



('83 Code, § 12.08.030)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 97.004  PRESERVATION FROM LIABILITY.



   On each application the applicant or his agent shall sign a statement
that he agrees to preserve and save harmless the city and each officer and
employee thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss
or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result
of his activities pursuant to the permit applied for.



('83 Code, § 12.08.040)



§ 97.005  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   The Director of Public Works shall issue the permit as requested, if he
finds:



   (A)   That the activity will not cause any unreasonable interference
with the public's use of the highway;



   (B)   That the activity is reasonably necessary, and is consistent
with the public interest;



   (C)   That the activity can be conducted without the possibility of
injury to persons and property; and



   (D)   That all fees and/or deposits required under this subchapter
have been paid or deposited.



('83 Code, § 12.08.050)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 97.006  CONDITIONS UPON ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The Director of Public Works shall be empowered to
conditionally issue a permit, where he finds such conditions are reasonably
necessary to insure compliance with the provisions of this code, and to carry
out the purposes of this subchapter.



   (B)   The conditions may include, but are not limited to, the
following:



      (1)   The relocation, reconstruction, replacement or
protection of any existing objects or structures; natural or manmade.



      (2)   The routes to be utilized.



      (3)   The locations to be utilized.



      (4)   The depth, location, dimension and number of excavations
to be permitted.



      (5)   The type and nature of equipment, safety devices and
personnel to be utilized.



      (6)   The type and method of construction.



      (7)   The duration of the term of the permit.



      (8)   The amount of the required security deposits to be made,
if any.  The amount and form of the deposits shall be set by the Director of
Public Works, based upon the estimated cost to the city of administration,
engineering, field inspection services required.



('83 Code, § 12.08.060)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 97.007  DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   If the Director of Public Works finds that any of the facts set forth
in § 97.005 are not present, he shall refuse to issue the permit.



('83 Code, § 12.08.070)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 97.008  NOTICE OF DECISION.



   The Director of Public Works shall give written notice to the
applicant, and others advising the same of his decision regarding a permit
application.



('83 Code, § 12.08.080)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.009  APPEAL OF DECISION.



   Any decision of the Director of Public Works with regard to the
issuance, refusal to issue, or conditional issuance of a permit shall be
final and conclusive in the absence of an appeal filed in the time and manner
set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 12.08.090)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.010  SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.



   The Director of Public Works shall suspend a permit, after its issue,
if he finds:



   (A)   The operations thereunder are not being conducted in
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter, the conditions of
issuance, and all applicable laws;



   (B)   The operations, as conducted, constitute a public nuisance, or
present an unwarranted possibility of injury to persons or property.  In
such case, the Director of Public Works shall issue, and give note of, an
order of suspension in the manner set forth in § 110.08.  Such an order
shall be effective, and subject to the appeal process in the time and manner
set forth in § 110.08; or



   (C)   The applicant for a permit falsified information on the permit
application.



('83 Code, § 12.08.100)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.011  EXPIRATION; TIME EXTENSION.



   Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall become null and
void and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified
unless the time is extended.  The Director of Public Works, for good cause,
may extend the time.



('83 Code, § 12.08.110)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.012  PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE.



   Permits issued under the authority of this subchapter are
nontransferable.



('83 Code, § 12.08.120)



§ 97.013  ISSUANCE BY OTHER AGENCY.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subchapter, the City Council may
authorize the issuance of permits by any other public agency.



('83 Code, § 12.08.130)



§ 97.014  PERMIT FEE.



   The permit fee shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 12.08.140)



§ 97.015  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.



   If the Director of Public Works, by survey or by inspection or by both,
ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of
the permit issued therefor, and of all applicable laws, he shall issue, if
requested to do so by the permittee, a certificate of completion which shall
contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed
under the permit.



('83 Code, § 12.08.150)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.016  DRIVEWAY APPROACH CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall construct or reconstruct a vehicular access
driveway approach to any lot in the city without first obtaining a permit
therefor, in the time and manner set forth in this subchapter, except as
otherwise provided in this subchapter.  A filing and processing fee shall be
set by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.08.160)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.017  TYPE OF CONSTRUCTION.



   Driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city's
standards therefor.



('83 Code, § 12.08.170)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.018  LOCATION OF APPROACHES.



   The Director of Public Works shall approve the location of driveway
approaches so as to insure that the approach will not constitute a hazard to
pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, nor encroach upon, or constitute a
nuisance as to, adjacent and/or abutting properties.



('83 Code, § 12.08.180)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 97.019  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or
returns of adjacent driveway approaches serving the same lot or parcel shall
be 22 feet, unless a lesser distance is approved by the Director. In the case
of adjacent driveway approaches serving two adjoining lots or parcels, the
intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be at least
three feet; otherwise a common or continuous driveway approach may be
required.



   (B)   A driveway approach, including the side slopes, shall not be
constructed:



      (1)   Between the prolonged intersecting property lines of any
highways; or



      (2)   Between the points of curvature of any curb return
having a radius of 20 feet or less.



   (C)   In applying the provisions of this section, the condition
producing the greater length of curb between the specified control points in
the particular case shall govern.



   (D)   A driveway approach, including the side slopes, shall not be
constructed between the points of curvature of any curb return except in the
case of a curb return having a radius of 25 feet or more, driveway approaches
may encroach at each end thereof for a distance not greater than one-eighth
of the total arc of the return, leaving in the clear at least three-quarters
of the arc length, if the encroachment does not conflict with other
requirements of §§ 97.018 through 97.021.



   (E)   The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to
modify these requirements based upon receipt of evidence from the permittee
that he will suffer a hardship if not granted an encroachment into the curb
return.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, a driveway
approach shall not encroach on any curb return beyond or ahead of any traffic
regulating device located on or adjacent thereto.



   (G)   Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a
modification of the provisions of the preceding divisions pertaining to
driveway approaches are necessary for the promotion of traffic safety, and
the Director of Public Works so finds, he may permit a deviation from the
provisions of such sections to the extent which he finds necessary.



   (H)   A driveway approach shall not be constructed or maintained
where fences, buildings, natural grade, or any other obstacle will prevent a
vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way and in
compliance with the city's zoning and building regulations, Chapters 153 and
150 respectively, after entering the driveway approach, nor where the same is
not designed to serve off-street parking facilities.



('83 Code, § 12.08.190)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.020  SIZE OF APPROACHES; RESIDENTIAL.



   Driveway approaches serving properties classified in any of the R zones
of the city shall be constructed and maintained so that:



   (A)   The width of each individual driveway approach shall be in
accordance with the city's standards therefor; and



   (B)   The sum of all driveway approach widths on any lot shall not
exceed 40% of the street frontage of the property on each abutting street.



('83 Code, § 12.08.200)



§ 97.021  SIZE OF APPROACHES; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL.



   Driveway approaches serving properties classified in any zone other
than an R zone, shall be constructed and maintained so that:



   (A)   The width of each individual driveway approach shall not
exceed 30 feet if the street frontage of the property is less than 100 feet;



   (B)   The width of each individual driveway shall not exceed 30% of
the street frontage of the property when the frontage is 100 feet or more,
provided no individual driveway approach width shall exceed 60 feet; and



   (C)   The sum of all driveway approach widths on any lot does not
exceed 60% of the street frontage of the property on each abutting street.



('83 Code, § 12.08.210)



§ 97.022  COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by
this subchapter must comply with the provisions of this subchapter, the
provisions made part of any permit, and the provisions of the specifications
and all codes referred to by this subchapter.



   (B)   All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision,
direction or rule made or presented by the Director of Public Works in the
matters specified on the permit or by attachments, or by any other matter in
any way relating to or affecting their use of the highway, and shall do
everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its
officers, agents and employees, except in the case of a public utility,
regulated by the Public Utilities Commission when such order, decision,
direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision,
direction or rule made or prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission
applicable to the public utility.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.08.220)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.023  STREET CUT MORATORIUM.



   For streets, alleys, and public places that were reconstructed,
overlaid, or sealed, the following shall apply:



   (A)   No non-emergency street cuts will be permitted for a period of
five years from the date of completion of the reconstruction, overlay, or
seal.



   (B)   In the case of an emergency or where street cuts have been
authorized by the Director of Public Works/City Engineer within five years
following the completion of the reconstruction, overlay, or seal the
following shall apply: the permittee will be required to grind and one and
one-half (1-1/2) inches of existing asphalt, curb to curb and repave the
surface for a distance of at least 25 feet (for a traverse street cut) and up
to one lane width (for a longitudinal street cut) beyond each side of the
trench using a properly licensed contractor.



   (C)   Emergencies (exceptions) are defined as follows:



      (1)   An emergency that endangers life or property.



      (2)   Interruption of essential utility service.



      (3)   Work that is mandated by the city, state, of federal
legislature.



      (4)   Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of
providing service exists.



(Ord. 1373, passed 4-1-15)



SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS



§ 97.040  DATUM PLANE ESTABLISHED.



   Sea level is declared to be the datum plane or base elevation for the
city for the purpose of establishing and designating the official elevations
and grades of streets, sewers and other public works within the city.



('83 Code, § 12.04.010)



§ 97.041  SPECIFICATIONS FOR WORK ON PUBLIC STREETS.



   The City Council, by resolution, shall adopt standard specifications
for the construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance of all public
streets, pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalk, drainage structures, traffic
signals, sewers and related public works.  Upon and after the adoption of
the specifications, no person shall construct, reconstruct, maintain or
repair any type of street work, as referred to in the specifications, except
in conformity therewith.



('83 Code, § 12.04.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.042  MODIFICATIONS, VARIATIONS AND ADDITIONS.



   The Director of Public Works may modify, vary or add to the
specifications when, because of special circumstances or conditions
pertaining to a particular job or area, such modification, variation or
addition is required to secure the desired standard of work.  Such
modifications, variations or additions shall, as soon as possible after
completion, be submitted to the City Council for approval or ratification, as
the case may be.



('83 Code, § 12.04.030)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.043  STREET WORK.



   (A)   Barricades and warnings.  No person shall ride or drive any
animal, or drive or propel any vehicle or bicycle, or walk or throw any
object upon any portion of any public street where street work is in progress
and where there is a barrier or barricade to prevent traveling upon such
portion of the public street, or at or near which there is a sign stating
that the street is closed, or where warning lights are maintained to indicate
that the street is closed.  Nor shall any person injure, destroy or remove
any such barrier, barricades or warning lights except under orders of the
person having charge of the street work. 



('83 Code, § 12.04.040)



   (B)   Newly made pavement.  No person shall drive or ride any
animal or drive or propel any vehicle or walk or go upon, over or across or
throw any object upon any newly made pavement, sidewalk, curb, gutter or
related street improvement work until all barriers or barricades protecting
the work have been removed, nor shall any person deface any such newly made
pavement, sidewalk, curb, gutter or related street improvement work.



('83 Code, § 12.04.050)



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.044  UNAUTHORIZED DEPOSITS.



   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit, or place or cause to be
deposited or placed any materials in or upon any public street, alley,
sidewalk, parkway or any other public place without the permission of the
Director of Public Works, except refuse as provided for in §§ 50.01 et
seq., properly contained and set out for collection.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.04.060)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.045  OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in §§ 97.001 et seq., no person shall
leave, place or cause to be left or placed in any alley, street, sidewalk,
parkway or any other public place in the city any obstruction whatsoever
which interferes with the free and uninterrupted use of the alley, street,
sidewalk, parkway or other public place by any person or vehicles.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.04.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Obstructions and encroachments on public ways, see Cal. Govt Code §
38775



§ 97.046  REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS.



   The Director of Public Works shall immediately notify any persons found
to be obstructing any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place,
in violation of § 97.044 or § 97.045, to remove the obstruction.  If
within a reasonable time after the giving of notice, the obstruction has not
been removed, the obstruction shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
Thereupon, the Director of Public Works shall proceed to remove the
nuisance.  All costs incurred by the city, including administrative costs,
shall be charged to the person responsible for the obstruction.



('83 Code, § 12.04.080)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



Cross-reference:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 95



§ 97.047  CLOSURE OR RESTRICTION OF USE.



   The Director of Public Works may restrict the use of, or close, any
city street whenever he considers such closing or restriction of use
necessary:



   (A)   For the protection of the public;



   (B)   For the protection of such city streets from damage during
storms; or



   (C)   During construction, improvement or maintenance operations
thereon.



('83 Code, § 12.04.090)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.048  SIDEWALK AND PARKWAY REPAIRS.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each lot or portion of
such lot fronting on any portion of a public street to maintain all driveway
approaches and/or adjoining sections of sidewalk over which vehicles pass
that are located in parkways abutting the lot, in such a condition that the
driveway approach and/or sidewalk will not constitute a hazard to person or
property and will not interfere with the public convenience and necessity in
the use of the sidewalk and/or driveway approach.



('83 Code, § 12.04.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.049  MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS AND PARKWAYS.



   (A)   No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to keep the sidewalk
or parkway in front of his property in a clean condition and free of all
accumulations of weeds, dirt and debris.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.04.110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.050  TRANSPORT OF MATERIAL.



   Any such person hauling refuse, as defined in § 50.01, dirt, sand,
gravel, or other similar material, of any kind, in and along any public
street or public place, shall be solely responsible for cleaning up any
material which falls or becomes dislodged from the vehicle.  If the person
fails to dispose of the material which has spilled form such a vehicle, the
city shall cause the material to be cleaned up and disposed of and the person
shall be responsible to the city for the cost thereof.



('83 Code, § 12.04.120)  (Ord. 1032, passed -  -89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



UNDERGROUND UTILITY LINES



Part 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 97.060  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DIRECTOR.  The City Planner of the city.



   PROPERTY.  Real property located within the city:



      (1)   Which is either undeveloped, i.e., having no buildings
or structures located thereon;



      (2)   Property which is proposed to be converted to a
different use by the construction of new buildings and structures and/or the
demolition, removal or structural reconstruction of existing buildings or
structures located thereon; or



      (3)   Property which is included in a subdivision or lot split
proceeding.



   UNDERGROUNDING.  The location or relocation of utilities so that all
of the utility facilities are located under the surface of the ground, except
for appurtenances and associated equipment, including but not limited to,
surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets and concealed ducts.  All such undergrounding work, where required,
shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws,
rules and regulations, including but not limited to, rules and regulations
and tariffs, applicable to the affected utility, adopted or approved by the
Public Utilities Commission of the state.



   UTILITY or UTILITY FACILITIES.  Wire, conduit and similar devices
designed and/or services, telephone, telegraph or cable television service to
a consumer.



('83 Code, § 12.36.010)  (Ord. 820, passed -  -81; Am. Ord. 837, passed
-  -82)



§ 97.061  CIRCUMSTANCES REQUIRING UNDERGROUNDING.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the undergrounding of
utility facilities shall be required in all of the following circumstances,
except as expressly provided in this section:



   (A)   Subdivisions.  All utilities to serve property included in a
subdivision, for which a tentative map is filed or amended, after the
effective date of the subchapter.



   (B)   Lot splits.  All utilities to serve properties included in a
lot split proceeding, for which a parcel map therefor is filed, or amended,
after the effective date of this subchapter.



   (C)   Other.  All utilities to serve any other property upon which
it is proposed to construct or reconstruct any building or structure, or
combination thereof, for which one or more building permits is required,
where the estimated cost of the construction is $3,000 or more.



   (D)   Relocations.  All structures to be relocated into or within
the city upon any parcel of land shall be required to install underground
utilities where the usable floor area of the building or structure to be
relocated is a total of 850 square feet or more.



   (E)   Responsibility for compliance.  The owner and/or person who
occupies any property to which this subchapter applies shall be responsible
for compliance therewith, including but not limited to obtaining the
installation of required facilities by the appropriate utility company or
companies.



('83 Code, § 12.36.020)  (Ord. 820, passed -  -81; Am. Ord. 837, passed
-  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Underground utility districts, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§ 5896.1
et seq.



§ 97.062  EXEMPTION.



   The Director shall grant an exemption from the provisions of this
subchapter if he finds all of the following facts present:



   (A)   All adjacent properties are served by overhead utility
facilities;



   (B)   The compliance with the provisions of this section constitute
an undue financial hardship which renders the proposed development
economically unfeasible; and



   (C)   The owner of the property involved agrees, in written form as
approved by the City Attorney, to join and participate in an undergrounding
utility district should one be initiated pursuant to applicable law, within
ten years after the date upon which a building permit for such buildings or
structures is issued, without protest as to the formation of such district. 
The agreement shall be recorded and shall bind, for the period of time, all
assignees and successors in interest to the then owner of the property.



('83 Code, § 12.36.030)  (Ord. 820, passed -  -81; Am. Ord. 837, passed
-  -82)



§ 97.063  APPEAL.



   Within ten days after the decision of the Director, any person
aggrieved by the Director's decision may appeal the decision to the City
Council.  The appeal shall be filed in the same manner as required by §
30.04, together with a filing and processing fee in a sum as set by
resolution of the City Council.  The action of the City Council on the
appeal shall be final and conclusive.



('83 Code, § 12.36.040)  (Ord. 820, passed -  -81; Am. Ord. 837, passed
-  -82)



Part 2. UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS



§ 97.070  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this part, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMISSION.  The Public Utilities Commission of the state.



   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES.  Poles,
towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar
or associated service.



   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT.  An area in the city which
is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of this part,
within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are
prohibited.



   UTILITY.  This term includes all persons or entities supplying
electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of
electrical materials or devices.



('83 Code, § 13.08.010)



§ 97.071  PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   The Council may from time to time call public hearings to
ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires
and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated
service.



   (B)   Prior to holding the public hearing, the Director of Public
Works shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for
submission at the hearing containing, among other information, the extent of
the utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and
affected property owners.  The report shall also contain an estimate of the
time required to complete the underground installation and removal of
overhead facilities.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail
of the time and place of the hearings at least ten days prior to the date
thereof.



   (D)   Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be
continued from time to time.



   (E)   At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and
conclusive. 



('83 Code, § 13.08.020)



§ 97.072  COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY RESOLUTION.



   If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal and the underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare the designated area an underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation.  The resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within
which the removed and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground
service.  A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and
equipment necessary for the removal and for the installation of the
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.



('83 Code, § 13.08.030)



§ 97.073  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders
the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
therein as provided in § 97.072, it is unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by the
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant
to continue to receive utility service as provided in § 97.078, and for such
reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been
performed, and except as otherwise provided in this part.



('83 Code, § 13.08.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.074  EXCEPTION; EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of this part, poles, overhead facilities
and associated overhead structures, may be installed and maintained in a
district, with the approval of the City Manager in order to provide emergency
or temporary service.



('83 Code, § 13.08.050)



§ 97.075  ADDITIONAL EXCEPTIONS.



   Any resolution adopted pursuant to § 97.072, shall not, unless
otherwise provided in the resolution, apply to any of the following types of
facilities:



   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.



   (C)   Overhead wires, exclusive of supporting structures, crossing
any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited,
or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited.



   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used
for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of
34,500 volts.



   (E)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building
by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the building or to an adjacent building.



   (F)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used
by a utility for furnishing communication service.



   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as
surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter
cabinets, and concealed ducts.



   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.



('83 Code, § 13.08.060)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.076  NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.



   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 97.072, the City Clerk shall notify all affected
utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by
the resolution of the adoption thereof.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall further notify the affected property
owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property
desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities, on
file with the Commission.



   (C)   Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy
of the resolution adopted pursuant to § 97.072, together with a copy of this
part, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and to the affected utilities.



('83 Code, § 13.08.070)



§ 97.077  RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.



   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service
within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to § 97.072,
the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors
and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.



('83 Code, § 13.08.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.078  RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting
a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in § 97.077 and the termination facility on or within the
building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities, on
file with the Commission.



   (B)   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying
or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of division (A)
of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted
pursuant to § 97.072, the Director of Public Works shall post written notice
on the property being served and, 30 days thereafter, may authorize the
disconnection, removal and replacement, of any and all service associated
facilities supplying utility service to the property.  Where such work is
accomplished by the city, or its agents, the actual cost thereof, and
administration costs shall be a debt owed to the city by the property owner.



('83 Code, § 13.08.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.079  RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.



   The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from
all poles required to be removed under this part in ample time to enable the
owner or user of the poles to remove the same within the time specified in
the resolution enacted pursuant to § 97.072.



('83 Code, § 13.08.100)



§ 97.080  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   In the event that any act required by this part or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to § 97.072 cannot be performed within the time provided on
account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities,
strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation.



('83 Code, § 13.08.110)



HOUSE NUMBERS



§ 97.090  ASSIGNMENT OF HOUSE NUMBERS.



   The Director of Public Works shall assign to all lots and buildings
specific street numbers that shall be consistent with the house numbering
system of the city as it presently exists or as it may be amended upon
instructions from the City Council.



('83 Code, § 12.16.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.091  CURB PAINTED HOUSE NUMBERS.



   (A)   Authority.



      (1)   No person shall paint house address numbers on the curb
of any public street without first having obtained a permit therefor from the
City Manager.



      (2)   No such permit shall be issued unless the City Manager
finds that the issuance thereof is in the public interest.



('83 Code, § 12.16.020)



   (B)   Type of markings.  Where a permit is obtained allowing the
painting of house address numbers on street curbs, the markings shall consist
of a white field with black letters thereon.  The field shall be
reflectorized by clear glass spherical beads applied with force against the
white field paint while the same is still tacky so that the beads will be
firmly bonded to the field paint upon drying.  The field and numeral borders
shall be sharply defined with no running or blurring of edges.  The numerals
shall be four inches in height.  The field shall have a minimum border of
one inch at all edges of the numerals.  All work shall be performed in
accordance with specifications prepared by the Director of Public Works.



('83 Code, § 12.16.030)



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



(Ord. 845, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PARADE AND DEMONSTRATION PERMITS



§ 97.105  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply:



   BUSINESS DAY. Any day in which the administrative offices of the City
of Baldwin Park are open for business.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  The Chief Executive Officer of the City of
Baldwin Park or his/her designee.



   DEMONSTRATION. A group gathering for the purpose of expressive activity.



   EXPRESSIVE ACTIVITY. Conduct, the sole or principal object of which is
the expression, dissemination or communication by verbal, visual, literary or
auditory means of opinion, views or ideas.  Expressive activity includes,
but is not limited to, public oratory and the distribution of literature.



   GROUP GATHERING.  Any formation, procession, or congregation of
persons who intend to or do assemble, travel in unison, or both assemble and
travel in unison, for any purpose in or on any public place.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any public property which is recognized by law as a
public forum, including without limitation any park, plaza, street, alley,
highway, thoroughfare or sidewalk.



   SPONTANEOUS DEMONSTRATION.  A demonstration occasioned by news or
other information which has come into public knowledge within five days
before such demonstration.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



§ 97.106  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall hold, manage, conduct or cause to be
conducted, or participate or take part in any group gathering in, on, or upon
any public place without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner
specified in this subchapter.



   (B)   The following group gatherings shall be exempt from the permit
required by division (A) of this section:



      (1)   Any group gathering consisting of not more than 35
persons which takes place in a public place and in a manner that complies
with all regulations, laws, or controls governing the use of such public
place, including but not limited to any applicable traffic regulations.



      (2)   Funeral processions not otherwise exempt pursuant to
division (1) above, if conducted by a licensed mortuary or funeral home, and
provided the Chief Executive Officer has been provided notice of the proposed
date, time, and route of such procession not less than two business days
prior to the procession occurring;



      (3)   Any group gathering not otherwise exempt pursuant to
division (1) above which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental entity
and which takes place solely within or on property owned by such governmental
entity.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



§ 97.107  CONDITIONS TO PERMIT.



   (A)   The Chief Executive Officer may condition any permit issued
pursuant to this subchapter with reasonable requirements concerning the time,
place, or manner of holding a group gathering as set forth in § 97.109(D).



   (B)   Conditions which may be imposed on a permit include, but are
not limited to, the following:



      (1)   The establishment of an assembly and/or disbanding area
for a group gathering which involves traveling in unison;



      (2)   The accommodation of the pedestrian and vehicular
traffic which will result from the group gathering, including, but not
limited to, requiring the use of traffic cones or barricades or city
personnel to direct such traffic;



      (3)   The restriction of persons not in vehicles to such
designated portions of a public place as necessary to assure their personal
safety or the safety of the public;



      (4)   Conditions designed to avoid or lessen interference with
public safety functions or emergency service access;



      (5)   Inspection and approval by city personnel of any stage,
booth, or other structure proposed for use in connection with the group
gathering to ensure that such structures are safely constructed and conform
to the requirements of all applicable codes;



      (6)   The provision and use of first aid stations or sanitary
facilities, including handicap accessible facilities;



      (7)   Restrictions on the use of sound amplification equipment
or other noise generating machinery as necessary to cause the conduct of the
participants in the group gathering to comply with applicable noise
regulations;



      (8)   The provision of a waste management plan, and
requirements for the clean-up and restoration of the site of the group
gathering;



      (9)   The manner in which the permittee must provide notice of
permit conditions to participants in the group gathering;



      (10)   A requirement that the permittee provide notice of the
group gathering to businesses and residences which abut the proposed
location(s) of the group gathering or are directly across the street from the
proposed location(s) of the group gathering;



      (11)   The designation of alternate sites, times, dates, or
modes for expressive activity which will reasonably reduce or mitigate
adverse impacts on the public health and safety.



   (C)   Issuance of a permit pursuant to this subchapter does not
obligate or require the city to provide any city services, equipment, or
personnel in support of a group gathering.  If such services, equipment, or
personnel are required as a condition of approval, the permittee shall be
responsible to reimburse the city for the actual cost of such services,
equipment, or personnel as set forth in § 97.110.



   (D)   No condition shall be imposed in a manner that will
unreasonably restrict expressive activity or other activity protected by the
California or United States Constitutions.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



§ 97.108  PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   The application for a permit to conduct a group gathering
shall be filed on the form provided by the city with the Chief Executive
Officer.



   (B)   Except as set forth in this subsection for spontaneous
demonstrations, each application for a permit for any group gathering which
involves any use of a public place regularly utilized for vehicles, including
but not limited to the crossing of streets by pedestrian participants
traveling in unison, must be filed not less than seven business days
immediately prior to the date of the group gathering.  Except as set forth
in this division for spontaneous demonstrations, each application which
involves only the use of a public place from which vehicular access is barred
must be filed not less than three business days immediately prior to the date
of the group gathering.  Each application for a spontaneous demonstration
may be filed not later than 5:00 p.m. of the second business day immediately
preceding the date of the proposed spontaneous demonstration.



   (C)   Each application shall contain full, complete and detailed
information as to the following:



      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person or
persons seeking to conduct the group gathering.  If the person is an
organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the individual to be
contacted shall also be included;



      (2)   A certification that the applicant shall be financially
responsible for any city fees, charges, or costs that may be lawfully imposed
for the group gathering;



      (3)   A statement of the purpose of the group gathering;



      (4)   A statement of any fees to be charged to participants or
spectators in connection with the group gathering;



      (5)   The proposed location of the group gathering, including
a plot plan depicting the placement of any temporary structures or
facilities.  If the group gathering involves traveling in unison, the
proposed location of the assembly and disbanding areas and the route to be
taken, including a map and written narrative, shall be provided;



      (6)   The date of the group gathering;



      (7)   The time when the group gathering is to be conducted
including the approximate times for assembly for and disbanding of the group
gathering;



      (8)   The approximate number of persons, and the approximate
number and type of any animals or vehicles that will participate in the group
gathering;



      (9)   A description of any amplification equipment to be used
at the group gathering;



      (10)   A description of any other noise generating machinery
to be used at the group gathering;



      (11)   A description of any equipment or service necessary to
conduct the group gathering with due regard for the health and safety of the
participants and the public;



      (12)   The number of persons proposed or required to monitor
or facilitate the group gathering and to provide control and direction for
use of the public place;



      (13)   Provisions, if any, for first aid or emergency medical
services, or both, based upon risk factors inherent in the group gathering
activities;



      (14)   Provisions, if any, for food and/or beverage
distribution to the participants in the group gathering;



      (15)   Provisions for clean-up and disposal of any debris or
waste generated by the group gathering.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



§ 97.109  PERMIT APPROVAL.



   (A)   Within two business days after the filing of an application
for any group gathering other than a spontaneous demonstration, the Chief
Executive Officer shall review it and either approve, conditionally approve,
or deny the application.  The Chief Executive Officer shall review and
either approve, conditionally approve, or deny an application for a
spontaneous demonstration by 5:00 p.m. of the business day immediately
preceding the date of the proposed spontaneous demonstration.



   (B)   The Chief Executive Officer shall make his/her determination
on whether to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application on the
basis of the standards set forth in this section.  In making such
determination, no consideration shall be given to any message or the content
of any expressive activity connected with the group gathering, the identity
or associational relationships of the organizer of the group gathering or its
members or affiliates, or any assumptions or predictions as to response by
any spectators to any expressive activity connected with the group gathering.



   (C)   The Chief Executive Officer shall issue the permit
unconditionally if he finds that the following criteria have been met:



      (1)   The proposed use of the public place is not governed by
or subject to any other permit procedures or to any other applicable laws,
rules, or regulations governing the use of such public place;



      (2)   The group gathering will not substantially interrupt
public transportation or other vehicular traffic in the area of its location
or constitute or create a traffic hazard;



      (3)   The activity to be conducted by the participants in the
group gathering will not result in or lead to injury to person or property;



      (4)   The group gathering will not interfere with construction
or development scheduled to occur at the public place on the date of the
group;



      (5)   The group gathering will not substantially interfere
with other authorized and permitted uses of the public place proposed for use;



      (6)   The group gathering will not unreasonably interfere with
access to police or fire stations or other public safety facilities;



      (7)   The proposed location(s) for the group gathering can
physically accommodate the number of participants expected.



   (D)   If the Chief Executive Officer determines that one or more of
the findings required by division (C) above cannot be met, he shall determine
whether the imposition of any one or more of the conditions set forth in §
97.107 on the time, place, or manner of conduct of the group gathering can
cause such criteria to be met.  In such case, he or she shall issue the
permit subject to the applicable condition(s).



   (E)   The Chief Executive Officer shall deny the application if:



      (1)   The application contains incomplete, false or misleading
information; or



      (2)   The applicant or the person or entity on whose behalf
the application for the permit was made has on the prior occasion of a group
gathering damaged city property and has not paid in full for such damage or
has other outstanding and unpaid debts to the city resulting from a prior
group gathering; or



      (3)   The Chief Executive Officer determines that one or more
of the findings required by division (C) above has not been met and there is
no permissible condition which may be imposed on the time, place or manner of
conduct of the group gathering so as to cause the findings set forth in
division (C) above to be met.



   (F)   The Chief Executive Officer shall give prompt notice of his or
her approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application to the
applicant by telephone, followed by written confirmation of the decision. 
Such notice shall include notice of any cost deposits required pursuant to §
97.110 and/or insurance required pursuant to § 97.111.  Any decision to
conditionally approve or deny an application shall be accompanied by detailed
facts and reasons for such determination.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



§ 97.110  FEES AND COST RECOVERY.



   (A)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit application fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council.



   (B)   If any condition of approval requires the permittee to obtain
and utilize services, equipment or personnel to be provided by the city, the
Chief Executive Officer shall provide the permittee with an estimate of the
cost thereof, based upon the actual cost to the city of providing such
service, equipment, or personnel for the time(s) and in the place(s)
required.  The permit shall not be issued until such time as the permittee
has posted with the city a deposit in the total amount of the estimated cost.



   (C)   If a group gathering includes the use of horses or other large
animals, the operation of water stations, or food or beverage distribution or
sales, a deposit reasonably calculated to cover the cost of cleaning the
public place after the conclusion of the group gathering may be required. 
The permit shall not be issued until such time as the permittee has posted
such deposit with the city.



   (D)   The city shall keep true and accurate records of the actual
costs of services, equipment, personnel, or clean-up incurred in connection
with the group gathering.  Such costs shall include all costs incurred by
the city in anticipation of the group gathering, even if the event is
cancelled.  If the actual costs are less than the deposit, any excess funds
shall be promptly refunded to the permittee.  If the actual costs exceed the
deposit, the city shall send notice to the permittee of the amount due, which
shall be due and payable within ten days of the date of notice.



   (E)   Any indigent natural person who intends to organize a
demonstration who cannot obtain a permit because of an inability arising from
such indigence to pay the costs or obtain the insurance required by this
subchapter may request the Chief Executive Officer to recommend alternatives
to the scale, time, place, or conduct of the demonstration that would result
in less costs being incurred or insurance not being required.  Upon receipt
of such request, the Chief Executive Officer shall make his or her best
efforts to advise the indigent natural person of such alternatives and shall
modify or waive such costs and/or insurance upon acceptance by such person or
such alternatives.  Application for indigent status shall be made at the
time of permit application and shall be accompanied by such relevant
information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the Chief Executive
Officer, be reasonably necessary to verify such status.  For purposes of
this subchapter, an indigent natural person shall be a person who meets the
standards of eligibility to proceed in court in forma pauperis.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



§ 97.111  INDEMNIFICATION; INSURANCE.



   (A)   Each permit shall expressly provide that the permittee agrees
to protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, and its officers,
employees, and agents from and against any and all claims, damages, expenses,
losses, or liability of any kind or nature whatsoever arising out of, or
resulting from the alleged acts or omissions of the permittee or its
officers, employees, or agents connected with the permitted group gathering,
and to defend, at the permittee’s own cost, risk, and expense, any and all
claims or legal actions that may be commenced or filed against the city, or
its officers, employees or agents as a result of the alleged acts or omission
of permittee or permittee’s officers, employees, or agents connected with
the permitted group gathering.



   (B)   No permit shall be issued until the permittee has provided
evidence satisfactory to the Chief Executive Officer that the permittee has
procured a policy of insurance from a reliable insurance company authorized
to do business in the state, which policy includes the city, its officers,
employees and agents as named insureds or additional named insureds, and
which provides the coverage that the Chief Executive Officer determines to be
necessary, reasonable, and adequate under the circumstances.  In making such
determination, the Chief Executive Officer shall consider only the following
factors:



      (1)   Those physical factors arising from the manner in which
the group gathering is held which create the risk of injury to the
participants or spectators of the group gathering, including, but not limited
to, the number of participants, the location of the group gathering, and the
absence or presence of vehicular traffic in proximity to the group gathering;



      (2)   Whether the risk can be lessened or eliminated by
adjusting the time, date, place, or planned manner of conduct related to the
group gathering; and



      (3)   If so, whether the applicant is willing to make such
adjustments.



(Ord. 1266, passed 6-15-05; Am. Ord. 1267, passed 7-6-05)



PARKWAY TREES



§ 97.125  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BEAUTIFICATION PROJECTS.  Any area improved, landscaped, or maintained
by the Department of Public Works.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works of the city.



   LIST.  The Approved Parkway Trees and Planting Materials List of the
city as approved by the City Council.



   MAINTAIN or MAINTENANCE  Includes, but is not limited to, chipping,
spraying, fertilizing, staking and tying, treating for disease or injury, and
any other similar acts, which promote the life, growth, health or beauty of
trees.



   PARKWAY.  Those strips of land between lot lines and portions of
abutting public streets utilized for vehicular traffic, which are owned by
the city in fee, or, as to which, the city has an easement for public street
purposes.



   PARKWAY TREE.  Any tree planted for the purpose of providing shade or
beauty to the street area.



   PLAN.  The Comprehensive Plan for the Planting and Maintenance of
Trees in Public Areas in the city as approved by the Council.



   PUBLIC AREA.  Parks, playgrounds, and areas around public buildings or
other areas maintained by the city.



   STREET.  Includes any public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, walk,
road, parkway, right-of-way or other public way, except alleys.



   TREE  Any tree planted or maintained by the city located in a parkway
or in a public area.



('83 Code, § 12.28.010)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.126  LIST OF VARIETIES OF TREES.



   The Director of Public Works shall prepare, for approval of the
Council, the list containing the types of varieties of trees for planting in
all parkways and in all public areas within the city.



('83 Code, § 12.28.020)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.127  PLAN FOR PLANTING AND MAINTENANCE OF TREES.



   The Director shall prepare for approval by the Council the plan for the
planting and maintenance of trees in streets and public areas in the city,
which shall include in general, maps of streets and public areas in the city,
upon which there shall be designated a general plan for the uniform planting
of trees, and specifications for the size and type of such trees permissible
within parkways within the city.  ('83 Code, § 12.28.030)  (Ord. 845,
passed -  -82)



Statutory reference:



   Landscaping and Lighting Act of 1972, see Cal. Sts. & High. Code §§
22500 et seq.



§ 97.128  INTERFERENCE WITH PLANTINGS.



   (A)   No person shall place fences, rocks, gravel, signs, stakes, or
any other objects immediately adjacent to a tree, excepting watering basins
for young trees, and objects for the temporary protection of new plantings of
ground cover.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.28.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.129  MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.



   Except as provided in § 97.130, it shall be the sole responsibility of
the owner or person in possession of each lot in the city to properly
maintain in parkways abutting such lots all plants and other vegetation
located therein.



('83 Code, § 12.28.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.130  MAINTENANCE BY CITY.



   The city shall be responsible for maintenance of all trees within
public areas and parkways.



('83 Code, § 12.28.060)



§ 97.131  REMOVAL OF TREES.



   Whenever the owner of a lot desires to have a tree removed from an
abutting parkway, he shall file a written request therefore for approval by
the Director of Public Works.  If the tree is found to be in good condition
and the request is granted solely for the convenience of the applicant, then
the full cost, including overhead, of the removal and replanting as
necessary, shall be borne by the person making the request and the estimated
amount, as determined by the Director of Public Works, shall be paid to the
Director of Administrative Services before removal shall take place.



('83 Code, § 12.28.070)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.132  PROHIBITION AGAINST INJURY TO STREET TREES.



   (A)   No person shall remove, trim, prune, or cut any tree located
in a public area or a parkway except as provided in this subchapter.  No
person shall injure or destroy any such tree by any means, including but not
limited to, the following:



      (1)   By constructing a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel
sidewalk or otherwise filling up the ground area around any such tree so as
to shut off its air, light or water from its roots (42 inches by 42 inches
closing).



      (2)   By piling building material and equipment or other
substance and materials around any such tree or shrub so as to cause injury
thereto.



      (3)   By pouring any deleterious matter on or around any tree
or shrub or on the surrounding ground, lawn or sidewalk.



      (4)   By posting any sign, poster or notice on any such tree,
tree stake or guard or by fastening guide wires, cables, ropes, nails, screws
or other devices to any tree, tree stake or guard.



      (5)   By causing or encouraging any fire near or around any
such tree.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.28.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



STREET BANNERS



§ 97.145  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CITY CO-SPONSORED EVENT.  Any event that is at least 50% supported or
sustained by the city in some manner as determined by the City Council,
including but not limited to, financially, by providing materials or services.



   CITY SPONSORED EVENT.  Any event supported and sustained solely by the
city, as determined by the City Council.



   STREET BANNER.  Any cloth, canvas or vinyl sign or banner, or other
device designed for use in or over a public street, alley, or place, or any
other public right-of-way, or any portion thereof, or from a light standard
within the public right-of-way.



(‘83 Code, § 12.20.010)  (Am. Ord. 1268, passed 9-7-05)



§ 97.146  PERMIT REQUIRED; ELIGIBILITY.



   (A)   No person shall erect, maintain, place, suspend, attach or
move any street banner for any purpose whatsoever, in, along, over, above or
across any public street, alley or place or any other public right-of-way, or
any portion thereof, without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner
prescribed in this subchapter. 



   (B)   A permit required under division (A) above, may only be
granted for street banners for a city sponsored or city co-sponsored event,
for which the banners shall be approved by the city.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be  a misdemeanor.



(‘83 Code, § 12.20.020)  (Am. Ord. 1268, passed 9-7-05)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 97.147  APPLICATION; FEES.



   (A)   Any person or entity desiring to place or locate a street
banner, for any purpose whatsoever, in, along, over, across or above any
public street, alley or place or any other public right-of-way, or portion
thereof, shall file with the Director of Public Works, an application
therefor, on the forms prescribed by him/her, together with a filing and
processing fee, as required.  The filing and processing fee shall be as set
forth by resolution of the City Council. 



   (B)   A service fee shall be charged if the permittee desires the
city to install and remove the street banner on the permittee’s behalf. 
The service charge shall be the actual cost to the city for installing and
removing the street banner, as determined by the Director of Public Works.



   (C)   The filing, processing and service fee may be waived:



      (1)   In its entirety for a city sponsored event;



      (2)   By up to 50% for a city co-sponsored event.



(‘83 Code, § 12.20.030)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1268, passed
9-7-05)



§ 97.148  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; CONDITIONS.



   Upon receipt of an application for a street banner, the Director of
Public Works shall issue a permit for the placement thereof if he finds that
the banner will not cause a traffic hazard or create a public or private
nuisance.  The Director of Public Works may condition the issuance of the
permit to insure that compliance is had with all provisions of this
subchapter.



('83 Code, § 12.20.040)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.149  REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The holder of any permit for any street banner shall comply
with the following regulations:



      (1)   The exact design and wording proposed to be used on the
street banner shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works together
with the application.  There shall be no deviation from the design and
wording without the Director's prior approval.



      (2)   No permit shall be issued for banners for partisan
political or commercial occurrences or events.



      (3)   Each permit issued shall contain on its face, and the
applicant shall be bound thereby, a designation of the location or locations
at which the banner or banners may be placed, and the time during which the
banner or banners may be so placed.



      (4)   No banner shall be erected pursuant to this subchapter
unless the banner or device is of a substantial cloth or canvas material,
adequately ventilated for wind, and securely suspended from existing poles or
other structures, at least 18 feet above the highest point of the underlying
roadway or other public place.  The erection of special poles or other
supports on public or private property shall not be authorized or allowed
pursuant to this subchapter, except by specific approval of the Director of
Public Works.



      (5)   Banners shall not be placed so as to interfere with
street lights, traffic signals or other structures of a public or private
nature.



      (6)   No permit shall be issued for a period of  more than
180 consecutive calendar days.



      (7)   All banners authorized to be installed by the permittee
shall be so installed by a contractor approved by the Director of Public
Works.  Any damage to the public street, alley or place or any other public
right-of-way, or portion thereof, resulting from the installing, displaying
or removing of any street banner shall be solely borne by the permittee and
the permittee's contractor.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.20.050)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82; Am. Ord. 1268, passed
9-7-05)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.150  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   The Director of Public Works, upon 24 hours written notice given to the
applicant shall suspend a permit whenever it is found by him that the
applicant has not complied with any conditions of issuance imposed upon the
permit, or has violated any other rule, regulation or law.  The order of
suspension shall be an order of revocation unless an appeal is filed in the
time and manner as provided in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 12.20.060)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.151  APPEAL.



   Any decision of the Director of Public Works with respect to
suspension, or with regard to the denial, issuance or conditions imposed upon
the issuance of a permit under this subchapter, shall be directly appealable
to the City Council in the time an manner set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 12.20.070)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.152  REMOVAL OF BANNERS.



   Upon final revocation of a permit, the applicant shall, within 24
hours, remove the street banner.  If the banner is not removed within the
time limit, the Director of Public Works shall cause the banner to be
removed, and shall charge the applicant for the cost thereof.  The charges
shall be collectible as a civil debt.



('83 Code, § 12.20.080)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.153  EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.



   Upon the expiration of a permit for a street banner, the applicant
shall cause the banner to be removed within 24 hours thereafter.  If the
street banner is not removed within the said time, the Director of Public
Works shall cause the banner to be removed and charge the applicant for the
cost thereof.  The charges shall be collectible as a civil debt.



('83 Code, § 12.20.090)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.154  REMOVAL OF HAZARDOUS AND DEFECTIVE STREET BANNERS.



   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this subchapter, the Director
of Public Works is empowered to remove any street banner at any time, without
notice to the permittee, if he finds the banner is hazardous and/or defective
and represents and constitutes an immediate threat to the public peace,
health, welfare and safety.



('83 Code, § 12.20.100)  (Ord. 845, passed -  -82)



§ 97.155  INSURANCE.



   For any city co-sponsored event for which a permit is issued, one or
more of the other co-sponsors shall be required to provide and maintain
liability insurance, identifying the city as co-insured in an amount not less
than $1,000,000.



(Ord. 1268, passed 9-7-05)



§ 97.156 RIGHT TO REMOVE.



   During the term of a permit for any street banner for a city
co-sponsored event and with at least one- week notice, the city may require
the removal of, or remove at each co-sponsor's expense, any street banner
installed for a city co-sponsored event in order for the city to install and
display any street banner for a city sponsored event.  Any street banner
removed pursuant to this section may be reinstalled by any co-sponsor and
displayed for the number of days remaining on the original permit subject to
the conditions of this subchapter and that permit.



(Ord. 1268, passed 9-7-05)



STREET BENCHES



§ 97.165  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BENCH.  A seat located upon public property along any public way for
the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.



   STREET.  Any public thoroughfare or way including the sidewalk, the
parkway and any other public property immediately adjacent to a public street.



('83 Code, § 12.12.010)



§ 97.166  PERMIT.



   (A)   Required.  No person shall install or maintain any bench on
any street without a permit from the City Manager.  Such a permit shall be
valid only for the location specified therein, and for a period of one
year.  Not more than two benches shall be allowed at any one location.



('83 Code, § 12.12.020)



   (B)   Application.  No bench permit shall be issued except upon
written application identifying the proposed location of each bench, the type
of construction proposed, and such other information as the City Manager may
require.



('83 Code, § 12.12.030)



   (C)   Fee.  Each application must be accompanied by a filing and
processing fee set by resolution of the City Council for each bench.  No
part of the fee shall be refundable.



('83 Code, § 12.12.040) 



   (D)   Denial.  A permit application shall be denied if the City
Manager finds that the maintenance of the bench would tend to obstruct
passage along any public way or create a hazard or would otherwise be
detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience.



('83 Code, § 12.12.050)



   (E)   Revocation.



      (1)   Any permit may be revoked, or renewal thereof denied,
for any violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter, for any fraud
or misrepresentation in the application, or for any other reason which would
have been grounds for denial of the application.



      (2)   Any permit issued under this subchapter shall be deemed
cancelled and revoked, if the permittee fails to place the bench within 60
days after the date of the issuance of the permit.



   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of division (A) of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.12.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.167  REMOVAL OF BENCHES BY CITY.



   (A)   After the revocation of any permit, the City Manager may
remove and store the bench, if the permittee fails to do so within 15 days
after being given notice of the revocation.



   (B)   The permittee may recover the bench, if within 60 days after
the removal, he pays the cost of the removal and storage, which shall be a
fee as set by resolution of the City Council for each such bench.  After 60
days, the City Manager may sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of the bench at
his discretion.  All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the
permittee, and shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by law
for the violation of this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 12.12.070)



§ 97.168  NEW PERMIT UPON SALE OR TRANSFER OF TITLE.



   Whenever a bench for which a permit has been issued is sold or title or
control thereof assigned or transferred, the City Manager shall be
immediately notified of the transaction.



('83 Code, § 12.12.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 97.169  ADVERTISING AND SIGNS ON BENCHES.



   (A)   No advertising matter or sign whatever shall be displayed upon
any bench except upon the front and rear surfaces of the backrest, and not
more than 75% of each such surface shall be so used.  All advertising shall
be subject to the approval of the City Manager.



   (B)   No advertisement or sign on any bench shall display the words
"stop," "look," "drive-in," "danger" or any other similar word, phrase,
symbol or character which might interfere with, mislead or distract traffic.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 12.12.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Advertising displays, Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 5230 and 5231



§ 97.170  ENFORCEMENT.



   The City Manager shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter and
shall have complete authority over the installation and maintenance of
benches, subject to the provisions in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 12.12.100)



BLINDER RACKS



§ 97.180  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council finds that the public health, safety, welfare
and convenience require that:



      (1)   The good appearance of public streets and grounds be
maintained;



      (2)   Visual blight on the public rights-of- way or which may
unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of adjacent store window displays,
landscaping and other improvements be reduced;



      (3)   Minors be shielded from materials which may be harmful
to their psychological or physical well-being.



   (B)   The City Council also finds, however, that the reasonable use
of such rights-of-way is historically associated with the sale and
distribution of newspapers and publications, and such use is a
constitutionally protected right.



   (C)   Although state law makes the knowing distribution, sale, or
exhibition of harmful matter to minors a criminal offense, as specifically
set forth in Penal Code § 313.1, § 313.1(d) clearly provides that nothing
in this section invalidates or prohibits the adoption of an ordinance by a
city, county, or city and county, that restricts the display of material that
is harmful to minors, as defined in this chapter, in a public place, other
than a public place from which minors are excluded, by requiring the
placement of devices commonly known as blinder racks in front of the
material, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view.



   (D)   It is the intent of the City Council to require the placement
of blinder racks as permitted by Penal Code §§ 311 through 313.1(d).  It
is also the intent of the City Council to use the provisions of Penal Code
§§ 311 through  313.4 as a guide to the interpretation of and the
definition of words and phrases contained in this chapter.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.181  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BLINDER RACK.  Any device placed in front of any material or matter so
that the lower two-thirds of the material or matter is not exposed to public
view.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works of the city, and his or her
designee.



   NEWSRACK. Any self-service or coin operated box, container, storage
unit, or other dispenser, installed, used, or maintained for the display and
distribution of a newspaper, periodical, or other printed matter.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any land which by deed, conveyance, agreement,
easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated
to the general public for street, highway, alley, sidewalk, walkway, storm
drainage, or bicycle path purposes.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.182  IDENTIFICATION.



   Every newsrack owner shall permanently affix to each newsrack the
owner’s name, address, and telephone number above the level of the
newspapers or periodicals being displayed for distribution in a place where
it may be seen by anyone using the newsrack.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.183  MATTER HARMFUL TO MINORS.



   No person shall knowingly display or cause to be displayed in any
public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, any
harmful matter as defined in § 313 of the Penal Code, unless such matter is
displayed in or upon shelves, newsracks, newsstands, containers, storage
units, or any other dispensers equipped with devices commonly known as
blinder racks affixed in such a manner that the lower two-thirds of the
matter is not exposed to public view. 



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.184  REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF NEWSRACKS.



   (A)   The Director may immediately correct any violation of this
chapter, and shall do so without impounding, if such correction can be
accomplished simply, easily, quickly, and without substantial public expense.



   (B)   Any newsrack installed, used, or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or of state law, may be subject to removal,
storage, and disposal by the Director.  In such cases, the Director shall
notify the owner, by mail, that, unless the violation is corrected or a
hearing requested within 15 calendar days of the date of the notice, the
newsrack will be impounded.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.185  HEARING ON IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   Any owner of a newsrack aggrieved by a decision under §
97.184 may request a hearing before the Chief Executive Officer or his or her
designee (other than the Director), provided that a written request for such
hearing is received by the City Clerk no later than 15 calendar days from the
date of the notice issued under § 97.184.



   (B)   A hearing shall be held within ten business days of the date
of receipt of a timely request for a hearing.  At the hearing, the owner of
the newsrack may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack
should not be impounded or should be returned without payment of an impound
fee.



   (C)   The Chief Executive Officer, or his or her designee, shall
render a written decision within seven business days after the close of the
hearing.  The decision of the Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee
shall be final.  Failure to so render a decision within seven business days
shall not affect the validity of such decision.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.186  DISPOSITION OF IMPOUNDED NEWSRACKS.



   (A)   The owner of the newsrack may, at any time up to and including
the thirtieth day after the impounding, and if a hearing is held concerning
the newsrack at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the
written decision, obtain a return of the newsrack and its contents, upon
paying an impound fee established by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   If a hearing on the impounding of the newsrack is not timely
requested, or if the newsrack is not returned in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the Director may sell or otherwise dispose of the
newsrack, its contents, and deposit the proceeds, if any, from any such sale
or other disposition, and any moneys contained in the newsrack, in the
city’s general fund.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



§ 97.187  FINE FOR DISPLAY OF HARMFUL MATTER TO MINORS.



   In addition to any and all remedies set forth in this chapter in
connection with violations thereof, displays of harmful matter to minors in
violation of § 97.183 of this chapter shall be punished as a misdemeanor
pursuant to § 10.99 by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding six months, or by both  fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. 1235, passed 5-19-04)



CHAPTER 98:  UNATTENDED SHOPPING CARTS



Section



   98.01   Businesses providing shopping carts



   98.02   Definitions



   98.03   Removal



   98.04   Hearing



   98.05   Location of removed shopping carts



   98.06   Destruction of removed shopping carts



   98.07   Physical containment system



   98.08   Phased enforcement



§ 98.01  BUSINESSES PROVIDING SHOPPING CARTS.



   Any business providing to its customers shopping carts as that term is
defined in § 98.02 of this Code shall permanently affix to the shopping cart
a sign that identifies the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer, or
both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized
removal of the shopping cart from the premises; notifies the public that the
unauthorized removal of the shopping cart from the premises or parking area
of the retail establishment, or the authorized possession of the shopping
cart, is a violation of state law; and lists a valid telephone number or
address for returning the shopping cart removed from the premises or parking
area to the owner or retailer.



(Ord. 1120, passed 2-19-97)



§ 98.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:



   BUSINESS PREMISES.  The entirety of a commercial site upon which a
cart provider conducts a commercial establishment, including, but not limited
to, the interior of the cart provider's commercial establishment, adjacent
walkways, any associated loading and parking areas provided on that site or
provided on private property in conjunction with the commercial establishment.



   CART PROVIDER.  The owner or operator of a business premises who
provides carts for use by its customers for the purpose of transporting goods
of any kind.



   OWNER.  That person or entity whose name is required to appear on the
shopping cart as provided in § 98.01 of this Code.



   PHYSICAL CONTAINMENT SYSTEM.  Disabling devices on all shopping carts,
which prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking
the wheels or otherwise preventing the movement of the shopping carts off the
business premises.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Any sidewalk, street, alley, lane, court, park,
or parkway on public property or other public place within the city.



   SHOPPING CART.  A non-motorized basket which is mounted on wheels or a
similar device generally used in retail establishments by a customer for the
purpose of transporting goods of any kind.



(Ord. 1120, passed 2-19-97; Am. Ord. 1314, passed 2-6-08)



§ 98.03  REMOVAL.



   (A)   Removal of shopping carts with identification signs.  Any
unattended shopping cart containing the sign required by Business and
Professions Code Section 22435.1 which is located outside the premises or
parking area of a retail establishment and within the public right-of-way may
be removed by the city or its authorized agent at the owner's cost if, prior
to the removal, the city provides to the owner or the owner's agent a minimum
of three business days' actual notice of the shopping cart's discovery and
location. Within 48 hours after said removal, the city shall again attempt to
notify either the owner of the shopping cart or the owner's agent, either by
telephone or in writing, that the city has removed the unattended shopping
cart is then located. Any owner wishing to recover a shopping cart removed
pursuant to this subsection may appear during normal business hours at the
applicable location and, after paying the $50 fine authorized by Business and
Professions Code Section 22435.7 sub. (f) (the “Fine”), if applicable,
and the removal and storage fee established by City Council resolution,
redeem the shopping cart. The fine shall only be required to be paid if the
owner or the owner's agent fails to retrieve one or more shopping carts
within the applicable three day period on three separate occasions within any
six month period.



   (B)   Removal of shopping carts within identification signs.  Any
unattended shopping cart not containing the sign required by Business and
Professions Code Section 22435.1 which is located outside the premises or
parking area of a retail establishment and within the public right-of-way
maybe immediately  removed by the city or its authorized agent at the
owner's cost. Within 48 hours of said removal, the city shall attempt to
notify the owner (if the identity of the owner is known), either by telephone
or in writing, that the city has removed the shopping cart from the public
right-of-way and the address at which the shopping cart is then located. Any
owner wishing to shopping cart removed pursuant to this subsection may appear
during normal business hours within 30 days of the date of notice (or, if no
notice is given because the identity of the owner is not known, within 30
days after removal) at the applicable location, and after paying the removal
and storage fee established by City Council resolution, redeem the shopping
cart.



   (C)   Removal of shopping carts which impede emergency services. 
Any unattended shopping cart located outside the premises or parking area of
a retail establishment which impedes emergency services may be removed by the
city or its authorized agent from public or private property at the owner's
cost consistent with Section 22435.7(c). Within 48 hours of said removal, the
city shall attempt to notify the owner (if the identity of the owner is
known), either by telephone or in writing, that the city has removed the
shopping cart from the public right-of-way and the address at which the
shopping cart is then located. Any owner wishing to recover a shopping cart
removed pursuant to this subsection may appear during normal business hours
within 30 days of the date of notice (or, if no notice is given because the
identity of the owner is not known, within 30 days after removal) at the
applicable location, and after paying the removal and storage fee established
by City Council resolution, redeem the shopping cart.



(Ord. 1120, passed 2-19-97)



§ 98.04  HEARING.



   Any owner of a shopping cart who has been charged a fee or fine to
redeem a shopping cart shall be entitled to obtain a hearing as to whether
the fee or fine has been properly charged by providing to the City Clerk a
written request for a hearing within 15 days of receipt of notice that the
shopping cart has been removed. The hearing shall be held not later than 30
days from the date of the hearing request and the owner shall be notified of
the time, date, and location of the hearing. The City Manager or his or her
designee shall appoint a hearing officer. If the hearing officer determines
that the city properly removed the shopping cart and the owner has been
charged the appropriate amount, the owner shall pay all costs associated with
the administrative hearing and, if he or she desires to redeem the shopping
cart, pay any applicable fee and/or fine. If the hearing officer determines
that the owner has been improperly charged a fee and/or fine, the owner shall
be entitled to redeem the shopping cart at an adjusted fee and/or fine or at
no charge, whichever is applicable.



(Ord. 1120, passed 2-19-97)



§ 98.05  LOCATION OF REMOVED SHOPPING CARTS.



   Any shopping cart removed by the city from the public right-of-way
pursuant to this Chapter shall be taken to a location which is:



   (A)   Reasonably convenient to the owner of the shopping cart; and



   (B)   Open for business at least six hours of each business day.



(Ord. 1120, passed 2-19-97)



§ 98.06  DESTRUCTION OF REMOVED SHOPPING CARTS.



   The city shall be permitted to destroy or otherwise dispose of any
shopping cart removed by the city from the public right-of-way pursuant to
this Chapter in the following circumstances:



   (A)   The shopping cart falls to contain a sign or other information
that identifies the owner, and the city is unable to locate the owner with
reasonable diligence; or



   (B)   The owner of the shopping cart or the owner's agent has failed
to reclaim the shopping cart from the city within 30 days of receipt of
notice that the shopping cart was removed by the city.



(Ord. 1120, passed 2-19-97)



§ 98.07  PHYSICAL CONTAINMENT SYSTEM.



   Every cart provider shall install a physical containment system to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Director of Community Development or his or
her designee.



(Ord. 1314, passed 2-6-08)



§ 98.08  PHASED ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Installation of the physical containment system required by §
98.07 shall be completed prior to the issuance of a business license to any
cart provider for any business opened after March 7, 2008 (the "compliance
date").



   (B)   For each cart provider whose business is legally in operation
before the compliance date, an additional six-month grace period will be
provided to allow the cart provider time to evaluate its own rates of cart
loss and to secure and install an appropriate containment system. Any such
cart provider who has not installed a physical containment system at the
conclusion of the six-month period shall be in violation of § 98.07. An
extension may be given at the discretion of the city's Chief Executive
Officer.



(Ord. 1314, passed 2-6-08)



CHAPTER 99:  PROHIBITION OF CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Unlawful camping



   99.03   Exemptions



   99.04   Storage of personal property in public places



§  99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning,
and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.



   CAMP.  Erect, maintain, or occupy an out of doors area for the
purposes of cooking, sleeping, and/or living accommodations.



   CAMP FACILITY.  One or more of the following:  tents, huts, or other
temporary physical shelters.



   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA.  Tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks,
or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.



   PROHIBITED PUBLIC PLACES. Any of the following:  public streets,
public sidewalks, public alleyways, public parking lots, public passageways,
public rights of way, publicly-owned landscaped areas or greenbelts, public
educational institutions, or other government-owned properties located within
the city pursuant to § 96.01.



   STORE.  To put aside, gather, collect, stash, stockpile, or accumulate
for use when needed.



(Ord. 1166, passed 10-18-00)



§  99.02   UNLAWFUL CAMPING.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or
use camp paraphernalia in the following areas:



   (A)   Any public park.



   (B)   Any public street, public sidewalks, public alleyways, public
parking lots, public passageways, public rights of way, publicly-owned
landscaped areas or greenbelts, public educational institutions, or other
government-owned properties located within the city.



(Ord. 1166, passed 10-18-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§  99.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding § 99.01 of this chapter, authority of the city to
issue  permits for special events may be granted in accordance with §
96.02(L).



(Ord. 1166, passed 10-18-00)



§  99.04  STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property,
including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas,
except as otherwise provided by resolution of the City Council:



   (A)   Any public park.



   (B)   Any public street, public sidewalks, public alleyways, public
parking lots, public passageways, public rights of way, publicly-owned
landscaped areas or greenbelts, public educational institutions, or other
government owned properties located within the city.



(Ord. 1166, passed 10-18-00)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE X:  FRANCHISES



Chapter



   100.   OFFICIAL POLICE TOW TRUCK SERVICES



CHAPTER 100:  OFFICIAL POLICE TOW TRUCK SERVICES



Section



General Provisions



   100.010   Intent and purpose



   100.020   Definitions



   100.030   Franchise agreements



   100.040   Franchise fee



   100.050   Franchise fee reports



Franchise Procedures and Conditions



   100.090   Selection of franchisees



   100.100   Franchise term and conditions



   100.110   Uniform Tow fee rates



   100.120   Business license required



   100.130   Transfer or assignment of franchise



Operating and Equipment Standards



   100.200   Tow truck equipment requirements



   100.210   Rules of operation



   100.220   Response time



   100.230   Rotation system



   100.235   Non-discrimination



Cancellation, Revocation or Suspension of Franchise



   100.250   Grounds for cancellation, revocation or suspension



   100.260   Procedure for action against official police tow service



   100.270   Liquidated damages



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 100.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   It is the intent of this chapter to prescribe the basic regulations for
the operation of "Official Police Towing Services" in the city in responding
to police emergency situations and in the removal of vehicles which are
apparently abandoned, improperly parked or stopped on public property, or
involved in an accident, or which constitute an obstruction to traffic
because of mechanical failure. It is the intent of the City Council in
enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter to provide a fair and
impartial means of distributing requests for towing services among the best
qualified towing firm or firms, and to insure that such service is prompt and
reasonably priced, and in the best interest of the public as well as the
interest of efficient policing operations for the removal from public streets
of such vehicles.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.020  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ATTENDANT or OPERATOR.  A trained and/or qualified individual
responsible for the operation of a tow car, tow truck or vehicle storage
facility.



   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.  The position which is charged with the
administration of the financial affairs of the city.



   HOLD FOR EVIDENCE.  A designation by the storing/impounding Police
Department employee requesting a level of care above that generally accorded
to stored or impounded vehicles. Within ten calendar days after the date of
the tow, the Official Police Tow Service shall contact the handling Police
Department employee for further instructions as to the handling and
disposition of any vehicle designated as HOLD FOR EVIDENCE.



   IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.  Any vehicle containing evidence of criminal
activity, or which in and of itself provides evidence of a criminal act, that
is removed from a site and taken to the tow yard at the direction of a Police
Department employee and for which a vehicle report (currently, form CHP 180)
is provided to the Official Police Tow Service.



   OFFICIAL POLICE TOW SERVICE. A towing company having a franchise with
the city to provide towing services to the city and/or Police Department. An
Official Police Tow Service shall be used by the city and/or Police
Department for any situation where a tow truck is required.



   STORED VEHICLE.  Any vehicle removed from a site and taken to a tow
yard at the direction of a Police Department employee, and for which a
vehicle report (currently, form CHP 180) is provided to the Official Police
Tow Service.



   TOW CAR or TOW TRUCK.  A motor vehicle which has been altered or
designed and equipped for, and exclusively used in the business of, towing
vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line, flat bed, roll back, or
dolly, or is otherwise exclusively used to render assistance to other
vehicles.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1177, passed 5-2-01; Am. Ord. 1407,
passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.030  FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS.



   Tow truck operator or companies designated as an Official Police Tow
Service, as defined in § 100.020, shall enter into a written franchise
agreement with the city. Each franchise agreement shall contain eligibility
requirements, operating regulations, and fee schedules as adopted by the City
Council. Every Official Police Tow Service shall post in a conspicuous place
in the interior of each tow truck operated by said Official Police Tow
Service an approved rate schedule in a form and location approved by the
Chief Executive Officer.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.040  FRANCHISE FEE.



   An Official Police Tow Service granted a franchise pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall pay the city a franchise fee of 25% of the
total gross revenue of an Official Police Tow Service derived from the towns
assigned by the Police Department including storage of said vehicles. The
franchise fee shall be payable monthly to the city during the term of the
franchise. All terms and provisions for payment of the fee shall be clearly
set forth in the franchise agreement as provided in § 100.030.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.050  FRANCHISE FEE REPORTS.



   (A)   Annual income statement.  Every Official Police Tow Service
shall annually provide the city with an income statement of the Official
Police Tow Service derived from the tows assigned by the city or Police
Department. Such statements shall be in such substance and format as may be
approved by the Director of Finance or his or her designee.



   (B)   Monthly report.  In addition to the annual income statement,
each monthly franchise fee payment made by the Official Police Tow Service to
the city shall be accompanied by a brief report showing the basis for
calculating the monthly franchise fee and a written statement, signed under
penalty of perjury by an officer of the Official Police Tow Service, which
identifies in detail the number of official police tow services performed and
sets forth the basis for exempting any such tow services from calculation of
the monthly franchise fee payment for such month.



   The monthly report shall include the following:



      (1)   Total police impounds;



      (2)   Number of times dispatched by Police Department;



      (3)   Number of these calls resulting in impounds;



      (4)   Number of vehicles sold on lien sale under authority of
Cal. Civil Code § 3072, and reporting said lien sales as per authority of
Cal. Vehicle Code § 22705;   



      (5)   Number of vehicles sold under authority of Cal. Civil
Code § 3073;



      (6)   For individual sales, the DMV release of liability form;



      (7)   For all bulk sales, the name of the salvage company or
individual purchaser and the vehicle identification numbers of all vehicles
sold;



      (8)   Number of calls answered in which time beyond one hour
was required to handle;



      (9)   Any responses to city requests for tow services in
excess of 30 minutes; and



      (10)   Calculation of the average response time for official
police tow services.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



FRANCHISE PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS



§ 100.090  SELECTION OF FRANCHISEES.



   (A)   At least 90 calendar days prior to the date an existing
Official Police Tow Service franchise is due to expire, or whenever the Chief
Executive Officer or his or her designee determines that the city has an
established need for a new or additional tow truck operator to provide
Official Police Tow Services to the city, the Chief Executive Officer or his
or her designee shall request that the Department of Finance send out a
notice of request for qualifications for a tow truck operator except where
the performance of an existing Official Police Tow Service has been exemplary
in which case the franchise shall be renewed by the City Council. The City
Council by majority vote must make the determination of whether “the
performance of an existing Official Police Tow Service has been exemplary.”
The City Council’s decision regarding “exemplary” services is final and
cannot be appealed. The request for qualifications shall be prepared by the
Department of Finance and shall be approved by the Chief Executive Officer or
his or her designee. Any proposals shall be reviewed by the Chief Executive
Officer or his or her designee. The Chief Executive Officer or his or her
designee shall select the most qualified proposal(s), if any, and the Police
Department shall conduct a background investigation on the operator and
his/her employees, and Chief Executive Officer shall  verify all information
included in the proposal submitted to the city.



   (B)   Upon successful completion of the background investigation,
the Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee shall recommend, in
writing, to the City Council the award of a franchise based on the bidder’s
compliance with the objective criteria established by this chapter.  In
preparing requests for and evaluating proposals received by the city, the
Department of Finance and the Chief Executive Officer or his or her designee
shall comply with the procedures and criteria adopted by this chapter.



   (C)   The City Council has the discretion to grant a franchise to a
tow truck provider that does not meet each of the requirements set forth in
this chapter, but only where it is determined that full and complete
compliance shall be achieved within six months of the date the franchise is
awarded.



   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the city has an established
need for a new or additional Official Police Tow Service if any of the
following occurs:



      (1)   An existing Official Police Tow Service's franchise is
revoked in accordance with the provisions of § 100.245 of this chapter; or



      (2)   The response times of all of the existing Official
Police Tow Services fail to meet the average response time required by §
100.220 because of a demonstrable increase in the volume of official tows; or



      (3)   The city annexes additional area and the Chief Executive
Officer or his or her designee, in his/her sole discretion, determines that
the increased area and population warrant additional Official Police Tow
Services to adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare.



   (E)   To be eligible for a franchise under this chapter, a tow truck
operator or company shall have a minimum of five years of verifiable
experience performing law enforcement  towing and storage and shall have
paid all applicable city fees and business licenses during said period where
said business was maintained in the city prior to the issuance of a franchise.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1177, passed 5-2-01; Am. Ord. 1407,
passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.100  FRANCHISE TERM AND CONDITIONS.



   All Official Police Tow Services shall be subject to the terms and
conditions specified in this chapter, as well as any terms or conditions
specified in their respective franchise agreements.



   (A)   Term.  All Official Police Tow Service franchises granted
pursuant to this chapter may be exclusive or non-exclusive and  shall be for
a term of four to ten years as specified by the City Council in any franchise
agreement between the city and the Official Police Tow Service.



   (B)   Number of franchises.  No provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed to require the restricting of the number of franchises awarded by the
city to one or any other particular number, and no provision of this chapter
shall be deemed to require the City Council to grant any franchise if the
Council determines that the grant of any such franchise is not in the best
interest of the city and the public.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.110  UNIFORM TOW FEE RATES.



   (A)   Fee schedules.  The city shall establish a uniform tow fee
schedule to be used by all Official  Police Tow Services. The uniform tow
fee schedule will be determined by using the average tow fee allowed by the
California Highway Patrol (the "CHP") for the Baldwin Park region, for those
Official Police Tow Services with contracts with the CHP. Said rates shall be
adjusted annually unless an adjustment to rates is approved more frequently
by the CHP. All Official Police Tow Services shall only charge the tow fee
rates established pursuant to the foregoing procedure. 



   (B)   Fee disputes.  Should there be any dispute between the
Official Police Tow Service and a vehicle owner or property owner over rates,
fees or charges imposed for services rendered under this chapter, such
dispute shall be decided by the Chief Executive Officer or his or her
designee, and the Official Police Tow Service shall make no demands upon the
vehicle owner or property owner for a sum in excess of the amount determined
to be reasonable by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.  TheChief
Executive Officer or his or her designee may hold an administrative hearing
on any such dispute, if any party to the dispute so requests.  Such hearing
shall be conducted in the same manner and according to the same rules set
forth in § 100.260(D)(1) through (D)(3) of this chapter.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.120  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   Each Official Police Tow Service shall have and maintain a valid
license to do business in the city at all times during the term of its
franchise agreement.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.130  TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Prior written consent required.  Any Official Police Tow
Service shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, mortgage, or dispose
of, either in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by
ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise or any
rights or privileges granted therein, without obtaining the prior, written
consent of the City Council. Any request to transfer or assign the franchise
must be in writing and must be submitted to the city at least 120 days prior
to the effective date of such sale, transfer, or assignment.



   (B)   Recommendation to city council.  Upon receipt of a written
request to sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, mortgage, or otherwise
dispose of an Official Police Tow Service franchise, the city’s Chief
Executive Officer shall investigate the proposed transferee or assignee and
determine whether such proposed transferee or assignee is qualified to serve
as an Official Police Tow Service operator pursuant to the criteria and
requirements set forth in this chapter and contained in the franchise
agreement, and shall make a recommendation to the City Council.



   (C)   Change of control defined.  The prohibition against the sale,
transfer, lease, assignment, subletting, mortgage, or disposal of any
interest in the franchise shall apply to any change in control of the
Official Police Tow Service operator. The word CONTROL as used herein is not
limited to a change in major stockholders or partners of the Official Police
Tow Service, but also includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. In the event that an Official Police Tow Service operator is a
corporation, prior written consent of the City Council shall be required
where ownership or control of more than 49% of the voting stock of the tow
truck operator is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert,
none of whom own or control the voting stock of the Official Police Tow
Service operator, either singularly or collectively, as of the effective date
of the franchise. Provided, however, that nothing in this provision shall be
construed to require the prior authorization of the City Council for any
transfer of the franchise from an Official Police Tow Service operator to a
wholly owned subsidiary.



   (D)   Grounds for revocation of franchise.  Any attempt to sell,
transfer, lease, assign, sublet, mortgage, or otherwise dispose of an
Official Police Tow Service franchise without the prior, written consent of
the City Council shall be null and void and shall subject the offending
Official Police Tow Service to cancellation, revocation or suspension of its
franchise subject to the terms and procedures set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



OPERATING AND EQUIPMENT STANDARDS



§ 100.200  TOW TRUCK EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Capabilities.  Official Police Tow Services shall provide
towing equipment capable of providing for the following services:



      (1)   Recovery truck(s) with an adjustable boom with a minimum
lifting capacity of at least five  tons.



      (2)   Wheel lift towing.



      (3)   Roll back/flatbed towing.



      (4)   Towing in parking garages.



      (5)   Towing from off road areas.



      (6)   Towing of large and oversized vehicles.



      (7)   Towing of motorcycles without causing additional damage.



   (B)   State requirements.  All tow trucks shall be equipped as
provided in the California Vehicle Code.



   (C)   Minimum equipment available.  Official Police Tow Services
shall, at all times, have at least three fully equipped and operational tow
trucks in service. All of the tow trucks in service must have a minimum
capacity of one ton. At least one of the tow trucks in service must have a
flatbed tow truck. At least one of the three tow trucks in service must have
a five ton lifting capacity.



   (D)   Unlocking vehicles.  Every Official Police Tow Service shall
be equipped for and have personnel proficient in unlocking locked vehicles,
where feasible and practicable, and when requested to do so by authorized
Police Department employees.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.210  RULES OF OPERATION.



   (A)   Request for services.  Official Police Tow Services shall
provide towing service when:



      (1)   The owner or driver of a disabled vehicle is unable, or
fails, to specify a garage or tow service; or



      (2)   A disabled vehicle presents a hazard; or



      (3)   An authorized Police Department employee requests a
towing service for the purposes of storing or impounding a vehicle.



   (B)   Business hours.  Official Police Tow Service's business
office shall be located within the storage yard and attended at all times for
servicing the public and the city from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday, except for the holidays of January 1, known as New Year's Day; third
Monday in January, known as Dr. Martin Luther King Jr's Birthday; third
Monday in February, known as Washington's Birthday/President's Day; last
Monday in May, known as Memorial Day; July 4, known as Independence Day;
first Monday in September, known as Labor Day; the second Monday in October,
known as Columbus Day; November 11, known as Veteran's Day; fourth Thursday
in November, known as Thanksgiving Day; and December 25, known as Christmas
Day. If January 1, July 4, November 11 or December 25 fall upon a Sunday, the
Monday following is a holiday and if they fall upon Saturday, the preceding
Friday is a holiday.



   (C)   Signs required.



      (1)   An Official Police Tow Service's business office shall
have a sign posted including the company name, address, phone number, and
hours of operation, clearly visible from the roadway.



      (2)   An Official Police Tow Service shall maintain a sign
listing the rates and charges of all towing and storage services offered.
Such rates sign shall be conspicuously placed in the business office or such
other places where customer financial transactions take place.



      (3)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall comply with Cal.
Vehicle Code § 27907 regarding signs on tow trucks.



   (D)   Release or availability of vehicles. 



      (1)   An Official Police Tow Service may collect an additional
charge for release of vehicles after normal business hours.



      (2)   An Official Police Tow Service shall release vehicles
stored or impounded by the Police Department, pursuant to authorization
provided by  appropriate employees of the Police Department. Such
authorization shall be in writing on a form provided by the Police Department.



      (3)    All vehicles stored or impounded as a result of a tow
ordered by the Police Department shall be made available to the owner of the
vehicle or his or her representative, any insurance agent, insurance
adjustor, or any body shop or car dealer, for the purpose of estimating or
appraising damages, except vehicles with a "HOLD FOR EVIDENCE" designation.



   (E)   Available on demand.  An Official Police Tow Service must be
available to promptly respond 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a
year, to  all requests by the city for towing services.



   (F)   Professional attire.  All operators of an Official Police Tow
Service responding to a request for towing service by the city and/or Police
Department shall appear in appropriate business attire, which shall include a
shirt with the company logo of the Official Police Tow Service.  If an
operator fails to appear in appropriate attire, the officer on the scene may
refuse to allow the Official Police Tow Service to provide towing service at
that time.  However, the response by the Official Police Tow Service shall
still be counted as a turn in the rotation system described in this chapter.



   (G)   Removal of hazards.  After being dispatched by the city
and/or Police Department to the scene, an Official Police Tow Service
operator shall cooperate with the police officers in removing hazards and
illegally parked vehicles as requested, including the complete cleanup of the
scene by all Official Police Tow Service operators responding. It is the duty
of the police officers to determine when such vehicle should be impounded or
moved, and the Official Police Tow Service operator shall abide by their
decisions. This requirement shall only apply to Official Police Tow Services
summoned to a scene in response to an official request by the Police
Department for tow services.



   (H)   Towing of city vehicles.  Each Official Police Tow Service
shall tow all city police vehicles free of charge within the city's corporate
limits. City police vehicles outside the city’s corporate limits shall be
towed at 75% of the established rates, as set forth in § 100.110(A) of this
chapter. In addition, each Official Police Tow Service shall tow all other
city vehicles, whether within or outside the city’s corporate limits, at
75% of the established rates, as set forth in § 100.110(A) of this chapter.



   (I)   Responsibility for own acts.  Each Official Police Tow
Service and its officers, employees and agents shall be responsible for their
acts while performing duties pursuant to their respective franchise
agreements as follows:



      (1)   The owners of Official Police Tow Service participating
in towing assignments by the city and/or Police Department shall be
responsible for the acts of their employees while on duty.



      (2)   Each participating Official Police Tow Service shall be
responsible for damage to vehicles while in its possession caused by the
active or passive negligence of that Official Police Tow Service.



      (3)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall be responsible
for damage to persons or property caused by the active or passive negligence
or wilful misconduct of its employees en route to or from a city request for
tow services.



      (4)   Each Official Police Tow Service and its employees,
drivers, and agents shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws, including but not limited to all applicable provisions of the
California Vehicle Code.



   (J)   Liability insurance.  Each Official Police Tow Service shall
procure and maintain, at its sole cost, a policy of public liability
insurance in an amount and form acceptable to the city Risk Manager. Such
liability policy shall be maintained in full force and effect for the entire
term of the tow company's franchise agreement and proof of such public
liability insurance shall be provided to the city on demand.



   (K)   Indemnity.  Each Official Police Tow Service agrees to
protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents
and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands, or liability
from or relating to loss, damage, or injury to persons or property in any
manner whatsoever arising out of or incident to the Official Police Tow
Service's franchise with the city or with the Official Police Tow Service's
performance of work under such franchise, including, without limitation, all
consequential damages caused in the preparation to respond to an official
police request for towing services, in providing official police towing
services and subsequent storage of vehicles, and in other related maintenance
activities, whether such claims are caused by the negligence of the tow
company or its agents and employees.



   (L)   Records and offices subject to inspection.



      (1)   All Official Police Tow Service's records, equipment,
and storage facilities will be subject to periodic checks by the city and/or
Police Department or other city investigators during normal business hours.



      (2)   Every Official Police Tow Service shall maintain all
offices, storage facilities and equipment in a neat, clean and organized
manner.



      (3)   Every Official Police Tow Service shall provide access
to employees  of the city at any time during normal business hours, for the
purpose of inspection or audit to determine that the objectives and
conditions of the Official Police Tow Service's franchise with the city are
being fulfilled.



      (4)   An Official Police Tow Service shall record its time in
and its time out on every tow truck assignment. Such records shall be
available and open to city  examination.



   (M)   Communications Requirements.  All Official Police Tow
Services shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Official Police Tow Service shall maintain a telephonic
point of contact capable of receiving city requests for towing services 24
hours a day.



      (2)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall require its
internal dispatch to  retain data and records relating to the city's
requests for towing services  on premises for the term of the franchise.



      (3)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall require the
telephonic point of contact to promptly accept and relay requests for towing
services made by the city.



      (4)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall install and
maintain at all times  during the term of its franchise with the city,
communications between their tow vehicle(s) and the official telephonic point
of contact. This  communication may be either by two way radio or cellular
telephone.



      (5)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall maintain a 24
hour  per day communication contact with their tow vehicle(s).



      (6)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall maintain a 24
hour per day telephone service to receive calls from the public.



   (N)   Vehicle storage facilities.  Every Official Police Tow
Service shall have a secure and environmentally safe vehicle storage facility
with a minimum of 15,000 usable square feet.



      (1)   The vehicle storage facility must be located within the
corporate city limits of the city.



      (2)   The vehicle storage facility must be completely enclosed
by a six foot high wall or fence with no holes, gaps, or other unsecured
openings, and a gate. The wall or fence shall have two or more strands of
barbed wire installed in such a manner so as to discourage access over the
top of the wall or fence, or the wall or fence shall be a minimum of eight
feet in height without barbed wire. All gates into the storage yard shall
meet the same standards required of the wall or fence. Any damage to walls,
fences or gates which allows, or could potentially allow, unauthorized access
to the vehicle storage facility must be repaired within 24 hours.



      (3)   The vehicle storage facility shall have adequate
lighting, and comply with all applicable building codes, zoning regulations,
environmental laws and regulations, and any and all other applicable laws,
rules and regulations established by federal, state, county and city
governments.



      (4)   Security at the vehicle storage facility shall be
adequate to preclude theft, vandalism, or damage by activity while in the tow
operator's establishment. The view to all vehicles must be obstructed from
the roadway. No vehicles shall be left parked or stored on the public
streets  at any time. The Official Police Tow Service operator must provide
off-street parking for its equipment and be able to accommodate at least four
additional vehicles for customer parking. Storage vehicles should be secured
away from the customer parking area and on-site office area.



      (5)   Each Official Police Tow Service operator shall
conspicuously post a tag on the windshield of all vehicles ordered impounded
by the Police Department. No vehicle ordered impounded by the Police
Department  shall be released by the Official Police Tow Service operator
until said operator has verified that the applicable city release charges
have been paid and obtained written authorization from the Police Department
to release a particular vehicle.



      (6)   Each vehicle storage facility must have adequate storage
facilities to provide storage of four  vehicles within an enclosed area,
totally  protected from the weather, contamination or handling by
unauthorized person(s). The Police Department will designate when a vehicle
is to be  placed into inside storage and may place a seal on each door of
the vehicle and/or door(s) of the impound facility. Vehicles placed into
inside storage shall not be removed therefrom without  written authorization
from the Police Department.



      (7)   Each vehicle storage facility must provide an inspection
area for authorized members of the Police Department. Such area shall have,
at  a minimum, a covered inspection area (roof) with a paved (concrete or
asphalt) surface, and an inspection pit or vehicle lift.



      (8)   No Official Police Tow Service shall perform any work
upon any vehicle stored or impounded by the Police Department without first
obtaining written authorization from the Police Department and the registered
owner of the vehicle.



      (9)   Each Official Police Tow Service shall not dispose of
any vehicle stored or impounded by official request of the Police Department,
through any process whatsoever, without first obtaining written authorization
from the Police Department to dispose of the vehicle.



   (O)   Unclaimed vehicles.  When disposing of unclaimed vehicles,
Official Police Tow Services shall abide by all federal, state and local laws
pertaining thereto.



   (P)   Official storage lot.  All vehicles stored or impounded as a
result of a tow ordered by the Police Department shall be towed directly to
an official storage lot unless the Police Department or other person legally
in charge of the vehicle requests that it be taken to some other location.
Vehicle release fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.220  RESPONSE TIME.



   (A)   Average and maximum response time. Each Official Police Tow
Service agrees that, for any 30 day period, the average response time
pursuant to requests for tow service by the Police Deparatment, shall not
exceed 25 minutes. Each Official Police Tow Service also agrees that the
maximum response time for any single request for tow service by the Police
Department shall not exceed 30 minutes. As used in this section, RESPONSE
TIME is defined as the elapsed time between the relaying of the tow service
request to the answering service and arrival of the tow vehicle on the scene.



   (B)   Delay.  When it becomes evident that there will be a delay in
responding to a request for towing service, the responding Official Police
Tow Service shall advise the Police Department of this delay and the reason
for the delay.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.230  ROTATION SYSTEM.



   (A)   Rotation list.  Each Official Police Tow Service designated
as an Official Police Tow Service shall be placed on a “rotation list” in
an initial order to be determined by the Police Department. The rotation list
shall be used whenever a driver or owner of a disabled vehicle is unable to
specify a particular garage or tow service, or whenever an authorized Police
Department employee requests the storage or impounding of a vehicle.



   (B)   Turns in rotation.  Each Official Police Tow Service shall be
called, in turn according to the established rotation list, to respond to a
Police Department request for towing service and, when in turn, shall have
exclusive right to provide service as  follows:



      (1)   The Official Police Tow Service at the top of the order
on the rotation list shall have preference to tow all vehicles from a
specific scene, provided that Official Police Tow Service responds with all
equipment needed to accomplish the tows within the response time specified
herein.



      (2)   Whenever an Official Police Tow Service cannot respond
with all equipment needed to accomplish all tows at a specific scene within
the response time specific herein, the next Official Police Tow Service on
the rotation list shall be called to provide service to the remaining
vehicle(s).



   (C)   Loss of turn in rotation.  Whenever an Official Police Tow
Service cannot, for any reason, respond with any equipment needed to
accomplish the requested service within the response time specified herein,
that Official Police Tow Service shall be passed over and the next Official
Police Tow Service on the rotation list will be called. The Official Police
Tow Service shall become eligible to provide service again only in its next
turn in rotation.



   (D)   Exceptions.



      (1)   Whenever the driver or owner of a disabled vehicle
specifies a particular club, association or tow service to be called to
provide service, such calls shall not constitute a "rotation" call.



      (2)   Whenever a Police Department employee determines that
an  emergency exists because an Official Police Tow Service is unable, for
any reason, to provide adequate tow service, the Police Department employee
shall have the right to have such duties performed by any other means
available.



      (3)   Whenever an Official Police Tow Service is called to tow
a city police vehicle within the city’s corporate limits, such call shall
not constitute a “rotation” call.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.235  NON-DISCRIMINATION.



   In the performance of its duties under this chapter, an Official Police
Tow Service shall not discriminate against any member of the public,
employee, subcontractor, or applicant for employment because of race, color,
religion, ancestry, sex, national origin, disability, sexual orientation, or
age. 



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



CANCELLATION, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF FRANCHISE



§ 100.250  GROUNDS FOR CANCELLATION, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   The franchise agreement entered into between city and Official Police
Tow Service pursuant to § 100.030, shall be subject to cancellation,
revocation or suspension by the Chief Executive Officer either as a whole or
as to any person or vehicle described therein. The procedure for such
cancellation, revocation or suspension is set forth in § 100.260.



   (A)   Notice and contents of notice.  The Official Police Tow
Service shall be given five days written notice to appear before the Chief
Executive Officer or his or her designee to show cause why the franchise
should not be revoked, suspended, or canceled for any of the reasons set
forth below.



   (B)   Basis for action.  A franchise may be revoked, suspended, or
canceled for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   An Official Police Tow Service fails to pay any city
business license fees or other fees provided in the franchise agreement or by
the Baldwin Park Municipal Code; or



      (2)   An Official Police Tow Service breaches any rules,
regulations, or conditions set forth in the franchise agreement or the
Baldwin Park Municipal Code; or



      (3)   An Official Police Tow Service, or any person having any
ownership interest in that Official Police Tow Service or any employee of
that Official Police Tow Service, violates any federal, state or local law; or



      (4)   An Official Police Tow Service fails to maintain a
satisfactory level of service to the police or public; or



      (5)   An Official Police Tow Service fails to keep any tow
vehicle in safe condition and good repair; or



      (6)   An Official Police Tow Service fails to use distinctive
coloring, monogram, or  insignia in compliance with Cal. Vehicle Code §
27907; or



      (7)   An Official Police Tow Service deviates from the
schedule of rates set forth in the franchise; or



      (8)   An Official Police Tow Service passes on a tow
assignment more than four times in any calendar month. PASSING is defined as
refusing, for any reason, any tow assignment from the Police Department,
including, without limitation, the towing of city vehicles at no charge; or



      (9)   An Official Police Tow Service fails to respond to
requests for tow service by the Police Department within the response time
established by § 100.220; or



      (10)   An Official Police Tow Service commits fraud or deceit
upon the city, including, without limitation, falsifying data and records
relating to the city's requests for towing services, falsifying the number of
official police tow services performed, falsifying the response times to city
requests for tow services; or



      (11)   An Official Police Tow Service commits fraud or deceit
upon any person to whom that Official Police Tow Service provides tow truck
services; or



      (12)   An Official Police Tow Service defaults on the
performance of its material obligations under this chapter or the franchise
and fails to cure such default within ten  calendar days after receipt of
written notice of the default and a reasonable opportunity to cure the
default; or



      (13)   An Official Police Tow Service fails to provide or
maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage as required by this
chapter and as set forth in the franchise agreement; or



      (14)   An Official Police Tow Service violates any order or
ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the Official Police
Tow Service relative to its tow truck business, unless such order or ruling
is being contested by that Official Police Tow Service by appropriate
proceedings conducted in good faith; or



      (15)   An Official Police Tow Service becomes insolvent,
unable or unwilling to pay its debts and obligations, or is adjudged to be
bankrupt.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.260  PROCEDURE FOR ACTION AGAINST OFFICIAL POLICE TOW SERVICE.



   Whenever the city determines that an Official Police Tow Service has
violated any applicable federal, state or local law, or has violated any
provision of the franchise between the Official Police Tow Service and the
city, the city shall give that Official Police Tow Service written notice of
the violation and an opportunity to be heard on the matter in accordance with
the following procedures:



   (A)   Written notice.  The city shall notify the offending Official
Police Tow Service in writing of any and all violations. Such notice shall be
delivered to the particular Official Police Tow Service in violation by
personal delivery or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, shall clearly set forth the specific violation, shall demand that
the offending Official Police Tow Service cure the violation, and shall set
forth the time period for curing the violation. The time period for curing a
violation shall be determined by the Chief Executive Officer, or his or her
designee, based on the nature of the violation, but under no circumstances
shall the time period to cure be less than ten calendar days. If the Official
Police Tow Service fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed
by the notice, or if the official police tow service fails to commence good
faith efforts to correct the violation within the time prescribed in the
notice, the city shall temporarily suspend the Official Police Tow Service's
franchise with the city pursuant to the provisions of division (B) of this
section or shall give the Official Police Tow Service 14 calendar days
written notice of a hearing before the Chief Executive Officer, or his or her
designee. The written notice shall specify the alleged violations and the
recommended action to be taken.



   (B)   Temporary suspension.  For equipment violations or business
omissions, where the Chief Executive Officer desires to provide an Official
Police Tow Service an additional opportunity beyond the initial notice to
correct violations or omissions, the Chief Executive Officer, or his or her
designee, may suspend that Official Police Tow Service from providing service
for a period of time, not to exceed seven calendar days. Such suspension
shall not be considered punitive and shall be for the specific purpose of
providing Official Police Tow Service time to correct specified violations or
omissions. If the Official Police Tow Service still fails to take corrective
action during the temporary suspension period, the city shall give that
Official Police Tow Service 14 calendar days written notice of a hearing
before the Chief Executive Officer, or his or her designee. The written
notice shall specify the alleged violations and the recommended action to be
taken.



   (C)   Suspension pending hearing.  For all substantive violations
of law or the  provisions of the franchise agreement between the Official
Police Tow Service and the city, or for refusal to correct violations after
proper notice is served upon the offending Official Police Tow Service
pursuant to divisions (A) and/or (B) of this section, where the Police
Department intends to take punitive action against the offending Official
Police Tow Service or revoke the franchise in its entirety, the Chief
Executive Officer or his or her designee, may suspend the offending Official
Police Tow Service from providing service for a period of time, not to exceed
14 calendar days, in preparation for a hearing.



   (D)   Informal hearing.  The Chief Executive Officer or his or her
designee, shall conduct such hearing and may receive information from any
source deemed relevant to the inquiry. The purpose of the hearing shall be to
determine the factual basis of the allegation(s) against the Official Police
Tow Service.



      (1)   The hearing shall be informal in nature.



      (2)   Formal rules of evidence (California Evidence Code
and/or the Federal Rules of Evidence) shall not apply.



      (3)   The offending Official Police Tow Service shall have the
opportunity to respond to the allegations and present information relevant to
Official Police Tow Service's defense.



      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing or within a reasonable
time thereafter, not to exceed ten  working days, the Chief Executive
Officer, or his or her designee, shall make a finding as to whether the
allegation(s) are "founded" or "unfounded."



      (5)   Upon a finding that the allegation(s) are "founded," the
Chief Executive Officer, or his or her designee, shall determine the
appropriate sanction to be taken  against the offending Official Police Tow
Service.



         (a)   The Chief Executive Officer may extend the
suspension of the offending Official Police Tow Service for a period of time,
not to exceed 30 additional calendar days, or;



         (b)   The Chief Executive Officer may permanently revoke
the offending  Official Police Tow Service's franchise and remove the
Official Police Tow Service from providing service in response to Police
Department request; or



         (c)   The Chief Executive Officer may impose such other
sanction as he or she determines is appropriate in light of the nature of the
violation and the relevant circumstances.



      (6)   The Chief Executive Officer, or his or her designee
shall notify the offending  Official Police Tow Service of his or her
finding and/or the sanctions to be imposed, in person, by registered mail, or
by written notice hand-delivered to that Official Police Tow Service's
business office.



   (E)   Appeals.  Any Official Police Tow Service aggrieved by a
decision of the Chief Executive Officer pursuant to this section may appeal
the finding of or the sanction imposed by, the Chief Executive Officer to the
City Council.  Any such appeal must be filed with the city’s Chief
Executive Officer in writing within five business days of the Official Police
Tow Service's receipt of the decision of the Chief Executive Officer.



      (1)   The city’s Chief Executive Officer shall schedule an
informal hearing within ten days of receiving an appeal from the Official
Police Tow Service and shall notify the Official Police Tow Service in
writing of such hearing at least five calendar days prior to the hearing
date. The same procedures set forth above for the hearing by the Chief
Executive Officer or his or her designee, shall apply to the hearing before
the City Council, if any.



      (2)   After hearing the evidence from both sides, the city’s
Chief Executive Officer shall issue a written decision within ten days of the
hearing. The decision  of the city’s Chief Executive Officer is final.



      (3)   Any person aggrieved by the City Administrator's
decision may file a writ of administrative mandamus pursuant to the Cal.
Civil Code § 1094.5 within 90 days of the date the City Administrator issues
his or her decision.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



§ 100.270  LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.



   (A)   Fines and penalties.  Each Official Police Tow Service agrees
that an Official Police Tow Service's failure to meet the average response
time for any 30 day period, or failure to meet the maximum response time for
any single request for tow service, will result in damages being sustained by
the city. Such damages are, and will continue to be impracticable and
extremely difficult to determine. Each Official Police Tow Service agrees to
pay the city $250 each and every time that Official Police Tow Service fails
to meet the average response time requirements for any 30 calendar day
period. Each Official Police Tow Service agrees to pay the city $100 each and
every time that Official Police Tow Service fails to meet the maximum
response time for any single request for tow service by the Police
Department. Each Official Police Tow Service further agrees that said sums
are the minimum value of the costs and actual damages caused by failure of an
Official Police Tow Service to complete service within the allotted time
period. Such sum is a liquidated damage and shall not be construed as a
penalty.



   (B)   Hearing. Prior to the imposition of such liquidated damages
against a particular Official Police Tow Service, that Official Police Tow
Service shall be entitled to a hearing as provided herein. Such hearing shall
be conducted in accordance with § 100.260.



(Ord. 1161, passed 7-12-00; Am. Ord. 1407, passed 3-7-18)



TITLE XI:  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



Chapter



   110.   GENERAL BUSINESS PERMITS



   111.   BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES



   112.   BANKRUPTCY, FIRE AND CLOSING OUT SALES



   113.   BINGO GAMES



   114.   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM



   115.   DANCES



   116.   ADVERTISING



   117.   RESERVED



   118.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



   119.   GARAGE, YARD AND PATIO SALES



   120.   PRIVATE PATROLS



   121.   SOLICITATIONS



   122.   STREET VENDORS



   123.   TAXICABS



   124.   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



   125.   TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSING



   126.   TRASH RECEPTACLES AT DRIVE-THROUGH EATING FACILITIES



   127.   MEDICAL AND ADULT USE COMMERCIAL CANNABIS



CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL BUSINESS PERMITS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Applicability



   110.02   Permit required



   110.03   Application



   110.04   Application investigation



   110.05   Issuance



   110.06   Notice of decision concerning application



   110.07   Appeal



   110.08   Suspension



   110.09   Posting or exhibiting



   110.10   Duration



   110.11   Permits nontransferable; exception



Temporary Use Permits



   110.20   Required



   110.21   Activities included



   110.22   Fees; exemptions



   110.23   Issuance



   110.24   Denial



   110.25   Application



Cross-reference:



   Fortunetelling business, see §§ 130.60 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the procedural aspects of
the issuance, denial, suspension and revocation of permits required pursuant
to this title, except as expressly set forth in Chapters 112, 113, 115, 116,
118, 120 and 123 of this code of ordinances.



('83 Code, § 5.12.010)



§ 110.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   The businesses and activities designated in this title are of
such unique character so as to require that each of the same be specifically
regulated in the manner provided. No person shall operate or conduct, or
participate in the operation or conduct of, any of the businesses or
activities specifically enumerated in this title without first obtaining a
permit therefor, in the manner prescribed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.12.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.03  APPLICATION.



   Any person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this title shall
file a written application therefor with the City Manager.  Written
application forms for such permits shall be prepared by the City Manager,
which shall require thereon such information as he or she deems necessary to
carry out the purposes of this title. For purposes of this title, the term
“City Manager” shall also mean and refer to the city’s Chief Executive
Officer.



('83 Code, § 5.12.030) (Am. Ord. 1201, passed 4-16-03)



§ 110.04  APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, upon receipt of a
written application for a permit, shall conduct an appropriate investigation
to determine whether the permit should be issued in accordance with the
provisions set out in this title.  The City Manager, or his or her designee,
may consider any relevant factual material, including, but not limited to,
the character and reputation of the applicant and/or other persons who will
be involved in the conduct of the operation allowed by the permit, if
issued.  Moreover, investigation of the business permit application shall
involve review by other city departments, including the Police Department, to
ensure that the action to be taken on each business permit application is
appropriate and consistent with the intent and purpose of this title.  This
investigation and review process shall apply to situations involving a change
of ownership of a business.  In the case of businesses involved primarily in
first amendment activities, the investigation and review process shall be
completed within 30 days, and the decision of the City Manager, or his or her
designee, regarding issuance, conditional issuance or denial of the business
permit shall be made within the 30 day period, unless the applicant consents
to a longer period.



   (B)   With respect to the following types of business operations as
listed below, the investigation of the facts relating to the business permit
application may also take into consideration the applicant's criminal record
and prior business history in order to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.  In no event shall a prior criminal record, or the
prior denial, revocation or suspension of a business license or permit,
constitute the sole basis or justification for the denial of a business
permit unless the City Manager, or his or her designee, after reviewing and
considering all relevant facts and circumstances, finds and determines that:



      (1)   The applicant's prior criminal record includes one or
more convictions for a crime involving moral turpitude which is substantially
related to the business activity for which the permit is requested and, when
considered alone or in conjunction with prior injunctive relief or the prior
denial, revocation or suspension of a business license or permit, the
issuance of the permit would be detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the community.



      (2)   The provisions of this subsection shall apply to the
following types of businesses:  Billiard Parlors/Pool Halls; Bowling Alleys;
Uses with Live Entertainment; Fortune-telling; Health Clubs; Hypnotists;
Massage Establishment; Peddlers and Solicitors; Social Clubs; Chiropractors;
and Cyber Cafes. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to
businesses involved primarily in first amendment activities. Any person who
holds a current and valid certificate issued pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of
Division 2 of the Cal. Business and Professions Code (commencing with §
4600) (the “State Regulations of Massage Therapists”) and any business
that employs or uses only persons who hold a current and valid certificate
issued pursuant to the State Regulations for Massage Therapists as massage
practitioners need not obtain the permit required pursuant to this division
(B). Except for the foregoing, all other provisions not in conflict with the
State Regulations for Massage Therapists shall remain in full force and
effect and are applicable to the persons and businesses described in this
division (B). 



   (C)   Prior to the issuance of any business permit, the applicant
must also comply with all applicable zoning, health, fire, building and
safety laws of the State of California and of the City of Baldwin Park.



('83 Code, § 5.12.040) (Am. Ord. 1201, passed 4-16-03; Am. Ord. 1330, passed
1-20-10)



§ 110.05  ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The City Manager shall issue any permit required by this title
only if:



      (1)   A completed written application therefor has been filed;



      (2)   The required filing and processing fee therefor has been
paid to the Director of Administrative Services; and



      (3)   He or she finds, as a result of his or her investigation
that all applicable provisions of this title, with regard to the permit
application have, or will be, met.



   (B)   The City Manager may condition any permit issued so as to
insure compliance with the provisions of this title.  The action of the City
Manager with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a
permit shall be final and conclusive in the absence of the perfecting of an
appeal from the decision, in the manner set forth in this title.



('83 Code, § 5.12.050)



§ 110.06  NOTICE OF DECISION CONCERNING APPLICATION.



   Within ten days after reaching a determination with reference to a
permit application, or suspension of a permit, the City Manager shall give
written notice of his or her decision to the applicant and to any other
person requesting the notice.



('83 Code, § 5.12.060)



§ 110.07  APPEAL.



   Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager, with
reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a permit, shall
have the right of appeal, taken in the time and manner set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 5.12.070)



§ 110.08  SUSPENSION.



   (A)   The City Manager shall suspend any permit issued under this
title, if he or she finds that the permittee or the permittee’s agents
and/or employees, have been, or are:



      (1)   Violating any condition of approval imposed upon the
permit;



      (2)   Violating any provision of this code or other applicable
law;



      (3)   That the continued operations under the permit would
endanger, jeopardize or disrupt the public peace, safety, health or general
welfare; or



      (4)   Any other cause, as set forth in this title.



   (B)   The City Manager, in the case of such suspension, shall serve
the permittee with a written order of suspension, which shall state the
reasons for the suspension.  The order shall be effective immediately upon
the permittee having been personally served, or 48 hours after the order has
been deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Postal
Service.



   (C)   Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the
permittee shall cease all operations authorized under the permit.  Where an
appeal is timely filed, no further operations shall be deemed authorized
pursuant to the permit, until the appeal is finally determined.



   (D)   The order of suspension shall be deemed a revocation of a
permit unless the permittee files an appeal from the order, in the time and
manner set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 5.12.080)



§ 110.09  POSTING OR EXHIBITING.



   (A)   Permits issued pursuant to this title shall be posted on the
premises where the business or enterprise for which the permit is issued is
conducted and shall remain so posted during the period the permit shall be in
force.



   (B)   Any permit issued to a person who goes from place to place
within the city for the purpose of carrying on the business or activity as so
permitted, shall be carried by him or her at all times, and he or she shall
exhibit the permit upon request therefor.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.12.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.10  DURATION.



   Permits issued pursuant to this title shall be valid until revoked,
except as is otherwise expressly provided in this title.



('83 Code, § 5.12.100)



§ 110.11  PERMITS NONTRANSFERABLE; EXCEPTION.



   No permit issued under this title shall be transferable, except as
otherwise provided expressly in this title.



('83 Code, § 5.12.110)



TEMPORARY USE PERMITS



§ 110.20  REQUIRED.



   (A)   A temporary use permit shall be required for each of the
activities enumerated in § 110.21, and all activities which are similar or
related thereto, except those activities sponsored by the city or other
public agency. The activities, being temporary in nature possess
characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their
operation without specific approval, upon the conditions as may be deemed
appropriate, in the manner set forth in this subchapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.56.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.21  ACTIVITIES INCLUDED.



   (A)   No person shall sponsor, participate or engage in any of the
following enumerated activities, without first obtaining a temporary use
permit therefor, issued by the City Manager:



      (1)   Circuses.



      (2)   Carnivals.



      (3)   Fairs.



      (4)   Temporary outdoor exhibits of equipment, goods or
merchandise.



      (5)   Aircraft and helicopter landings and demonstrations, and
parachutist demonstrations.



      (6)   Christmas tree sales, except for those conducted as an
integral part of a business which has a valid business license, issued
pursuant to this code.



      (7)   Swap meets.



   (B)   Limitations on Permits.



      (1)   Duration. The maximum duration for temporary use permits
issued for activities enumerated in division (A) shall be as follows:



         (a)   For uses listed in divisions (A)(1), (2), (3), (5)
and (7), four consecutive calendar days;



         (b)   For uses listed in division (A)(6), 30 consecutive
calendar days;



         (c)   For uses listed in division (A)(4), up to one
calendar week, but not more than four nonconsecutive calendar weeks per year.



      (2)   Number of permits.  There shall be a maximum of two
permits issued per year for any one location and a maximum of two permits
issued per year to any one applicant, provided that the limitation on the
number of permits based upon location shall not apply to shopping centers
having an area of ten or more acres.



      (3)   Standards.  Temporary outdoor exhibits of equipment,
goods or merchandise shall meet the following minimum standards and permit
requirements:



         (a)   Displays shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular
access.



         (b)   Displays located within the public right-of-way
shall maintain a minimum four foot unobstructed access way for safety
purposes.



         (c)   Displays shall be located solely along the
storefront of the business requesting such display.



         (d)   Applications shall be submitted two weeks prior to
the proposed display period.  All applications shall be subject to Planning
Division and Engineering Division approval.



      (4)   Temporary use permits issued for activities stated in §
110.21(A)(4) shall require that the placement of exhibits, outdoor displays
and sidewalk sales ensure aesthetic character and quality.



('83 Code, § 5.56.020)  (Ord. 858, passed -  -83; Am. Ord. 933, passed - 
-86; Am. Ord. 980, passed -  -88; Am. Ord. 981, passed -  -88; Am. Ord.
1156, passed 2-2-00; Am. Ord. 1274, passed 9-21-05)



§ 110.22  FEES; EXEMPTIONS.



   A filing and investigation fee as set by resolution of the City Council
shall be required with each application for a temporary use permit.  No such
fee shall be required from an applicant who is exempt from the payment of
business license taxes pursuant to this code.



('83 Code, § 5.56.030)



§ 110.23  ISSUANCE.



   The City Manager shall, upon proper application, issue a temporary use
permit if he or she determines that the proposed activity can, and will, be
conducted in a manner compatible with the preservation of the public peace,
safety, health and general welfare, and will not be injurious or detrimental
to property located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location for
the activity.



('83 Code, § 5.56.040)



§ 110.24  DENIAL.



   The City Manager shall refuse to issue a permit if the activity would
not be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety or
general welfare, or if the same would be injurious or detrimental to
properties adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the proposed location of the
activity.



('83 Code, § 5.56.050)



§ 110.25  APPLICATION.



   This subchapter shall have no application to events or activities which
are sponsored and controlled by a school district.



('83 Code, § 5.56.055)  (Ord. 933, passed -  -86)



CHAPTER 111:  BUSINESS LICENSE TAXES



Section



General Provisions



   111.01   Purpose



   111.02   Definitions



   111.03   Business license required



   111.04   Branch establishments; multiple businesses



   111.05   Application; contents of license



   111.06   License for newly established business; determination of
license tax



   111.07   Licenses nontransferable; location and name change



   111.08   Duplicate license



   111.09   Posting and keeping license



   111.10   Renewal of license



   111.11   Business license tax based upon number of employees



   111.12   License issued annually; tax due and payable



   111.13   Delinquent taxes



   111.14   License tax deemed debt to city



   111.15   Statements inconclusive



   111.16   Failure to file statement or corrected statement



   111.17   Appeal



   111.18   Additional power of City Manager



   111.19   Compliance with laws



   111.20   Effect of adoption and subsequent amendments



   111.21   Administrative rules



   111.22   Enforcement



   111.23   Remedies cumulative



Exemptions



   111.35   Applicability



   111.36   Charitable and nonprofit organizations; exempt business
license



   111.37   Disabled veterans



   111.38   Issuance to exempted person



   111.39   Revocation to exempted person



   111.40   Sale of edible agricultural or poultry products



Taxes; Fees



   111.50   Gross receipts for other businesses



   111.51   Business license tax schedule



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 111.01  PURPOSE.



   This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes,
and is not intended as a regulatory measure.



('83 Code, § 5.04.010)



§ 111.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  Includes all professions, trades, occupations and any other
kind of calling, whether or not carried on for a profit.



   ENGAGED IN BUSINESS.  The operating, conducting, managing or carrying
on of any business within the city whether or not at a fixed place of
business, i.e., an office, shop, store, and the like, located within the city.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any person engaged, full-time or part-time, in the
operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, or any member of the
owner's family or partner, or agent, or manager, or solicitor and any and all
other persons employed or working in the business.



   VEHICLE.  This term shall mean as defined in the Vehicle Code of the
state.



('83 Code, § 5.04.020)  (Ord. 1084, passed 7-6-94)



§ 111.03  BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in any business in the
city without first obtaining a business license, and paying the license tax
therefor, in the time and manner set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to require any person to
obtain a business license or pay a license tax prior to doing business within
the city if the requirement conflicts with the Constitution or applicable
statutes of the United States or of the state.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.04.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority to license businesses, see Cal. Gov't Code § 37101 and Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 16000 et seq.



§ 111.04  BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS; MULTIPLE BUSINESSES.



   (A)   A separate business license shall be obtained, and a separate
license tax paid therefor, for each branch business establishment; provided,
that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and
incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to be a branch establishment.



   (B)   In the event that any person is engaged in more than one of
the several businesses required to be licensed by this chapter, in the same
location, and under the same management, the person shall obtain a separate
license for each business.



('83 Code, § 5.04.040)



§ 111.05  APPLICATION; CONTENTS OF LICENSE.



   Every person required to obtain a business license under the provisions
of this chapter shall make application for the license to the City Clerk, and
upon the payment of the prescribed business license tax the City Clerk shall
issue to the person a business license which shall contain the following:



   (A)   The name of the person to whom the business license is issued.



   (B)   The business licensed.



   (C)   The place where the business is to be engaged in.



   (D)   The date of the expiration of the business license.



   (E)   Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement
of the provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.050)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.06  LICENSE FOR NEWLY ESTABLISHED BUSINESS; DETERMINATION OF LICENSE
TAX.



   (A)   Upon a person making application for a business license to be
issued for a newly established business, the person shall furnish to the City
Clerk for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of business license tax to
be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the
City Clerk, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as
may be necessary to determine the amount of the business license tax to be
paid by the applicant.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall not issue to any person another business
license for the same or any other business, until that person has furnished
to him the written statement and paid the business license tax as required in
this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.060)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.07  LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE; LOCATION AND NAME CHANGE.



   No business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
transferable; provided, that where a business license is issued authorizing a
person to engage in a business at a particular location, the licensee may
upon application therefor and paying a fee as set by resolution of the City
Council have the business license transferred to the same location and issued
under another business name.



('83 Code, § 5.04.070)



§ 111.08  DUPLICATE LICENSE.



   A duplicate business license may be issued by the City Clerk to replace
any business license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost
or destroyed upon the licensee filing a written statement of such fact, and
at the time of filing the statement paying to the City Clerk a duplicate
business license fee as set by resolution of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 5.04.080)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.09  POSTING AND KEEPING LICENSE.



   (A)   All business licenses must be kept and posted in the following
manner.



      (1)   Any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place in the
city shall keep the business license posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises where the business is carried on.



      (2)   Any licensee engaged in business but not operating at a
fixed place in the city, shall keep the business license upon his person at
all times while engaging in the business.



      (3)   Any licensee, to whom a business license has been issued
for the operation of a wheeled vehicle, shall obtain from the City Clerk, in
addition to the business license, a numbered vehicle decal.  The decal shall
be permanently affixed to the lower right corner of the windshield of the
vehicle.



   (B)   Any licensee to whom a business license has been issued for
the operation of a coin-operated machine or device shall obtain from the City
Clerk, in addition to a business license, a numbered vending machine decal. 
The decals shall be permanently affixed to each machine, in a conspicuous
location.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.04.090)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.10  RENEWAL OF LICENSE.



   In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a business license shall
submit to the City Clerk for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the
business license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a
form to be provided by the City Clerk setting forth the information
concerning the applicant's business during the preceding year as may be
required by the City Clerk to enable him to ascertain the amount of the
business license tax to be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.100)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.11  BUSINESS LICENSE TAX BASED UPON NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   In all cases where a business license tax is based, in whole
or in part, upon the number of employees engaged in the business, the average
monthly number of persons employed by the business during the preceding
calendar year shall be determined by the following formula:  One-twelfth of
the total number of employees earning wages for each month of the calendar
year.



   (B)   When a business has existed less than 12 months of the year
preceding the issuance of a business license, the actual number of months of
existence shall be used in computing the fraction.  If an employer has not
previously engaged in business, he shall estimate the average number of
employees who will be employed by him during the remainder of the calendar
year.



('83 Code, § 5.04.110)



§ 111.12  LICENSE ISSUED ANNUALLY; TAX DUE AND PAYABLE; PRORATION.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, all
business licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be annual
business licenses, and the business license tax thereon shall be due and
payable annually in advance on the first day of the anniversary month of the
issuance of the license.



   (B)   All business license taxes shall be payable in advance, in
lawful money of the United States, at the office of the City Clerk.



('83 Code, § 5.04.120)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.13  DELINQUENT TAXES.



   Any person who fails to pay a business license tax when due shall be
assessed by the City Clerk a penalty of 10% per month to a maximum of 100% of
the business tax due.  The penalty shall be imposed if the taxes are not
paid within 30 calendar days after the due date of the taxes; provided, that
if the last day for payment of the tax falls upon a holiday, then the time
for payment of the tax, without the imposition of a penalty, shall be
extended to the next succeeding day during which the city offices are open
for business.



('83 Code, § 5.04.130)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.14  LICENSE TAX DEEMED DEBT TO CITY.



   The amount of any business license tax and penalty imposed pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city.  An
action may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent
jurisdiction to recover the amount of any such delinquent tax and penalties.



('83 Code, § 5.04.140)



§ 111.15  STATEMENTS INCONCLUSIVE.



   (A)   No statement shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth
therein, nor shall the filing of the statement preclude the city from
collecting, by appropriate actions, such sum as is actually due and payable
under this chapter.  The statement and each of the several items therein
contained shall be subject to audit and verification by the City Clerk, who
is authorized to examine, audit and inspect the books and records of any
licensee or applicant for a business license, as may be necessary in his
judgement to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.



   (B)   All licensees, applicants for business licenses, and persons
engaged in business in the city are required to permit an examination of the
books and records for the purposes aforesaid.



   (C)   The information furnished or secured pursuant to this chapter
shall be confidential.  Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such
information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a
misdemeanor and the officer or employee of the city shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of this code, in addition to any other penalties provided
by law.



('83 Code, § 5.04.150)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.16  FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENT OR CORRECTED STATEMENT.



   (A)   If any person fails to file any required statement within the
time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the City Clerk, he fails
to file a corrected statement, the City Clerk may determine the amount of
business license tax due from the person by means of such information as he
may be able to obtain.



   (B)   If this determination is made, the City Clerk shall give a
notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it
in the United States Postal Service, postage prepaid, addressed to the person
so assessed at his last-known address.



('83 Code, § 5.04.160)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.17  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the City Clerk with respect to
the issuance or refusal to issue a business license may appeal to the Council
in the time and manner set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 5.04.170)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.18  ADDITIONAL POWER OF CITY MANAGER.



   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the City Clerk
shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any
required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days, and in such case
to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, and shall have the
further power to compromise any claim as to the amount of business license
tax due.



('83 Code, § 5.04.180)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



Cross-reference:



   Powers of City Clerk, see §§ 31.01 et seq.



§ 111.19  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.



   Persons required to obtain a business license and to pay a license tax
for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be
relieved from compliance with any other applicable law.



('83 Code, § 5.04.250)



§ 111.20  EFFECT OF ADOPTION AND SUBSEQUENT AMENDMENTS.



   The adoption, or subsequent amendment, of any provision of this chapter
shall not, in any manner, be construed to affect prosecution for violation of
any provision of this chapter, committed prior to the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter; nor shall the adoption or amendment be
construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any
such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash
deposit required by any regulation to be posted, filed or deposited, and all
rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force
and effect.



('83 Code, § 5.04.260)



§ 111.21  ADMINISTRATIVE RULES.



   The City Clerk is authorized to adopt such administrative rules and
regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.270)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.22  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to enforce each and all
of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The City Clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him
under this chapter, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized
assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in
the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been
complied with.



   (C)   The City Clerk and each and all of his assistants and any
police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge,
and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed in
this chapter, and demand an exhibition of its business license certificate. 
Any person having such business license certificate theretofore issued, in
his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the
certificate on demand, shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to the
penalties provided for by the provisions of this code.



('83 Code, § 5.04.280)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 111.23  REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.



   All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the
use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.290)



EXEMPTIONS



§ 111.35  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply
to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of
the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state
from the payment of the taxes as are prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   None of the business license taxes provided for by this
chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate
commerce.  In any case where a business license tax is believed by a
licensee or applicant for a business license to place an undue burden upon
such commerce, he may apply to the City Clerk for an adjustment of the tax so
that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce.



   (C)   The application may be made before, at or within six months
after payment of the prescribed business license tax.



   (D)   The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony,
show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of
business and such other information as the City Clerk may deem necessary in
order to determine the extent, if any, of the undue burden on such commerce.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall then conduct an investigation, and, after
first having obtained the written approval of the City Attorney, shall fix as
the business license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and
nondiscriminatory, or if the business license tax has already been paid,
shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business license tax so
fixed.



   (F)   In fixing the business license tax to be charged, the City
Clerk shall have the power to base the business license tax upon a percentage
of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the business
license tax assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of
like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business
license tax as prescribed by this chapter.  Should the City Clerk determine
the gross receipts measure of business license tax to be the proper basis, he
may require the applicant to submit either at the time of termination of
applicant's business in the city, or at the end of each three-month period, a
sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay the amount of business license
tax therefor; provided, that no additional business license tax during any
one calendar year shall be required after the licensee has paid an amount
equal to the annual business license tax as prescribed in this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.190)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.36  CHARITABLE AND NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS; EXEMPT BUSINESS LICENSE.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or
construed to require the payment of a business license tax to conduct, manage
or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any local institution
or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly for the
benefit of charitable, educational, civic or philanthropic purposes, if no
profit therefrom is derived, either directly or indirectly by any individual;
nor shall any business license tax be required for the conducting of any
entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical,
literary, religious, or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts
of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be
appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent and/or
charitable purpose in the city; nor shall any business license tax be
required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition
or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military,
state, county or municipal organization or association whenever the receipts
of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture are to be
appropriated to any church, school or to any religious or benevolent and/or
charitable purpose within the city; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from
complying with any provisions of this code requiring a permit from the City
Council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any
profession, trade, calling or occupation.



   (B)   Any person desiring an exempt business license as provided in
this section shall make application for an exempt business license through
the City Clerk.  The applications shall be written upon a form provided by
the City Clerk.  The application shall contain the name of the person or
organization or brief description of the class of persons for whose benefit
the activity or solicitation is being made, together with the address and
telephone number of the person or organization (and, if an organization, the
name and addresses of its officers); the name of the person or persons who
are to solicit; the total amount to be realized; the estimated total amount
to be expended as compensation therefor, and the total amount to be raised or
realized in the activity, drive or campaign and the purposes for which the
money or property derived from the activity is to be used, which statement
shall be signed by either the person applying therefor, the chief officer of
the organization, for whom the activity is conducted, or if the activity is
to be for an unorganized class of persons, verification shall be made by the
person in charge of the activity.



   (C)   Before issuing an exempt business license, the City Clerk may
make inquiry of the applicant, or any other person, concerning the plan of
conducting the  activity, the disposition of the proceeds thereof, and the
matters set forth in the application required in this chapter.  If upon such
inquiry and/or from the application, he has reason to believe that the method
of conducting the activity and/or the disposition of the proceeds does not
qualify them as a local charitable or nonprofit organization as required
under this section, he shall refuse to issue an exempt business license.



   (D)   In the event the City Clerk does not grant an exempt business
license to any person or organization, the person or organization shall have
a right to appeal the decision to the City Council, in the time and manner
set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 5.04.200)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.37  DISABLED VETERANS.



   Every peddler, solicitor, or other person claiming to be entitled to
exemption from the payment of any business license tax provided for in this
chapter upon the grounds that he is an honorably discharged or released
soldier, sailor or marine of the United States who is physically unable to
obtain a livelihood by manual labor and who shall be a qualified elector of
the state, as provided by Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 16001 or other law of
this state, shall, in addition to any other information required by this
chapter, also file with the City Clerk a certificate of a regularly licensed
and practicing physician dated within one year of the application, to the
effect that the applicant is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by
manual labor, and stating the nature of the incapacitation; provided no
exempt business license shall be issued except in cases where the veteran
applying there for is actively engaged in the management and conduct of the
business for which the exemption is requested.



('83 Code, § 5.04.210)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.38  ISSUANCE TO EXEMPTED PERSON.



   The City Clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified
statement, issue a business license to the person claiming exemption under
this subchapter without payment to the city of the business license tax
required by this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.220)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.39  REVOCATION TO EXEMPTED PERSON.



   The City Clerk, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for
hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the
provisions of § 111.35 through this section upon information that the
licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.04.230)  (Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



§ 111.40  SALE OF EDIBLE AGRICULTURAL OR POULTRY PRODUCTS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales of edible
agricultural or poultry products sold or produced, which have not been
processed in any way, other than washing, which sales are made from
residences or other structures by the owners or occupants thereof, or members
of their immediate families, where the residences or other structures are not
designed, constructed or altered so as to display the edible agricultural or
poultry products to be sold, or where such structures are temporary and
without sides of any kind, and such residences or other structures are
located on the property on which such edible agricultural or poultry products
are raised, grown or produced, whether such sales are advertised by signs or
not.



('83 Code, § 5.04.240)



TAXES; FEES



§ 111.50  GROSS RECEIPTS FOR OTHER BUSINESSES.



   For every business not licensed under any other chapter of this code or
which can only be licensed under a gross receipt type license as directed by
the state statutes, the following gross receipt fee schedule will be used:



Gross Receipt Fee Schedule



   Gross Receipts               Fee



   $ 0.00 to $  5,000.00               $ 50.00



   5,000.00 to 10,000.00               55.00



   10,000.00 to 15,000.00            60.00



   15,000.00 to 20,000.00            65.00



   20,000.00 to 25,000.00            70.00



   25,000.00 to 30,000.00            75.00



   30,000.00 to 35,000.00            80.00



   35,000.00 to 40,000.00            85.00



   40,000.00 to 45,000.00            90.00



   45,000.00 to 50,000.00            95.00



   50,000.00 to 55,000.00            100.00



   55,000.00 to 60,000.00            105.00



   60,000.00 to 65,000.00            110.00



   65,000.00 to 70,000.00            115.00



   70,000.00 to 75,000.00            120.00



   75,000.00 to 80,000.00            125.00



   80,000.00 to 85,000.00            130.00



   85,000.00 to 90,000.00            135.00



   90,000.00 to 95,000.00            140.00



   95,000.00 to 100,000.00 and over         145.00



('83 Code, § 5.08.230)  (Ord. 1054, passed -  -91)



Editor's Note:  Gross receipt business licenses apply only when required by
state law.



§ 111.51  BUSINESS LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The several rates of business license taxes required to be
paid pursuant to this chapter by the owner, operator, or other person
required to obtain a business license pursuant to this chapter, are fixed and
established for and within the city as set forth in the following business
license tax schedule in division (C) below.



('83 Code, § 5.08.010)



   (B)   Businesses not expressly provided for. 



   Every person engaged in a business, as to which a business license tax
is not specifically set forth herein   $ 50



   For each employee in excess of three   9



('83 Code, § 5.08.240)



   (C)   Business license tax schedule.



   A



Advertising.



   For maintaining a billboard, bulletin board, advertising on benches or
other similar structures, installing flags or other special
decorations   80



('83 Code, § 5.08.020)



Amusements and coin-operated devices; dancehalls and theaters.



   Billiard parlor or pool hall   50



   Each table in excess of one   15



   The license shall include the right to sell tobacco and candy.



   Bowling alley   50



   Each alley in excess of one   15



   Carnival and circus for each day of operation   62.50



   Each sideshow, concession or ride   12.50



   Provided, that the maximum license fee shall not exceed $125 per day.



   Coin-operated machines and devices shall be licensed by the owner of
the business wherein the equipment is located.  There shall be affixed to
each such machine licensed a decal as indicated in § 110.09.  The annual
license fee for such machines shall be:



   Game or mechanical rides   60



   Music box   15



   Cigarette and tobacco machines   $ 10



   Merchandise or service machines requiring $0.25 or more to
activate   10



   Merchandise or service machines requiring less than $0.25 to
activate   5



   Washers and dryers not open to the general public but whose use is
confined solely to the occupants     of the apartment building or trailer
court where such machines are located   5



   Postage stamp machines   1.25



   Public or private dancing halls   250



   Every theater shall pay an annual license fee, for each fixed seat or
car space   0.25



('83 Code, § 5.08.030)



Auctioneers.



   Each person conducting an auction sale at a fixed place of business or
elsewhere   175



   There shall be no proration of this fee.



('83 Code, § 5.08.050)



Automobile dealers.



   Every person regularly engaged in the sale of new or used automobiles,
trailers, campers, or similar items   100



('83 Code, § 5.08.060)



Auto wrecking yard.



   Every person engaged in the dismantling or altering of any motor
vehicle or other activities generally carried on in an auto wrecking
yard   80



   For each employee over three   7



('83 Code, § 5.08.070)



   C



Contractors.



   General engineering contractors and general building contractors,
licensed as such by the state, engaged in such business in the city   100



   It shall be the responsibility of every general building and
engineering contractor to require subcontractors employed by them to obtain a
business license as provided in this chapter, before permitting the
subcontractor to begin or perform services for the general building or
engineering contractor.



   Each general building or engineering contractor shall furnish the
license inspector with a list of each such subcontractor upon forms furnished
by the Building Department.



   Specialty contractors licensed by the state as such   $ 50



('83 Code, § 5.08.080)



   D



Deliveries.



   For conducting, managing or carrying on the business of running,
driving or operating an automobile, truck, tank wagon or any vehicle for the
wholesale or retail delivery of merchandise of any nature, kind or
description, or for the purpose of carrying on a bakery route, linen route,
ice route, water (distilled, spring, mineral aerated) route, laundry or
dry-cleaning route, dairy route, or other routes of a like or similar nature,
whether wholesale or retail, for the first vehicle   50



   For each additional vehicle   10



('83 Code, § 5.08.090)



   F



Filmmaking, motion pictures, television productions.



   Persons or organizations engaged in the business of filmmaking, motion
pictures or television productions, for each day that such personnel and/or
equipment, including props and temporary sets, into the city, and including
the photographing and recording of exterior and/or interior scenes   100



   For the purpose of this section, FILMMAKING, MOTION PICTURES and
TELEVISION PRODUCTIONS include the development of a screen story, whether
based on fact or fiction, the photographing of the story by means of
photographic film, magnetic tape, or other device, and the cutting, scoring,
editing and final preparation of the picture.



('83 Code, § 5.08.095)



   H



Hospitals.



   Annual license fee   100



   For each bed   5



('83 Code, § 5.08.100)



Hotels, motels and trailer parks.



   Hotels, motels and trailer parks, for first three units   50



   For each unit in excess of three   5



('83 Code, § 5.08.110)



   J



Junk dealers.



   Junk dealers annual license fee   $ 50



   For each employee over three   7



('83 Code, § 5.08.120)



   N



Newspapers.



   For each daily, weekly, semiweekly or monthly newspaper, printed or
published or circulated in the city   100



('83 Code, § 5.08.130)



   P



Pawnshops.



   Pawnshops annual license fee   50



   For each employee over three   7



('83 Code, § 5.08.140)



Professional.



   The annual business license tax for professionals shall be based upon
the average number of professional members and the average number of
employees, computed as follows:  For each person practicing his profession,
other than as a salaried employee   50



   For each salaried employee in excess of three   7



   The business license tax applies to anyone engaged in any of the
following professions: Accountant, appraiser, architect, attorney at law,
auditor, bacteriologist, chemist, chiropodist, chiropractor, dentist,
engineering consultant, entomologist, geologist, mortician, oculist,
optician, optometrist, osteopath, physician, physiotherapist, surveyor,
veterinarian, and x-ray laboratory.



('83 Code, § 5.08.150)



Public utilities.



   Every person engaged as a public utility or otherwise in the
distribution, transportation or transmission of electricity, gas,
communications or water, unless operating under a franchise and paying a
franchise tax to the city   50



   For each employee in excess of three   7



('83 Code, § 5.08.160)



   R



Real estate brokers.



   Real estate brokers annual license fee   $ 100



   For each employee in excess of three   7



   Out of city real estate brokers placing a sign on any property in the
city   100



('83 Code, § 5.08.170)



Rentals; residential and nonresidential.



   Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of
operating apartments, or multiple dwelling units, as defined in the zoning
code set forth in Chapter 153, containing two or more such units which are
offered for rental or lease, located in a single structure or multiple
structures, under common ownership, regardless of zone, per unit   15



   Every person who owns a single-family unit (one house per lot) and who
rents out or leases the single-family unit to another   30



   Every person engaged in the business of rental of nonresidential
property   50



   Plus an additional $0.95 per every $1,000 in rental income in excess of
$25,000 annually.



   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply:
RENTAL OF NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  Any business conducted or carried on by
any person engaged in the business of renting or letting a building or
structure of any kind, including, but not limited to, office buildings,
warehouses, commercial spaces, and industrial spaces, to a tenant for
purposes other than dwelling, sleeping or lodging.



('83 Code, § 5.08.175)



Restaurants.



   Each restaurant, drive-in, beer bar or cocktail lounge with a capacity
of:



   25 or less   50



   26 to 100   75



   Over 100   150



('83 Code, § 5.08.180)



Rest homes.



   Rest homes, homes for the aged and nursing and convalescent hospitals,
and convalescent homes   50



   For each bed   5



('83 Code, § 5.08.190)



Roominghouses.



   Roominghouses annual license fee, per bed   $ 10



('83 Code, § 5.08.200)



   S



Self-service car wash and laundromats.



   Self-service car wash, ice vendor, dry-cleaning establishment,
laundromat, or other similar business open to the general public   50



('83 Code, § 5.08.210)



Solicitors.



   For every person, whether or not he has a fixed place of business in
the city, who travels from place to place or house to house and makes
demonstrations of, or solicits, takes orders or canvasses for the sale of, or
who sells any goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions to periodicals or
magazines, or things or articles of value of any nature, kind or description,
per year   100



   Per day   15



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any person who
employs, or who engages the services of another person as an independent
contractor, ten or more persons who engage in an activity for which a
business tax would be imposed pursuant to § 110.51, shall be issued a single
business license, upon payment of a business license tax of $300, which
business license shall entitle the person to engage and conduct solicitations
within the city and permitting not to exceed 15 individual solicitors.



   Every person or employee who desires to solicit in the city shall be
required to furnish his fingerprints and thumb prints, shall pay a fee as set
by resolution of the City Council and file an affidavit with the City Clerk
which shall contain the following.



      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.



      (2)   Name and address of the person by whom employed, if any.



      (3)   Length of service of the applicant with his employer.



      (4)   Place of residence and nature of employment of the
applicant, during the period of at least the year just preceding.



      (5)   Nature of the goods and service to be offered by the
applicant.



      (6)   Driver's license number and license number of
applicant's automobile.



      (7)   Citizenship status of applicant.



      (8)   Personal description of the applicant, and a statement
that he has not been convicted of a felony.



   After the affidavit has been filed, the City Clerk shall refer the
affidavit to the Police Department for investigation.  If, as a result of
such investigation, it is found that the statements set forth in the
affidavit are true, the business license shall be issued; and if, on the
other hand, they are found to be untrue in any material manner, the
application shall be denied.



('83 Code, § 5.08.220)



   V



Vehicle used in the sale of goods on public rights-of-way or public property.



   The owners or operators of vehicles used in the sale of goods on public
rights-of-way or public property, per vehicle   $ 145



   W



Warehouse, distribution, storage.



   Every person engaged in the business of maintaining a warehouse,
distribution facility and/or centralized record storage in the city   100



   Per square foot of chargeable covered and enclosed space   0.03



   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply.



      CHARGEABLE COVERED AND ENCLOSED SPACE.  The covered and enclosed
space determined to be within the perimeter of a commercial or industrial
structure.  The determination of the chargeable covered and enclosed space
within the perimeter of a commercial or industrial structure shall be made by
the Building Department of the city.



      WAREHOUSE, DISTRIBUTION CENTER, STORAGE FACILITY AND/OR
CENTRALIZED RECORD STORAGE.  Any building or structure, or portion thereof,
used primarily for the deposit, storage or safekeeping of goods regardless of
whether the goods are offered for sale.



('83 Code, § 5.08.225)  (Am. Ord. 1054, passed -  -91; Am. Ord. 1084,
passed 7-20-94; Am. Ord. 1109, passed 12-20-95)



CHAPTER 112:  BANKRUPTCY, FIRE AND CLOSING OUT SALES



Section



   112.01   Definitions



   112.02   Permit required



   112.03   Application for permit



   112.04   Filing and processing fee



   112.05   Denial



   112.06   Conditions of permit



   112.07   Exception



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVERTISE, ADVERTISEMENT, ADVERTISING, PUBLISH, and/or PUBLICATION. 
Any and all means, whether oral, written, lettered or printed, used for the
purpose of conveying to the public notice of the conduct of a sale, as
defined in this section.



   PERMIT.  A permit to conduct a sale.



   PERMITTEE.  Any person who shall be granted a permit to conduct a sale.



   SALE.  Any sale or any offer to sell, to members of the general
public, goods, wares or merchandise in stock, in connection with a declared
purpose, as set forth by advertising, that the sale is anticipatory to the
termination, liquidation, discontinuance, dissolution or abandonment of the
business or that portion of the business to which the sale relates.



('83 Code, § 5.16.010)



§ 112.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall hereafter advertise or conduct any sale,
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Manager, in the
manner provided in this chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.16.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   No permit to conduct a sale as defined in this chapter shall
be granted except upon written application to the City Manager made at least
30 days before the sale is to commence.



   (B)   Each application shall set forth and contain the following:



      (1)   Street address and type of building where the sale is to
be held.



      (2)   The nature of the occupancy, whether by ownership,
lease, or sublease, and if by lease or sublease, the effective date of the
termination of such tenancy and the name of the owner, and sublessor, if any.



      (3)   A copy of all advertisements proposed to be used in
connection with the sale, and a statement of the means or methods of
advertising to be used in advertising the sale.



      (4)   The facts in regard to the termination or winding up of
the business to which the sale relates.



      (5)   An inventory or statement, in such form and in such
detail as the City Manager may require, setting forth the amount and
description of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold at the sale, and, the
date of acquisition of the goods, wares or merchandise, and the persons from
whom obtained and the location of the goods.



('83 Code, § 5.16.030)



§ 112.04  FILING AND PROCESSING FEE.



   No application for any permit shall be accepted by the City Manager for
filing unless accompanied by a filing and processing fee as set by resolution
of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 5.16.040)



§ 112.05  DENIAL.



   No permit shall be issued if any one or more of the following facts or
circumstances are found to exist.



   (A)   The applicant was granted a license under this chapter for a
"close-out" type of sale relating to the same or a similar business within
two years preceding the date of the filing of the application.



   (B)   The inventory includes goods, wares and merchandise purchased
by the applicant or added to his stock in contemplation of such sale and for
the purpose of selling the merchandise at the sale.  For the purpose of this
division, any unusual addition to the stock of such goods, wares and
merchandise made within 60 days prior to the filing of the application shall
be prima facie evidence that the addition was made in contemplation of the
sale and for the purpose of selling the addition at the sale.



   (C)   The acquisition by applicant of a bankrupt stock of goods or
similar merchandise within six months of application.



   (D)   That any representation made in the application is false.



   (E)   The inventory is incomplete.



   (F)   The advertising set forth is false, fraudulent, deceptive or
misleading in any respect.



   (G)   That the methods to be used by the applicant in conducting the
sale are, in the opinion of the City Manager, such as will work a fraud upon
purchasers.



('83 Code, § 5.16.050)



§ 112.06  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.



   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize
only the type of sale named in the application, at the place named therein,
for a period of not more than 30 calendar days, and shall permit the sale of
only goods which are described in the application, all of which goods,
throughout the duration of the sale, must be definitely separated from any
other goods displayed at, or within the store or place of business, and all
advertising, signs or notices referring to, or calling attention to the sale,
must be confined to the display, or displays, or goods involved in the sale.
The City Manager is empowered to condition the issuance of any permit in such
manner as, in his opinion, will serve to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.16.060)



§ 112.07  EXCEPTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person who has
been engaged in a business for which a business license is required pursuant
to this code, for a period of five years immediately preceding the conduct,
by such person, of a sale for which a permit would otherwise be required
hereunder.



('83 Code, § 5.16.070)



CHAPTER 113:  BINGO GAMES



Section



   113.01   Bingo games for charitable purposes permitted



   113.02   Organizations eligible for license to conduct bingo games



   113.03   Bingo game license required



   113.04   Definitions



   113.05   Filing of application for license



   113.06   Processing of application



   113.07   Issuance of license



   113.08   Amending the original application



   113.09   Requirement for bingo manager



   113.10   Manager to be non-compensated



   113.11   Bingo manager license



   113.12   Issuance of bingo manager license



   113.13   Conduct of bingo games



   113.14   Location of bingo games



   113.15   Accounting procedures



   113.16   Bingo proceeds



   113.17   Financial interest and operation by licensee only



   113.18   Cooperation with city personnel



   113.19   Fees



Cross-reference:



   Charitable and religious solicitations, see §§ 122.01 et seq.



Statutory reference



   Bingo, see Cal. Penal Code § 326.5



§ 113.01  BINGO GAMES FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES PERMITTED.



   Bingo games for charitable purposes are hereby authorized pursuant to
Section 19, Article 4, of the California Constitution, and Section 326.5 of
the Penal Code, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.02  ORGANIZATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE TO CONDUCT BINGO GAMES.



   Eligible organizations may apply to the city for a license to conduct
bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the
California Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.03  BINGO GAME LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person or organization shall engage in, carry on, maintain, or
conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained, or conducted a
bingo game in the city without first having secured a bingo license in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with
the regulations contained in this chapter and in Section 326.05 of the
California Penal Code pertaining to the operation of bingo games.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.04  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter:



   ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION.  Organizations eligible for license to conduct
bingo games. Any organization exempted from the payment of the Bank and
Corporation Tax by California Revenue and Taxation Code 23701a, 23701b,
23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701l or any mobile home park association
or senior citizens organization may conduct bingo games within the city;
provided, that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable
purposes, subject to conditions set out in this chapter.



   BINGO.  A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers or symbols on a card, which conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random.  Notwithstanding California Penal Code 330c, BINGO
includes cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted
in a manner providing for the distribution of prizes. The winning card(s)
shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the
playing or operation of the bingo games, and all such cards bear the legend,
"for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and
pursuant to local ordinance".



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.05  FILING OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Every organization desiring a license pursuant to this chapter shall
file an application upon a form to be provided by the City Clerk's Office,
and at such time pay the required fee. The application shall be filed at
least 60 days prior to the conduct of any bingo game(s), and shall specify:



   (A)   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant
organization, the nature of the organization, and a statement that the
applicant is an eligible organization as defined by § 113.04.



   (B)   The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the
applicant.



   (C)   A list of the names of all members of the applicant
organization who will operate and staff bingo games and the date they became
members.



   (D)   A detailed description of the record system to account for the
receipts, prizes, expenses, and profits of each bingo game.



   (E)   The location and signatures of the special bank account(s)
required by § 113.18.



   (F)   The specific charitable purpose(s) which the bingo proceeds
will benefit.



   (G)   A detailed schedule of the date(s) and hours,  and a 
detailed description, including, but not limited to occupancy capacity and
parking availability, of the location of the proposed bingo game(s).



   (H)   A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games
in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code
and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that
the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon violation of any such
provisions.



   (I)   The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or
mailed, and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those
set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service
of process on behalf of the applicant.



   (J)   Whether the application is for a new license or a renewal of
an existing license.



   (K)   The application shall be signed by at least two officers,
including the presiding officer of the local organization, and shall be
verified as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of
pleadings.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.06  PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.



   The application for a bingo license shall be filed with the City
Clerk's Office. Upon receipt, the City Clerk shall refer the application to
the City Manager/Executive Team for review and report as to whether the
appropriate provisions of this chapter and Section 326.5 of the California
Penal Code have been or will be complied with. The applicant shall provide
any additional information which may be requested during the review period,
and as may be necessary to make a licensing determination.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.07  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   A bingo license shall be issued by the City Clerk if the City
Manager/Executive Team find that the bingo application meets all requirements
of this chapter and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and that it
will have no substantial adverse impact on the neighboring area. If the City
Manager/Executive Team finds that the bingo game as proposed does not comply
with all the requirements of this chapter and of Section 326.5 of the
California Penal Code, or that it will have a substantial adverse impact on
the neighboring area, but that conditions can be imposed which will eliminate
such problem, the bingo license may be issued subject to such conditions. 
Bingo licenses shall be issued for a period of one year.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.08  AMENDING THE ORIGINAL APPLICATION.



   (A)   Every organization having a license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall notify the city in writing of any requested change(s) in the
facts required to be stated by § 113.05.



   (B)   Any requested change as to the location, date(s), and/or
time(s) for proposed bingo game(s) must be submitted to the City Clerk's
Office not less than 45 days prior to the date when the change, if approved,
would become effective.  All other changes shall require written
notification only, to be provided to the City Clerk's Office in writing not
later than five days following the date when such changes or the intent to
change shall be signed by at least two officers, including the presiding
officer of the organization.



   (C)   Requests for change(s) to the original application shall be
forwarded to the City Clerk's Office for review and to assure that the
proposed amendment complies with the provisions of this chapter and Section
326.5 of the Penal Code.



   (D)   The licensee shall notify the city of any changes in the list
of members who will operate and staff bingo games.  Said notification shall
be made in writing and served upon the city by one of the following methods:



      (1)   Personal delivery of a revised list and the obtaining of
a receipt therefor at least three days prior to the operation of any games; or



      (2)   Transmittal of a revised list by certified mail bearing
a post date at least five days prior to the operation of any game.



   (E)   The licensee shall retain in his records proof of service of
the modifications required by division (A) through (D) of this section.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.09  REQUIREMENT FOR BINGO MANAGER.



   No organization shall engage in, conduct, or carry on, or permit to be
engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises within the
city, the operation of a bingo game unless such game is conducted under the
personal direction of a bingo manager. The bingo manager shall be present on
the premises during the operation of all bingo games.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.10  MANAGER TO BE NON-COMPENSATED.



   No person may be licensed as a bingo manager unless he is a
non-salaried, non-compensated member of the organization licensed to conduct
bingo games and has been a member for at least six months.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.11  BINGO MANAGER LICENSE.



   To obtain a bingo manager license, the applicant shall file a written
application which shall set forth, in addition to such information as may be
required by the city:



   (A)   A statement that neither the bingo manager nor the members of
the organization which operate any bingo game organized by such organization,
will receive any profit, wage, or salary, or any other direct or indirect
consideration from any bingo game.



   (B)   A statement that the bingo manager applicant has read and
understands all requirements of the law in regard to conducting bingo games
in the city, and that such bingo manager will accept full responsibility for
the conduct of such bingo games and all members who will operate and staff
the bingo games.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.12  ISSUANCE OF BINGO MANAGER LICENSE.



   A bingo manager license shall be issued if the required security is
posed and the City Manager/Executive Team finds that each statement made in
the application is true and not deceptive or misleading, and that the
proposed bingo manager has not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor
related to gambling, fraud, theft, or similar circumstances.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.13  CONDUCT OF BINGO GAMES.



   (A)   Each licensed eligible organization may hold a maximum of
three bingo games per week.



   (B)   Bingo games may be held only between noon and midnight of any
one day, not to exceed any six continuous hours.



   (C)   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the
members of the eligible organization.



   (D)   The posting of any sign or device at the location at which a
bingo game is being, or will be, held for the specific purpose of advertising
the existence, location, date, or time of a bingo game is strictly prohibited.



   (E)   Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public,
attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of
the room in which such game is conducted or the limit stated in the bingo
license, whichever is less.  Neither seats nor space may be reserved for any
person.



   (F)   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any
bingo games shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate
game which is held.  All monetary or cash prizes shall be paid in the form
of a check drawn on a financial institution.



   (G)   All staff members of a bingo game shall wear on the outside of
their clothing an identification insignia or badge not less than 2" x 3" in
dimension, indicating the name and title of the staff member.



   (H)   No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be allowed to
participate in any game.



   (I)   No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed during the
hours of operation of a bingo game.



   (J)   No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate
in a bingo game.



   (K)   The bingo license shall be posted at all times in a
conspicuous place at the public entrance to a bingo game while such game is
being conducted.



   (L)   The licensee shall have available on the premises at all times
during the conduct of games the list of members operating and staffing games
which has been filed pursuant to § 113.05 of this chapter. In the event the
list is different from the list originally submitted with the application for
a bingo license, proof of service of the revised list, as required by §
113.08 of this chapter, shall be attached to the current list.



   (M)   The licensee shall post the costs, prizes and rules of each
game to be played.  Such signs shall be posted adjacent to the license and
permit during the conduct of the bingo game.



   (N)   No admission fee, purchase or donation shall be required for
entry onto the bingo premises.



   (O)   No licensee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit
or loan (including but not limited to IOU's and checks to be held) or allow
any patron to play on credit.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.14  LOCATION OF BINGO GAMES.



   A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased
by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which
property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the
purpose for which the organization is organized, provided, however, that no
bingo games may be conducted at any city-owned facility or at any residence.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned
or leased by or whose use is donated to the organization be used or leased
exclusively by or donated exclusively to such organization.  The license and
permit issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to
conduct a bingo game only on such property, the address of which is stated in
the application.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.15  ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES.



   (A)   At least two members of the licensed organization shall
jointly count all bingo proceeds.



   (B)   A record shall be kept, on forms approved by the city, by the
licensee showing the name and written signature, the address, and the
telephone number of the winner, and the consecutive serial number on the
receipt for the prize.



   (C)   All proceeds derived from a bingo game shall, within 24 hours,
be deposited in a special account in any financial institution and shall not
be commingled with any other account or funds.



   (D)   The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the
income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation,
conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are
authorized in this chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers,
shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time
and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such records
available. Such examination may consist of but is not limited to the actual
counting or examination of players, bingo card, equipment, records, and funds.



   (E)   The city may demand a complete detailed accounting of all
income and expenses at any time. If the licensee fails to render such an
accounting within the time limit set by the city, the license shall be
temporarily suspended until such accounting is rendered.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.16  BINGO PROCEEDS.



   (A)   Eligible organizations pursuant to California Revenue and
Taxation Code 23701d, shall keep bingo profits in the special account
required by § 113.15, and such funds shall not be commingled with any other
fund or account.  Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.



   (B)   Eligible organizations defined other than pursuant to
California Revenue and Taxation Code 23701d, shall keep all proceeds derived
from bingo games in the special account required by § 113.15 and such
proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:



      (1)   Such proceeds may be used for prizes at authorized bingo
games.



      (2)   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 20% of the
proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or $1,000 per month, whichever is
less, may be used for rental of property overhead, including the purchase of
bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security
personnel.



      (3)   Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.



   (C)   The bingo game profits or proceeds shall be disbursed by check
at least quarterly for a charitable purpose.



   (D)   It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5b of the Penal Code of
the State of California for any person to receive a profit, wage, or salary
from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000, which fine shall be deposited in
the general fund of the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence,
security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may
be paid from the revenues of the bingo game as provided in division (A) and
(B) of this section.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.17  FINANCIAL INTEREST AND OPERATION BY LICENSEE ONLY.



   (A)   No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity
except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of any
bingo game.



   (B)   A bingo game shall be operated, managed, and staffed only by
members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a
profit, wage, or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration from
any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in
the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game, provided,
however, that this division shall not preclude the employment by the licensee
of security personnel who are not members of the licensee at a bingo game.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 113.18  COOPERATION WITH CITY PERSONNEL.



   (A)   No person shall interfere with, prevent, or refuse to permit a
police officer, or other peace officer, or other officer or employee of the
city to make an examination or inspection of any premise, whether the premise
is open to the public or not, or of any record kept by the applicant
organization, or by any agent or employee thereof, for the purpose of
determining whether the applicant organization and/or bingo manager are
complying with all of the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   A licensee shall produce and exhibit the bingo license and
bingo manager license, whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or
city officer authorized to issue, inspect, or collect licenses.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



§ 113.19  FEES.



   (A)   The fees for the bingo license and bingo manager license shall
be:



   Bingo license               $50 annually



   License amendment fee         $25 each amendment



   Bingo manager license         $25 annually



   (B)   If any application for a license is denied, one-half of any
license fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.



(Ord. 1116, passed 6-19-96)



CHAPTER 114:  CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Franchise to install and operate system



   114.03   System standards



   114.04   Franchise fee; amount or payment



   114.05   Inspection of records



   114.06   Application for franchise



   114.07   Franchise term; duration and termination



   114.08   Bonds, indemnifications, liquidated damages, insurance



   114.09   Acceptance of franchise



   114.10   Limitations of franchise



   114.11   Transfer of ownership or control



   114.12   Rights reserved to city



   114.13   Rules and regulations



   114.14   Regulation of franchise



   114.15   Right of intervention



   114.16   Rates and charges



   114.17   Effect of annexations



   114.18   Safety requirements



   114.19   Right to privacy of subscribers



   114.20   Removal of facilities upon request



   114.21   Consultant's costs to be borne by grantee



   114.22   Receivership



   114.23   Service to subscribers



   114.24   Financial disclosure of independent consultant



   114.25   Authorization to solicit, sell, distribute and charge;
traversing of city



   114.26   Prohibited acts



   114.27   Jurisdiction; standards and rates contractual



   114.28   Written notice to subscriber



   114.29   Filing with City Clerk



   114.30   Violations



Statutory reference:



   Community antenna TV systems, see Cal. Gov't Code § 53066



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIBER SERVICE.Any service not included in basic cable
service or basic radio service, including, but not limited to, pay-cable or
pay-television service.



   BASIC RADIO SERVICE.  The provision to all subscribers of such audio
programs as the retransmission of broadcast FM radio signals and the
transmission of cablecast radio signals, all provided to subscribers at a
monthly rate.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.



   BROADCAST SIGNAL.  A television or radio signal that is transmitted
over the air to a wide geographic audience and is received by a cable
communications system off-the-air or by microwave.



   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM,
CATV SYSTEM, COMMUNITY ANTENNA TV SYSTEM or SYSTEM.  A facility, consisting
of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation,
reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service
which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more
multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management,
unless the facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way;



      (3)   A facility of a common carrier, except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent the facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or



      (4)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility systems.



   CABLE SERVICE.  The total of the following:



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service; and



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection of such video programming or other programming service.



   CABLECAST SIGNAL.  A nonbroadcast signal that originates within the
facilities of the cable television system.



   CABLE-MILE.  A linear mile of strandbearing cable as measured on the
street or easement from pole to pole or pedestal to pedestal.



   CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL.  A portion of the electromagnetic frequency
spectrum which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by
the Federal Communications Commission.



   CITY.  The city of Baldwin Park, a general law city, in its present
incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or
reincorporated form.



   CLASS IV CHANNEL.  A signaling path provided by a cable television
system to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another
point in the cable television system.



   CLOSED CIRCUIT or INSTITUTIONAL SERVICE.  Such video, audio, data and
other services provided to institutional users on an individual requirement,
private channel basis.  These may include, but are not limited to, two-way
video, audio or digital signals among institutions or from institutions to
residential subscribers.



   COMMENCE CONSTRUCTION.  That time and date when construction of the
cable television system is considered to have commenced, which shall be when
the first connection is physically made to a utility pole, or undergrounding
of cables is initiated, after preliminary engineering (strand mapping) and
after all necessary permits and authorizations have been obtained.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the City of Baldwin Park or his
designee.



   COMMENCE OPERATION.  That time and date when operation of the cable
television system is considered to have commenced which shall be when
sufficient distribution facilities have been installed so as to permit the
offering of full service to at least 10% of the dwelling units located within
the service area.



   COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER.  A subscriber who receives a service in a place
of business, where the service may be utilized in connection with a business,
trade, or profession.



   COMMERCIAL USE CHANNEL. The channel(s) available for commercial use as
defined by federal law and specified in the franchise agreement.



   CONVERTER  An electronic device which converts signal carriers from
one form to another.



   COUNCIL.  The legislative body of the city.



   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNEL or EDUCATIONAL CHANNEL.  Any channel where
educational institutions are the primary designated programmers.



   FRANCHISE.  An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by a
franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or
otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.



   GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL or GOVERNMENT CHANNEL.  Any channel where
government agencies are the primary designated programmers.



   GRANTEE.  The person, firm, or corporation granted a franchise by the
Council pursuant to this subchapter and the lawful successor, transferee or
assignee of the grantee.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  Any and all compensation, in whatever form, derived
by a grantee from the operation of a system including, but not limited to,
all of the following:



      (1)   Grants, subsidies, exchanges, directly or indirectly
received by a grantee.  Gross receipts shall not include any refund or any
tax imposed upon a subscriber collected by a grantee for a taxing entity.



      (2)   Any and all compensation and other consideration
received directly or indirectly by the grantee from subscribers in payment of
the installation fee and service charge for any furnished service of the
cable television system.



      (3)   Any and all income, compensation and other consideration
received by grantee from any advertising on its cable television system.



      (4)   Any and all fees or income received by a grantee for the
lease or rental, and compensation for any service in connection therewith, of
studio and equipment rental and production costs and air time, of any channel.



   INSTALLATION.  The connection of the system to subscribers' terminals,
for the provision of service.



   LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL.  Any channel where a grantee is the primary
designated programmer, and provides video programs to subscribers.



   MONITORING.  Observing a communication signal, or the absence of a
signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer,
whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose
whatsoever.  MONITORING shall not include systemwide, nonindividually
addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity,
controlling return paths transmissions, or billing for pay-cable.



   NONBROADCAST SIGNAL.  A signal that is transmitted by a cable
television system and that is not involved in an over-the-air broadcast
transmission path.



   OPEN CHANNEL.  Any channel that can be received by all subscribers,
without the necessity for special equipment.



   PAY-CABLE or PAY-TELEVISION.  The delivery to subscribers, over a
cable television system, of television signals for a fee or charge to
subscribers over and above the charge for basic subscriber service, on a per
program, per channel, or other subscription basis.



   PENETRATION.  The result expressed in the percentage obtained by
dividing the total number of potential subscribers in the service area into
the number of subscribers receiving service.



   PERSON.  Any natural person and all domestic and foreign corporations,
associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every
kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, and societies.



   PRIVATE CHANNEL  or CLOSED-CIRCUIT CHANNEL.  Any channel which is
available only to subscribers who are provided with special converter or
terminal equipment to receive signals on that channel.



   PROGRAMMER.  A person or entity who or which produces or otherwise
provides program material or information for transmission by video, audio,
digital, or other signals, either live or from recorded tapes or other
storage media, to subscribers, by means of a cable television system.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL or COMMUNITY ACCESS CHANNEL.  Any channel where
any member of the general public or any noncommercial organization may be a
programmer, without charge, on a first-come, first-served, nondiscriminatory
basis, in accordance with the terms of the franchise agreement.



   PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES or PEG ACCESS
FACILITIES.  The total of the following:



      (1)   Channel capacity designated for public, educational or
governmental use; and



      (2)   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel
capacity.



   SERVICE AREA.  That geographical area of the city throughout which a
grantee, pursuant to its franchise, shall provide cable service to
subscribers.



   SERVICE TIER.  A category of cable service or other services provided
by a grantee for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee.



   SPECIAL SERVICE AREA.  Any area of the city designated by the Council,
if it so elects, in the franchise, where the grantee may charge different
rates, or provide different services, than in the remainder of its service
area.



   STREETS.  Those public streets, alleys, easements and other publicly
owned property, designated in a franchise as areas within which a grantee may
place its facilities utilized by it in operating its system.



   TAPPING.  Observing a two-way communications signal exchange, where
the observer is neither of the communicating parties, whether the exchange is
observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever.



('83 Code, § 5.24.010)  (Ord. 912, passed - -85)



§ 114.02  FRANCHISE TO INSTALL AND OPERATE SYSTEM.



   Nonexclusive franchises to install, construct, operate and maintain a
system within all or a specific portion of the city, as described in the
franchise, may be granted by the Council to any person, who offers to furnish
and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of
this subchapter, and applicable state and federal law.  No provision of this
chapter shall be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a
franchise when in the opinion of the City Council it is in the public
interest not to grant such franchise.



('83 Code, § 5.24.020)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.03  SYSTEM STANDARDS.



   A system permitted to be installed and operated pursuant to a franchise
shall be designed and installed to meet all of the standards and shall offer
all of the services as required by this chapter and the franchise.  These
services shall be offered to all subscribers in accordance with this chapter
and its franchise.  The grantee shall not reduce nor change the level of
required services without prior City Council approval.



   (A)   Interconnection of services. Each grantee shall make all
reasonable efforts to electrically interconnect its system with systems in
adjacent communities for the purposes of sharing locally originated
subscriber and institutional services.  Such an interconnect shall be
effected by coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, microwave or other
bi-directional signal transportation means as appropriate to permit services
interchange in compliance with the technical provisions of this chapter. 
Within a reasonable time as set by the city, each grantee shall contact all
franchised operators in the communities adjacent to the city for the purposes
of exploring and securing a mutually acceptable system interconnect agreement
and report the results of the activity to the City Manager.  The report
shall state each contacted operator's name, city and response, list all
programming and services activity available to subscribers via an
interconnect agreement as well as list programming and services to similarly
be transmitted from the city to such adjacent communities; and an explanation
of the substance of the governing business agreement reached with the other
operators.



      (1)   If an adjacent operator is responsive to a grantee's
inquiry for interconnect, the City Council regulating the franchise of the
adjacent operator, and the City Council must first approve all details, plans
and other agreements before implementation of the interconnect, which consent
shall not be unreasonably withheld.



      (2)   If an adjacent operator is not responsive to a grantee's
inquiry, a letter report, describing the reasonable attempts made to obtain
an interconnect agreement and indicating why the agreement was unsuccessful,
shall be filed with the City Manager.



      (3)   In the case of new systems constructed in adjacent
communities after the system in this city is operative, a grantee shall have
six months after the new system becomes operational to make the required
inquiries and attempt to obtain an interconnect agreement.



      (4)   In the case of systems operated in adjacent communities
by a grantee of a franchise issued pursuant to this chapter, the grantee
shall provide a plan to interconnect with the system operated under such
franchise, the implementation of which shall be mutually acceptable by each
affected city.  The plan shall be submitted to the city within the time set
by the City Manager.



   (B)   System construction standards.



      (1)   General construction schedule.



         (a)   Within the time set in its franchise, a grantee
shall commence, and thereafter, shall proceed with due diligence, to obtain
all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of
its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment
agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and other permits, licenses and
authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the operation of cable television systems, associated
microwave transmission/reception facilities and/or satellite communications
facilities.



         (b)   Within the time set in its franchise, a grantee
shall commence construction and installation of its system.



         (c)   Each franchise shall set a construction schedule
for the completion of the installation of the system throughout the proposed
service area.  Failure of a grantee to complete the installation of its
system in the time and manner set forth in its franchise shall result in the
imposition of liquidated damages, and, in the sole discretion of city, shall
be grounds for termination of the franchise.  The proposed construction
schedule shall not, in any event, exceed two years, except that, by
resolution, pursuant to division (d) below, the Council, in its discretion,
may extend the time for the commencement and completion of installation and
construction for additional periods in the event grantee, acting in good
faith, experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond his control.



         (d)   Any requests for extensions of the proposed
construction schedule approved as part of a franchise, due to acts of God,
acts of the public enemy, fires, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions,
strikes, lockouts, freight embargoes, unusually severe weather, or from any
other cause beyond the reasonable control of a grantee and/or its employees,
agents or contractors, must be requested from the City Manager in writing
within 14 days after the cause for such delay first occurs.  The request
must specify the exact reason for the delay and the total number of extension
days requested.  A grantee shall provide written substantiation supporting
such a request.  Within 14 days of receipt of a grantee's request for an
extension the City Manager shall respond to the grantee with approval,
partial approval, or denial, of the request for extension.



         (e)   By acceptance of a franchise granted hereunder,
each grantee shall be deemed to have agreed that failure to comply with any
time requirements referred to in divisions (a), (b) and (c) above, shall
result in the imposition of liquidated damages, pursuant to the franchise,
and may, in the discretion of the city be grounds for termination of the
franchise.



      (2)   Use of poles.  A grantee shall be authorized to utilize
existing poles, conduits, and other facilities of a public utility, but shall
not be authorized to construct or install any new, different, or additional
poles, whether on public or privately-owned property, unless the franchise
expressly so provides.



      (3)   Undergrounding of system.  In a grantee's service area
where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public
utilities providing telephone, communication and electric services are
underground, or hereafter are placed underground, or whenever the city shall
undertake a program designed to cause such facilities to be undergrounded in
all or a part of the service area, the grantee shall likewise construct,
place or replace, reconstruct, and thereafter operate and maintain, all of
its system underground, with the exception of "active electronic" equipment
which may be placed above ground.  The grantee shall have the option of
sharing or not sharing public utility trenches.  However, at no time shall
the grantee place cable underground without appropriate conduit.  The entire
cost of undergrounding required pursuant to this section shall be borne by
the grantee. [Underground utility lines and districts, see §§ 97.060 et
seq. of this code of ordinances.]



      (4)   Required approvals.  The design and location of all
surface or above ground mounted equipment shall be approved by the City
Engineer.  Such equipment shall be located so as not to endanger the persons
or property, nor physically detract from the surroundings.  The method of
underground construction to be utilized by a grantee, whether by trenching,
boring, cutting or other method and the restoration of streets utilized for
the placement of the grantee's property shall be submitted to the City
Engineer for approval.  The construction shall be subject to the required
permit fees and city inspection as may be required by other applicable laws
or regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted, including, but not limited
to, those pertaining to works and activities in, on, under or over streets.



      (5)   Submission of drawings.  Each grantee shall furnish the
city with as-built drawings of its entire system within the time set therefor
by the City Engineer.  In the event a grantee desires to make any changes or
modifications to its system that would alter the as-built plans, the grantee
shall first obtain approval therefor from the City Engineer and then file
revised as-built drawings which reflect the changes within 30 days of
completion of the drawings.



      (6)   City use of facilities.  The city shall have the right,
free of charge, to make additional use, for any public or municipal purpose,
whether governmental or proprietary, of any facilities erected, controlled,
or maintained exclusively by or for a grantee, provided the use does not
unreasonably interfere with the use thereof by the grantee.



      (7)   Identification required.  Each grantee shall provide,
at its sole expense, a method of employee/subcontractor identification,
acceptable to the city, for all such individuals who may make personal
contact with residents of the city for the purposes of construction,
marketing, or other matters relating to its system.



      (8)   Maintenance, removal, abandonment. Each grantee at its
sole expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove its property when, in the opinion of the City Engineer, the same is
required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation,
freeway or strict construction projects.  Each such grantee shall be
permitted, subject to the approval of the City Engineer, to abandon any of
its property in place.  Work required by a grantee hereunder shall not be
deemed a taking of the property of the grantee, and the grantee shall not be
entitled to reimbursement by reason of action required hereunder.



         (a)   Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of any
grantee to perform any work or other act required by this section to be
properly completed within the time prescribed therefor by the City Manager,
the City Manager may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or
in part by city forces or others, and upon so doing shall submit to the
grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof.  The grantee shall,
within 30 days after receipt of the statement, pay to the city the entire
amount thereof, without off-set or deduction.



         (b)   In the event that:



            1.   The use of any part of a system is
discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 30 days, without prior
written approval by the city;



            2.   Any part of such system has been installed in
any street or other area without complying with the requirements of this
chapter or the franchise; or



            3.   Any franchise is terminated, cancelled, or
has expired; then the grantee shall, at the option of the city, and at the
sole expense of the grantee, upon demand of the city, promptly remove or,
with the prior approval of the City Engineer, abandon in place, all of its
property referred to in divisions 1., 2. above or this division 3.  Upon
abandonment of any such property in place, grantee shall cause to be
executed, acknowledged and delivered to the city, such instruments as the
City Attorney shall prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the
ownership of such property to the city.



   (C)   Technical performance and maintenance standards.  Each system
shall be designed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the technical
performance standards contained in the franchise.  In addition, should the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), or any other state or federal
authority having jurisdiction, impose on CATV systems technical performance
standards either outside the scope of the technical performance standards
contained in a franchise or requiring a higher level of system performance,
those standards shall be complied with by each grantee.  If, for any reason,
the technical standards imposed by the FCC or other authority, shall be
reduced in scope or service level, the more stringent standards imposed by
the franchise shall be deemed to be in full force and effect.



   (D)   Maintenance of system. Each grantee shall maintain its system
so it consistently operates within substantial compliance of the technical
standards applicable thereto, substantial compliance being defined as 95% of
the channels to be received shall meet all applicable technical standards
simultaneously at the time of measurement, and 100% of the local origination
equipment shall meet all applicable technical standards specified herein.



   (E)   New developments.  Each grantee shall continue to upgrade its
system and service so that its system is as advanced as the then current
state of technology will allow.  The grantee shall install additional
channel capacity as required to keep channel capacity in excess of the
reasonable demand thereof by users.  At all times the system shall be no
less advanced than any other system of comparable size, excepting only
systems which are experimental, pilot, or demonstration.



   (F)   Local business office.



      (1)   Each grantee shall maintain a local business office
within the city for the purpose of conducting its local activities.  Each
grantee shall maintain a 24-hour toll-free answering service for service
related problem calls, as well as separate toll-free telephone numbers for
the system manager, the sales marketing department, and service department. 
A minimum of three lines shall be maintained for service and sales, and, in
the event the city determines through subscriber complaints that number is
insufficient to meet current demands, the grantee shall add such additional
lines as may be necessary in the opinion of the City Manager, to provide
prompt, efficient response to subscriber inquiries.



      (2)   All such required telephone lines shall be listed in
directories of the telephone company serving the city, and be so operated
that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at
any time, day or night, seven days a week.  All complaints shall be
acknowledged within 24 hours of receipt.



   (G)   Complaint procedure and remedies for inadequate service.



      (1)   Complaint procedure.  The following procedure shall be
utilized to address subscriber complaints.



         (a)   Each franchise application shall include a
proposed written procedure for receiving, acting upon and resolving
subscriber complaints.



         (b)   Each grantee shall furnish a copy of the approved
complaint procedures to each subscriber at the time of the initial
subscription.



         (c)   Each grantee shall maintain a written record, or
"log," listing date and time of all customer complaints, identifying the
subscriber and determining the nature of the complaints and when and what
action was taken by the grantee in response thereto; such record shall be
kept at each grantee's local office, reflecting the operations to date for a
period of at least three years, and shall be available for inspection during
regular business hours without further notice or demand by the City Manager.



         (d)   In the event that a subscriber complaint is not
resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the subscriber or the grantee, either
may submit the matter to the City Manager for resolution of the dispute. 
The City Manager's determination shall be final.



      (2)   Inspection orders.



         (a)   When there have been a substantial number of
similar complaints made or where there exists other evidence which, in the
judgment of the City Manager, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of
cable service, or the grantee's ability to meet the technical standards
herein adopted, the City Manager shall have the right and authority to compel
the grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of that part of
its system involved in the problem.  Such test or tests shall be made and
the reports of the test or tests shall be delivered to the City Manager
within the time set by the City Manager.  The report shall include the
following information.



            1.   The nature of the complaint which
precipitated the special test.



            2.   What system component was tested.



            3.   The equipment used and procedures employed in
such testing.



            4.   The names of the individuals performing and
witnessing the testing.



            5.   The date, time, and location of testing.



            6.   The results of the test.



            7.   Any other information pertinent to the
special test.



         (b)   If, in the judgment of the City Manager, the
resultant tests indicate the service problem(s) are preventable and within
the grantee's control, the City Manager shall issue a written order to the
grantee directing that the problem be remedied within a reasonable period set
by the City Manager.  A failure by a grantee to comply with any order issued
pursuant to this section shall result in the imposition of liquidated damages
as set forth in its franchise and other remedies set forth herein or in the
franchise.



      (3)   Remedies for inadequate service.  The following
remedies for inadequate or untimely service to subscribers are established.



         (a)   In the event that service to any subscriber is
interrupted, without fault of the subscriber, for 24 or more consecutive
hours, except for acts of God, and except in circumstances for which prior
approval of the interruption is obtained from the City Manager, a grantee
shall provide a pro rata rebate of the monthly fees during which the
interruption occurs, to each affected subscriber. If either the grantee or
the subscriber is dissatisfied with the amount of the rebate, either may
request a hearing before an arbitrator selected by the City Council.  The
arbitrator may award a pro rata rebate, plus assess a penalty upon the
grantee, not to exceed $200 for any one month of interrupted service.



         (b)   In the event that the system fails to meet any
performance standards specified herein for a period of 90 or more consecutive
days, grantee shall reduce all subscribers' fees by an amount set by the City
Manager, until all such performance standards are met.  The City Manager
shall notify a grantee in writing during the first month of the three-month
period that the system has failed to meet performance standards.



   (H)   Periodic testing and reporting.  Each grantee shall test its
system, and report the results to the city, on a scheduled basis as specified
below.



      (1)   Quarterly system tests.  On the last regular working
day of each of the first three operating quarters of each year, each grantee
shall submit system performance data taken within the last quarter to the
City Manager.  The specific data to be required in the quarterly test report
shall be set forth in the franchise.



      (2)   Annual system tests.  During the last month of the
fourth operating quarter of each year, each grantee shall perform annual
performance tests of system.



         (a)   Such tests shall be in full compliance with
applicable FCC regulations and technical standards, and regulations and
technical standards included in the franchise.



         (b)   Such tests shall be independently witnessed and
the resultant data analyzed by a representative of the city if so directed by
the City Manager.



         (c)   All necessary test instrumentation shall be
supplied by each grantee.  A current certificate of calibration by an
independent calibration laboratory shall be supplied for each test
instrument.  All costs for instrumentation and calibration shall be borne by
each grantee.



         (d)   1.   Measurement locations for system
compliance with division (1) above, except those requirements regarding
24-hour visual signal amplitude and channel amplitude characteristics, shall
include:



               a.   End of each system major trunk; and



               b.   End of each system trunk branch four or
more trunk amplifiers deep.



            2.   Actual test locations shall be selected to
measure performance of the system in the service area and shall be (or as
closely as possible to simulate) actual subscriber locations.



         (e)   Measurements regarding 24-hour visual signal level
and channel amplitude characteristics shall be made as required by the FCC.



         (f)   Measurement for system compliance with division
(1) above, shall be made where practical on all origination equipment
employed in the system.



         (g)   Measurement techniques shall be those suggested by
each grantee, and approved by the city.



         (h)   Concurrent with annual performance tests, the city
representative shall inspect all system headed facilities and outside plant
for adherence to best industry installation, workmanship and safety practice.



         (i)   If the performance tests show that the system is
below the performance standards required in this chapter or the franchise,
the city shall give notice thereof to grantee and such grantee shall correct
the deficiency within the time set by the city.  Grantee shall notify the
city when the correction has been made and shall retest to ensure
compliance.  In the event the resultant tests reveal grantee has failed to
correct the deficiency, or if the time for correction has elapsed and grantee
has not attempted to correct the deficiency, the city may employ independent
engineers to demonstrate, at the grantee's cost, the appropriate correction
to the grantee.  Grantee shall then have a reasonable time, as set by the
city, to correct the deficiency.



      (3)   Annual service report.  The following information shall
be reported by each grantee to the city on an annual basis on a date
designated by the City Manager.



         (a)   Existing service area.  A description of the
service area with comments on any portion thereof not actually served, areas
where certain services are not yet available, or areas where special
conditions exist.  All special service areas shall be indicated.



         (b)   Work in progress.  An indication on the map of
areas where system construction or reconstruction is in progress with a
statement on its present status and anticipated schedule of completion of
such work.



         (c)   Statistics on subscribers.  The following
statistics shall be supplied:



            1.   Single-family homes passed.



            2.   Single-family subscribers.



            3.   Multiple-dwelling unit subscribers.



            4.   Commercial subscribers.



            5.   Additional television outlets.



            6.   Saturation (total subscribers divided by
total dwelling units passed).



         (d)   Statistics on system expansion.  A listing of any
expansion of the system in the service area including a measure, in miles of
cable, of the expansion.  Designations shall be included to identify
expansions to new developments.



         (e)   Technical standards.  A detailed, informative,
and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational
standards of each grantee and the corresponding standards required by this
subchapter.



         (f)   Subscriber agreements.  Copies of new or revised
subscriber agreements, if any.



   (I)   PEG access facility management.



      (1)   Intent.  It is the intent of the city to insure that
access facilities and channels provided for in any franchise, are managed in
the best public interest, so that programming on such channels will be free
of censorship, open to all residents, and available for all forms of public
expression, community information and debate of public issues.  Pursuant to
these objectives, the city may delegate the responsibility for PEG access
facility management to a nonprofit entity which may include, but not be
limited to, any of the following:



         (a)   A nonprofit public corporation;



         (b)   A PEG access facility management commission or
committee, the members of which shall be appointed by the city, so as to
represent a broad spectrum of the community; or



         (c)   An established nonprofit entity with special or
cablecasting capability, such as a local or regional community college.



      (2)   Functions.  The entity designated to manage the access
facilities and channels shall have the following functions.



         (a)   Responsibility for program production for and
management of the public access facilities channel and all other community
channels as may be designated in the franchise for community-based
programming.  Community channels may include government and educational
access channels, as designated in the franchise.



         (b)   To assure that the public access facilities and
channels are made available to all residents of the franchise service area on
a non-discriminatory, first-come, first-served basis.



         (c)   To assure that no censorship facilities or control
over program content of the public access facilities and channels exists,
except as is necessary to comply with FCC prohibition of material that is
obscene; or contains commercial advertising, or constitutes the conduct of a
lottery; or otherwise violates a valid law or regulation.



         (d)   To devise, establish, and administer reasonable
rules, regulations, and procedures pertaining to the use and scheduling of
the public access facilities and channels.



         (e)   To prepare, in conjunction with the grantee, such
regular or special reports as may be required or desirable.



         (f)   To hire and supervise its staff.



         (g)   To make all purchases of materials and equipment
that may be required.



         (h)   To develop sources of funding, such as foundation
or federal or state grants, to further its functions.



         (i)   To perform such other functions relevant to the
public access facilities and channels as may be appropriate.



         (j)   Establishment of budgets on an annual basis.



      (3)   Access rules.  The PEG access facility management
entity shall complete a set of rules for the use of the access facilities and
channels which shall be promptly forwarded to the grantee for review.  The
rules, after review by grantee, shall be submitted to the City Manager for
approval.



         (a)   Access on a first-come, first-served,
nondiscriminatory basis for all residents of the franchise service area.



         (b)   Prohibition of commercial or political use.



         (c)   Prohibition of any presentation of lottery
information, or obscene or indecent material.



         (d)   Public inspection of the log of producers, which
shall be retained by the grantee for a period of four years.



         (e)   Procedures by which individuals or groups who
violate any rule may be prevented from further access to the channel.



         (f)   Free use of such reasonable amounts of channel
time, cablecasting facilities, and technical support.



      (4)   PEG access facility management entity reports to city. 
The PEG access facility management entity shall provide a report to the city,
at least annually, indicating achievements in community- based programming
and services, and, if required by the City Manager, shall provide a special
report each time grantee requests an increase in rates, indicating the level
and quality of grantee's support during the period elapsed since any previous
rate increase was implemented.



('83 Code, § 5.24.030)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.04  FRANCHISE FEE; AMOUNT OR PAYMENT.



   (A)   Each grantee granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter
shall pay to the city, during the life of the franchise, a sum equal to 5% of
its annual total gross receipts.  If, during any part of the term of any
franchise, a federal or state litigation is imposed on the amount of the
franchise fee required hereunder, such limitation shall apply only for the
time period the limitation is legally operational.



   (B)   Franchise fee payments by each grantee to the city shall be
made periodically as set forth in each franchise.  All such fees shall be
paid to the City Treasurer.  Franchise payments required hereunder shall be
in lieu of any business license tax.



   (C)   In the event the preceding payments are not received by the
city at the specified times, each grantee shall pay to the city, in addition
to the principal sums due, interest thereon in the maximum amount then
allowed by law on the unpaid balance.



   (D)   Each grantee shall file with the City Manager within 90 days
after the expiration of each grantee's fiscal year or portion thereof during
which its franchise is in force, a balance sheet and statement of profit and
loss showing in detail the gross receipts, as defined herein, received by the
grantee during each such fiscal year, or portion thereof.  The manner of
preparation of the financial reports shall be set forth in the franchise.



('83 Code, § 5.24.040)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.05  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   (A)   Fiscal records; audits.  The city shall have the right to
inspect and audit each grantee's fiscal records.  If an independent audit of
any grantee's records, directed by the city, shows a franchise fee
underpayment of 2% or more, the grantee shall bear all costs of the audit. 
No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord
and satisfaction as to any claim the city may have for further additional
sums payable, or for the performance of any other obligation of a grantee
pursuant to this chapter or its franchise.



   (B)   Other records.



      (1)   The city shall have the right to inspect at any time
during normal business hours, all books, records, maps, plans, financial
statements, service complaint logs, performance test results and other like
materials of any grantee, which relate to the operation under the franchise
and are maintained at the local office of a grantee.



      (2)   If any of the books or records are not kept in the local
office, the books or records, upon reasonable request, shall be made
available to the city, at grantee's expense.



   (C)   Copies of federal and state reports.  The grantee shall
submit to the city copies of all pleadings, applications, reports,
communications and documents of any kind, submitted by the grantee to, as
well as copies of all decisions, correspondence and actions by, any federal,
state and local courts, regulatory agencies and other government bodies
relating to its cable television operations pursuant to its franchise. 
Grantee shall submit such documents to the city simultaneously with their
submission to the courts, agencies and bodies; and within five days after
their receipt from the courts, agencies and bodies.  The grantee hereby
waives any right to claim confidential, privileged or proprietary rights to
the documents unless such confidential rights are determined to be
confidential by law or by the practices of federal or state agencies.  The
confidential data exempt from public disclosure shall be retained in
confidence by the city and its authorized agents and shall not be made
available for public inspection.



   (D)   Miscellaneous reports.  Grantee shall submit to the city such
other information or reports in the forms and at such times as the city may
reasonably request or require.



   (E)   Income tax returns.  If considered necessary in rate
disputes, and if not incorporated with parent company returns, the grantee
shall submit to the city copies of all income tax returns and reports which
are filed with the local, state or federal governments pertaining to its
cable system, pursuant to its franchise, upon city request.  The returns, to
the extent deemed confidential by state or federal agencies, shall not be
disclosed to the public.



   (F)   Inspection of facilities.  The grantee shall allow the city
to make inspections of any of the grantee's facilities and equipment at any
time upon reasonable notice, or, in case of emergency, upon demand without
prior notice, to allow the city to verify the accuracy of any submitted
report.



   (G)   Failure to file report.  The refusal, failure, or neglect of
the grantee to file any of the reports required, or such other reports as the
city reasonably may request, or follow inspection of its facilities, shall be
deemed a material breach of terms of its franchise, and shall subject the
grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to the city
under the franchise or otherwise.



   (H)   False statements.  Any materially false or misleading
statement or representation knowingly made by the grantee in any report
required hereunder shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise and
shall subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to the city under the franchise or otherwise.



   (I)   Cost of reports.  All reports and records required under this
or any other section shall be furnished to the city at the sole expense of
the grantee.



('83 Code, § 5.24.050)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.06  APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.



   (A)   (1)   Each application for a franchise to construct,
operate, and maintain a system in this city shall be filed with the City
Clerk on forms provided by the city.



      (2)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee, in an amount set by the City Manager, to defray the cost of
filing and processing the application, which shall be in the form of a
certified or cashier's check or a money order.



   (B)   The Council shall, by advertisement or any other means,
solicit and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and
may determine and fix any date upon which the same shall be received by the
city, and may make any other determination and specify any other terms or
conditions, respecting the soliciting and calling for the applications.



   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a franchise, the City
Manager shall expeditiously prepare a report (hereafter "report") including
his recommendations respecting the application, which shall be filed with the
Council and each applicant.



   (D)   (1)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendations of the
City Manager, the Council shall adopt a resolution of intention which shall:



         (a)   Set a time and place for a public hearing to
consider the granting of a franchise;



         (b)   Give notice of receipt of the applications, and
describe the character of the franchise desired; and



         (c)   The terms and conditions upon which the franchise
is proposed to be granted.



      (2)   Copies of the application and the report shall be
available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.  The City
Clerk shall publish the resolution at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing.



   (E)   (1)   At the time set for the hearing, or at any
adjournment thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear all interested
persons, including any objections or protests to the granting of the
franchise.



      (2)   In making any determination hereunder as to any
application, the Council shall give due consideration to the quality of the
service proposed, rates to subscriber, income to the city, experience,
character, technical and financial responsibility of the applicant, and any
other considerations deemed pertinent by the Council for safeguarding the
interests of the city and public.  The Council, at its discretion, shall
determine whether to award a franchise on the basis of such considerations.



   (F)   The Council may at any time prior to the close of the hearing,
demand and the applicant shall provide, such supplementary, additional or
other information as the Council may deem reasonably necessary to determine
whether the requested franchise should be granted.



   (G)   After the public hearing the Council shall make one of the
following determinations.



      (1)   That one or more of the applications for a franchise be
denied; or



      (2)   That one or more of the applications for a franchise be
granted upon appropriate terms and conditions.



   (H)   If the Council shall deny an application for a franchise, the
determination shall be final and conclusive.



   (I)   If the Council shall determine that an application for a
franchise shall be granted, the franchise shall be granted by ordinance,
naming the grantee, and setting forth the terms and conditions thereof.



   (J)   Any grantee, prior to the effective date of its franchise,
shall reimburse the city for its actual engineering, administrative,
publication and legal expenses incurred in connection with the processing,
evaluation, and preparation of documents relating to the franchise, in excess
of the prepaid nonrefundable application fee.



('83 Code, § 5.24.060)  (Ord. 912, passed - -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.07  FRANCHISE TERM; DURATION AND TERMINATION.



   (A)   Duration.  Any franchise granted under this subchapter shall
be for a term not to exceed 15 years, as determined by the City Council. 
The term of a franchise shall commence the date of its acceptance by the
grantee.



   (B)   Termination.



      (1)   Pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter and
any applicable state and federal law, the city may terminate any franchise
granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in the event of the
failure, refusal or neglect by grantee to do or comply with any material
requirement or limitation contained in this chapter, in the franchise, in any
rule or regulation adopted by the Council, or in any lawful order issued for
or on behalf of the city (hereinafter referred to, collectively, as
"requirement").



      (2)   The City Manager shall make written demand upon a
grantee to do or comply with any such requirement.  If the failure, refusal
or neglect of a grantee to so comply continues following the written demand,
the City Manager shall advise the City Council thereof.  The Council shall
set a public hearing to consider whether the franchise should be
terminated.  The City Clerk shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at
least 30 days prior to the date of the Council hearing, a written notice of
the request for such termination, and the time and place of the hearing. 
The City Clerk shall also publish a notice of hearing, setting forth a time
and place when and where any persons having any interest therein may appear
before the Council and be heard, at least ten days prior to the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city.



      (3)   The Council shall consider the matter and shall hear any
persons interested therein, and shall determine whether or not any failure,
refusal or neglect by the grantee occurred as charged.



      (4)   If such failure, refusal or neglect by the grantee is
found by the Council to have occurred, but is found to be the result of
excusable neglect by grantee, the Council shall order the grantee to comply
with the requirement within the time and in the manner as it deems reasonable.



      (5)   If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or
neglect by the grantee occurred, but was not due to excusable neglect by
grantee, then the Council shall, by resolution, impose liquidated damages,
and may declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be terminated unless
there be compliance by the grantee with the requirement in the time and
manner as the Council shall fix.



('83 Code, § 5.24.070)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.08  BONDS, INDEMNIFICATIONS, LIQUIDATED DAMAGES, INSURANCE.



   (A)   Security fund.



      (1)   Contemporaneously with an applicant's filing its
acceptance of a franchise, it shall deposit with the city, and during the
term of the franchise granted, maintain on deposit, a security fund in a sum
set by the franchise.  Funds from the security fund shall be utilized for
the purposes provided in this chapter, and in each franchise.



      (2)   Within 15 days after written notice to a grantee by the
city that the city has withdrawn any amount from its security fund, the
grantee shall deposit with the city a sum of money sufficient to restore the
security fund to the original amount as set by the franchise.



      (3)   If any grantee fails to pay the city any moneys due
within the time fixed in this chapter or the franchise; or fails to pay to
the city within ten days' written notice, any damages, costs or expenses
which the city may be compelled to pay by reason of any act, omission or
default of the grantee; or fails after ten days' written notice to comply
with any provision of this chapter or its franchise which the city reasonably
determines can be remedied or partially cured by an expenditure from the
security fund, the city may immediately, without prior notice to grantee,
withdraw the amount thereof from the security fund.  Upon such withdrawal,
the city shall in writing notify the grantee of the amount, date and purpose
thereof.  In the event the security fund is insufficient to pay and/or repay
the city for its lawful costs, damages, or obligations incurred, any other
funds or assets of the grantee, may be drawn upon by the city for any such
amounts due the city.



      (4)   Each franchise issued pursuant hereto shall contain a
liquidated damage provision, the terms of which shall be agreed upon by the
city and the grantee.  Sums due to city, as and for liquidated damages,
shall be a proper charge against the security fund.



      (5)   A grantee shall be entitled to the return of all moneys
remaining in the security fund, including any accrued interest, at the
expiration or termination of its franchise, provided there is then no
outstanding obligation owing on the part of the grantee to the city.



      (6)   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter, the franchise or authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the security fund shall
affect any other right the city may have.



   (B)   Hold harmless agreement.



      (1)   Each grantee in its acceptance of its franchise shall
acknowledge and agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers,
agents and employees, against and from any and all claims, demands, causes of
action, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including, but not limited to,
damage to city property and damages arising out of copyright infringements,
and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents from the
owners or authorized distributors or licensees of programs delivered by
grantee's system), costs or liabilities of every kind and nature whatsoever,
including but not limited to, damages for injury or death of a person or
damage to property, caused by the act or omission of such grantee, its
officers, agents, and employees in the exercise of its rights and privileges
under its franchise.



      (2)   Definition.  For the purpose of this division, the
following definition shall apply.



   COSTS OR LIABILITIES.  Includes, but is not limited to, reasonable
attorney fees, reasonable accountant fees, reasonable expert witness and
consultant fees, reasonable per diem expenses and traveling expenses for
witnesses, and court costs of any trial.



   (C)   Defense of litigation.



      (1)   Each grantee in its acceptance of its franchise shall
acknowledge and agree, at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon demand
of the city, made by and through the City Attorney, to appear in and defend
any and all suits, actions, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial,
quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise, brought or
instituted by third persons or duly constituted authorities, against or
affecting the city, its officers, agents or employees, arising out of or
pertaining to the exercise by such grantee of its rights and privileges under
its franchise including, but not limited to, the act of granting such
franchise by the city.  Where the city determines, reasonably, that its
interests are best served by appearing in the action or proceeding by and
through its own counsel, it may do so at the grantee's sole expense.



      (2)   Grantee shall pay and satisfy or shall cause to be paid
and satisfied any judgment, decree, order, directive, or demand rendered,
made or issued against grantee, the city, its officers, agents or employees,
in any of these premises; and such indemnity, as expressed in this section,
shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of
any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance
required hereunder, or otherwise provided.  No grantee shall make or enter
into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action,
action, suit, or other proceeding without first obtaining the written consent
of the city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (D)   Expenses of litigation.  In the event of any legal action
between grantee and the city arising out of any alleged breach by grantee of
any term of condition or provisions of this subchapter or the franchise, the
prevailing party shall be entitled to reasonable attorney fees, and court
costs related to the litigation.



   (E)   Insurance required.



      (1)   Not in derogation of a grantee's obligation pursuant to
divisions (B) and (C) hereof, each grantee at all times during the term of
its franchise, shall maintain in full force and effect, at its sole cost and
expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, including
coverage for, premises operations, explosion and collapse hazard, underground
hazard, contractual insurance, broad form property damage, independent
contractors and personal injury and automobile liability comprehensive
form.  The City Manager shall have the right of approval as to coverages,
companies and policy limits of all such policies.



      (2)   The city, its officers and employees, shall be named as
additional insureds in all of the insurance policies.  Where such insurance
is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or
persons, it shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement.  These
policies shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or
any alteration of the policy shall not be effective except upon 90 days prior
written notice thereof to the city.



      (3)   Insurance policies required hereunder shall contain the
following endorsements.



         (a)   The naming of an additional insured as herein
provided shall not affect any recovery to which the additional insured would
be entitled under this policy if not named as the additional insured.



         (b)   The additional insured named herein shall not be
held liable for any premium or expense of any nature on this policy or any
extension thereof.



         (c)   The additional insured named herein shall not by
reason of being so named be considered a member of any mutual insurance
company for any purpose whatsoever.



         (d)   Any other insurance held by the additional insured
shall not be required to contribute anything toward any loss or expense
covered by the insurance which is referred to by this certificate.



      (4)   Each grantee shall maintain during the term of its
franchise, at its own cost and expense, a policy of Worker's Compensation
Insurance, in minimum amounts as required by law.



      (5)   Each grantee shall, concurrently, with the filing of its
acceptance of its franchise, and thereafter periodically during the term of
its franchise, furnish to the City Clerk certificates of insurance evidencing
the existence of insurance coverage required hereunder.  Such certificates
shall provide that the coverage may not be cancelled, substantially altered
or terminated except upon 30-days written notice to the city.



      (6)   If a grantee fails to maintain any of the insurance
coverage required hereunder, the city may, forthwith, terminate its franchise
and/or obtain, at grantee's expense, such insurance coverage.



('83 Code, § 5.24.080)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.09  ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   No franchise granted under this chapter shall become effective
for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof by the named
grantee shall have been filed with the City Clerk. The written acceptance, in
the form as approved by the City Attorney, shall be and operate as an
acceptance of each and every term and condition and limitation contained in
this subchapter and in the franchise.



   (B)   The written acceptance shall be filed by the proposed grantee
not later than 12:01 p.m. of the 25th calendar day following the effective
date of adoption of the ordinance constituting the franchise.



   (C)   In default of the filing of the written acceptance as herein
required, the prospective grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and
repudiated the franchise as offered.  Thereafter, the acceptance of the
grantee shall not be received nor filed by the City Clerk.  The grantee
shall have no rights, remedies, or redress under that franchise unless and
until the Council, by resolution, shall determine that the failure to timely
file the acceptance was excusable, shall order that the acceptance be
received or filed, upon such terms and conditions as the Council may impose.



('83 Code, § 5.24.090)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.10  LIMITATIONS OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Every franchise granted under this chapter shall be
nonexclusive.  Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of
the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from
granting any identical or similar franchise to any other qualified person,
firm, or corporation, within all or any portion of the city.



   (B)   No privilege or exemption is granted or conferred by any
franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically described in
this chapter or in its franchise.



   (C)   Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by a grantee to
occupy a portion of any street shall be subordinate to the use thereof by the
city or any person authorized by the city to the street.



   (D)   Time shall be of the essence as to any franchise granted
hereunder.  A grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply
promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise by any
failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.



   (E)   Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer,
employee, department, or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by
the city to any other officer, employee, department, or city board.



   (F)   Any such franchise granted hereunder shall not relieve the
grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from
any department of the city, utility company, or from others who maintain
utilities in the streets.



   (G)   No grantee shall have any recourse whatsoever against the city
for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or
requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because
of enforcement by the city of the provisions thereof.



   (H)   Each grantee shall be subject to all requirements of city
laws, rules, regulations, and specifications heretofore, or hereafter enacted
or established.



('83 Code, § 5.24.100)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.11  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.



   (A)   Transfer of franchise.  Any franchise granted hereunder shall
be a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public.  The franchise
cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of,
including but not limited to, by forced or voluntary sale, merger,
consolidation, receivership, or other means without the prior consent of the
city, and then only under such conditions as the city may establish; however,
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (B)   Ownership or control.



      (1)   The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any
proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of
control of the grantee.  The word CONTROL as used herein is not limited to
major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised.  A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or transfer by any person or group of
persons of 10% of the voting shares of the grantee.  Every change, transfer,
or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to
cancellation unless and until the grantor shall have consented thereto, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.  For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control,
the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling
party, and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry.



      (2)   In seeking the city's consent to any change in ownership
or control, the grantee shall have the following responsibility:



         (a)   To show to the satisfaction of the city whether
the proposed purchaser, transferee, or assignee (hereafter referred to as the
"proposed transferee"), which in the case of a corporation, shall include all
officers, directors, employees and all persons having a legal or equitable
interest in 5% or more of its voting stock, or any of the proposed
transferee's principals:



            1.   Has ever been convicted of, or held liable
for, acts involving moral turpitude including, but not limited to any
violation of federal, state or local law, or is presently under an indictment
or investigation complaint charging such acts; or



            2.   Has ever had a judgment in an action for
fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against it, her, him, or them by
any court of competent jurisdiction.



         (b)   To establish, to the satisfaction of the city, the
financial solvency of the proposed transferee by submitting all current
financial data for the proposed transferee which the grantee was required to
submit in its franchise application; and such other data as the city may
request.  Financial statements shall be audited and certified by an
independent certified public accountant.



         (c)   To establish to the satisfaction of the city that
the financial and technical capability of the proposed transferee is such as
to enable it to maintain and operate the system for the remaining term of the
franchise under the existing franchise terms.



   (C)   The grantor agrees that any financial institution having a
pledge of the franchise or its assets for the advancement of money for the
construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify
the city that it or its designee satisfactory to the city will take control
and operate the system, in the event of a grantee default in its financial
obligations.  Further, the financial institution shall also submit a plan
for such operation that will insure continued service and compliance with all
franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises
control over the system.  The financial institution shall not exercise
control over the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by
the city in its discretion and during this period of time it shall have the
right to petition the city to transfer franchise to another grantee.  If the
city finds that the transfer, after considering the legal, financial,
character, technical and other public interest qualities of the applicant, is
satisfactory, the city will transfer and assign the rights and obligations of
the franchise as in the public interest.  The consent of the city to the
transfer shall not be unreasonably withheld.



   (D)   Waiver.  The consent or approval of the city to any transfer
of the grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the
city in and to the use of streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be
expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of the franchise.



   (E)   Prohibition on early transfer.  In the absence of
extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or
assignment of the franchise prior to substantial completion of construction
of the proposed system.



   (F)   Acceptance.  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or
control be approved without the successor in interest accepting, in writing,
the franchise.



('83 Code, § 5.24.110)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.12  RIGHTS RESERVED TO CITY.



   (A)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter, or any franchise issued
pursuant hereto, shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any
way, to any extent, the right of the city to acquire any property of the
grantee, either by direct purchase or through the exercise of its right of
eminent domain.  The franchise itself and all of the rights or privileges
granted by the franchise, shall have no value assigned to it in the event of
the acquisition of the system by an entity having the power of eminent domain.



      (2)   In the event of acquisition by the city of a system, or
a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the city, or
with a representative appointed by the city, to operate its system for a
temporary period in order to maintain continuity of service to all
subscribers.



   (B)   There is reserved to the city every right and power which is
required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the city, and
each grantee by its acceptance of a franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and
to comply with any action or requirement of the city in its exercise of such
rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, provided
that such requirements are not inconsistent with the terms of this chapter
and its franchise.



   (C)   The granting of a franchise hereunder shall not constitute a
waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city.



('83 Code, § 5.24.120)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.13  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Council may at any time adopt rules and regulations implementing
the provisions of this chapter, and may amend, modify, delete, or otherwise
change any such rules and regulations previously adopted, in the following
manner:



   (A)   The Council shall pass a resolution of intention stating or
describing the rules and regulations to be adopted, amended, modified,
deleted, and fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and
where any persons having any interest therein or objection thereto may appear
before the Council and be heard.



   (B)   The resolution shall direct the City Clerk to publish the
resolution at least once within ten days of the passage thereof in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city, and to mail a copy of the
resolution to any grantee or applicant for a franchise, not more than 30 days
nor less than 15 days prior to the time fixed for hearing thereon.  The
Council may order each grantee to make public service announcements regarding
the time, place and subject matter of the hearings.



   (C)   At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment
thereof, the Council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such comments as may
be presented.  Thereafter, the Council, by resolution, may adopt, amend,
modify or delete such rules and regulations.  The determination by the
Council shall be final and conclusive.



   (D)   Any rule or regulation as adopted, amended, modified, deleted
or otherwise changed by the Council shall become effective upon the tenth day
following the adoption of the Council resolution, unless a longer period
shall be expressly provided in the resolution.



('83 Code, § 5.24.130)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.14  REGULATION OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Regulatory authority.  The city shall exercise appropriate
regulatory authority under the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable law.  If the grantee by its cable television system also serves
other continuous or neighboring communities, the city may, at its sole
option, participate in a joint regulatory agency, with delegated
responsibility in the area of cable and related communications.



   (B)   Regulatory responsibility.  The city, acting alone or acting
jointly with other grantors, may exercise or delegate any or all of the
following regulatory responsibilities:



      (1)   Administering and enforcing the provisions of all
franchises.



      (2)   Coordination of the operation of PEG access facilities.



      (3)   Providing technical, programming and operational support
to public agency users, such as government departments, schools and health
care institutions.



      (4)   Establishing procedures and standards for use of
channels dedicated to public use sharing of public facilities, if provided
for in any franchise.



      (5)   Planning expansion and growth of public benefit cable
services.



      (6)   Analyzing the possibility of integrating cable
communications with other local, state or national telecommunications
networks.



      (7)   Formulating and recommending long-range
telecommunications policy.



('83 Code, § 5.24.140)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.15  RIGHT OF INTERVENTION.



   The city may intervene in any suit or proceeding in which a grantee is
a party, if the city reasonably determines that its interests are not
adequately represented.



('83 Code, § 5.24.150)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.16  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The initial service rates, installation charges, connection
charges, disconnection charges, reconnection charges, equipment rental
charges and any other type of system charges (hereafter collectively referred
to as "rates") for each system, shall be set forth in the franchise.  To the
extent local regulation of rates is permitted under federal and state law,
existing rates may be changed from time to time only by resolution of the
City Council pursuant to this section.  Failure to enforce this section by
the city shall not amount to a waiver of its provisions.



   (B)   Applications.  All rate increase requests submitted or
proposed by a grantee shall contain the following:



      (1)   The amount of adjustment in rates requested.



      (2)   Written financial material showing that the adjustment
in rates is justified by increased expenses incurred by the grantee in the
operation of its system.



      (3)   Copies of financial reports and income statements
prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards and
practices and certified by an independent certified public accountant (CPA)
for at least the preceding three years or from the date of acceptance of the
franchise whichever is the lesser (hereafter referred to as "term").  If the
grantee is a subsidiary of another firm, similar financial data shall be
furnished for the parent corporation.



      (4)   An itemization of capital assets, both tangible and
intangible, the accounting basis for depreciation and the depreciation
schedule.  If intangible assets such as goodwill are being amortized, the
amortization periods shall be stated.



      (5)   A detailed breakdown of operating, marketing and general
administrative costs by category for the term.



      (6)   The number of subscribers for service for the term.



      (7)   The number of cable plant-miles and dwelling units
passed by the cable plant for the term and preceding years.



      (8)   A statement as to any allocation of funds to parent
company overhead or operating costs, and the basis for the allocation.



   (C)   Council action.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a rate increase request, accompanied by
all of the supporting information above, it shall be the obligation of the
Council to act upon the request expeditiously.  Prior to taking action on
the request at least one noticed public hearing shall be held upon the
request.  The Council shall approve, partially approve, or disapprove, the
request based upon all of the following criteria.



         (a)   Performance of the grantee.



         (b)   Whether the grantee has adequately served the
subscribers and the city.



         (c)   Comparability of rates in surrounding communities.



         (d)   Whether the profits from services offered are
reasonable.



         (e)   Operating and construction expenses of the grantee.



         (f)   Completeness and accuracy of the information
submitted by grantee in support of its request for increases.



      (2)   The decision shall be in resolution form.  Any approved
increase in rates shall become effective not earlier than 30 days after the
date of approval by the Council.



   (D)   Time of applications.  Applications for rate increases shall
not be submitted more often than once in any 12-month period.



   (E)   Public hearing.  Before approving any rate increase, the City
Council shall conduct at least one public hearing thereon.  The hearing
shall be noticed as directed by the City Council, which may include, but not
be limited to, the use of public service announcements by grantee on its
system.



('83 Code, § 5.24.160)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.17  EFFECT OF ANNEXATIONS.



   (A)   In the event any territory shall be annexed to the city which
is not served by a system pursuant to franchise issued by a governmental
agency, the territory may become a part of the service area of a grantee if
so ordered by the Council after conducting a public hearing.



   (B)   In the event any portion of territory annexed to the city is
covered by an existing franchise or license granted by a governmental agency
other than the city and if the grantee of the franchise or license has not
commenced installation of a system within the territory, it shall be deemed
not to be served by a system, and all rights acquired by the grantee under
its franchise or license shall terminate by operation of law as of the date
on which the annexation to the city becomes effective.



   (C)   If the annexed area is served by a franchise or license issued
by another public entity, such services may continue, subject to the
provisions of the franchise or license and the provisions of this chapter
during the balance of the term of the franchise or license, provided all
franchise fees shall be paid to the city.



('83 Code, § 5.24.170)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.18  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Each grantee shall at all times employ reasonable care and
shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for
preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries,
or nuisances to the public.



   (B)   Each grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables,
fixtures, and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of
applicable laws and in such manner that they will not interfere with any
installations of the city or of a public utility serving the city.



   (C)   All structures and all lines, equipment, and buildings and
structures, used by grantee directly or indirectly in its system, wherever
situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe,
suitable substantial condition, and in good order and repair.



   (D)   Each grantee shall strictly adhere to the building and zoning
regulations set forth in Title XV of this code of ordinances.  Each grantee
shall locate and maintain its lines, cables, and other appurtenances on both
public and private property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable
interference with the use of said public or private property by any person.



('83 Code, § 5.24.180)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.19  RIGHT TO PRIVACY OF SUBSCRIBERS.



   (A)   Each grantee shall strictly observe and protect the rights of
privacy and of property of subscribers and users at all times.  Information
on individual subscribers, individual subscriber preferences of any kind,
viewing habits, political, social or economic philosophies, beliefs, creeds,
religions or names, addresses or telephone numbers shall not be revealed to
any person, governmental unit, private agency or company, unless upon the
authority of a court of law, by statute, or, upon prior written permission of
the subscriber.  The request for permission must be contained in a separate
document with a prominent statement that the subscriber is authorizing the
permission in full knowledge of its provision.  Such authorization shall not
in any event be required as a condition of receiving service.



   (B)   A grantee may release the number of its subscribers but only
as a total number and as a percentage of the potential subscribers throughout
its service area.  When indicating the number of subscribers viewing a
particular channel at a particular time, a grantee shall indicate only the
total number of subscribers viewing during the relevant time and the
percentage of all subscribers which they represent, but never the identity of
a particular subscriber.



   (C)   A grantee may maintain only the information, relating to
subscribers, as is necessary to bill subscribers for the use of any of its
services.



   (D)   Neither a grantee nor any other person shall initiate in any
form, the discovery of any information on or about a subscriber's premises
without prior valid authorization from the subscriber.  As used in this
division, VALID AUTHORIZATION means written approval from the subscriber
expressly valid for a period of time not to exceed one year.



   (E)   A subscriber may, at any time, revoke any authorization
previously made, by delivering to a grantee in writing, by mail or otherwise,
his/her decision to so revoke.  Any such revocation shall be effective upon
receipt by franchisee.



   (F)   No monitoring of any subscriber terminal shall take place
without specific prior written authorization by the user of the terminal in
question, provided, however, a grantee may conduct systemwide or individually
addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of verifying system integrity, security
monitoring, and/or other addressable premium service implementation or
verification which the subscriber has contracted for.  In no event shall
residential aural or visual monitoring of any kind take place without a clear
indication to the subscriber that such monitoring is taking place.



   (G)   A grantee may, without prior subscriber approval, monitor
those subscriber terminals which are connected to utility monitoring devices
which measure utility usage and which have been first approved by the City
Council.



   (H)   Prior to implementation of any interactive subscriber response
mechanism, a grantee must first demonstrate to the City Manager that such a
mechanism can operate effectively and provide absolute protection against any
invasion of privacy.



   (I)   A grantee shall not tabulate any test results, nor permit the
use of its system for such tabulation, which would reveal the commercial
product preferences or opinions of subscribers, members of their families or
their invitees, licensees or employees, without prior authorization of the
subscriber.



   (J)   Each compilation, publication, tabulation or other
dissemination of each piece of information made or permitted to be made in
violation of this section shall result in the imposition of liquidated
damages, pursuant to the grantee's franchise.



   (K)   The rights accorded subscribers pursuant to this section shall
be in addition to any other privacy right accorded subscribers pursuant to
federal or state law.



('83 Code, § 5.24.190)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.20  REMOVAL OF FACILITIES UPON REQUEST.



   Upon termination of service to any subscriber, each grantee shall
promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of the
subscriber upon subscriber's request.



('83 Code, § 5.24.200)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.21  CONSULTANT'S COSTS TO BE BORNE BY GRANTEE.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, when necessary to
aid in the analysis of matters relating to an evaluation of a grantee's
operation pursuant to a franchise, including, but not limited to, rate
increase requests, technical standards, construction supervision or market
surveys in the city, the city shall be entitled to employ the services of
qualified consultants.  All reasonable costs so incurred by the city shall
be paid by grantee regardless of the nature or outcome of any specific matter
under consideration.  The terms of this section shall not apply to any
research cost incurred by the city in connection with the right of the city
to purchase the system.



('83 Code, § 5.24.210)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.22  RECEIVERSHIP.



   (A)   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a
substantial part of a system, or upon the termination of any lease covering
all or a substantial part of the system, the grantee shall notify the City
Clerk of such fact, and the notification shall be treated as a notification
that a change in ownership of the grantee has taken place and the provisions
of this chapter governing such changes shall apply.



   (B)   The city shall have the right to revoke a franchise 120 days
after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the
business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy,
or other action or proceeding, unless the receivership or trusteeship shall
have been vacated prior to the expiration of the 120 days, or unless:



      (1)   Within 120 days after his election or appointment, the
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with the provisions of this
chapter and the franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and



      (2)   The receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, shall have
executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby the receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by
each and every provision of the franchise.



('83 Code, § 5.24.220)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.23  SERVICE TO SUBSCRIBERS.



   (A)   Right to services.



      (1)   It shall be the right of all subscribers who pay the
lawful charges therefor, to receive all available services to which they are
legally entitled pursuant hereto.



      (2)   The grantee shall make available to all subscribers,
upon demand, at a charge approved by the City Manager, parental control
devices to control the viewing of programming.



   (B)   Continuity of service.  In the event that a grantee elects to
rebuild, modify, or sell its system, or the city revokes or fails to renew
its franchise, a grantee shall do everything in its power to ensure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the
circumstances during the term of the franchise.



   (C)   Tenant rights.  The grantee shall be required to provide
service to tenants in individual dwelling units in a multiple housing
facility with all services offered to other dwelling units within its service
area, so long as the owner of the facility consents in writing to the
following:



      (1)   To grantee's providing of the service to units in the
facility.



      (2)   To reasonable conditions and time for installation,
maintenance, and inspection of the system on the facility premises.



      (3)   To reasonable conditions promulgated by grantee to
protect grantee's equipment and to encourage widespread use of the system.



   (D)   An owner shall not discriminate in rental charges, or
otherwise, between subscribers who receive cable service and those who do not.



('83 Code, §§ 5.24.230, 5.24.250I.)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty,
see § 10.99



§ 114.24  FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE OF INDEPENDENT CONSULTANT.



   (A)   Any person, partnership or corporation employed by the city
for the purposes of advising the city on matters relating to cable
television, or reviewing and evaluating, or assisting the city in reviewing
and evaluating, proposals for franchises, or regulating, or assisting the
city in regulating a cable television system, shall, as a condition of their
employment, file within ten days of the date of employment with the City
Clerk, a statement containing the following:



      (1)   A listing and description of any financial and/or
ownership interest held by the consultant in any cable television company,
any subsidiary or affiliate of any cable television company, any company
which is a supplier or customer of any cable television company, or in other
company which owns stock or has any interest in any of those types of
companies which are described in this section.  If the consultant is a
partnership, the financial and/or ownership interests in cable television
companies, affiliates, subsidiaries, suppliers, and customers of any partner
must be disclosed.  If the consultant is a corporation, the financial and/or
ownership interests in cable television companies, affiliates, subsidiaries,
suppliers, and customers of any shareholder, officer or directors must be
disclosed.



      (2)   A listing and description of any cable television
company, affiliate, subsidiary, supplier or customer which the consultant has
represented, on a compensated or noncompensated basis within the last 15
years.



   (B)   The statement filed pursuant to this section shall be a public
document open to inspection by any person.  Failure to file this statement,
or the inclusion of a material misrepresentation or omission within the
statement, shall constitute grounds for the city's termination of the
employment contract.



('83 Code, § 5.24.240)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.25  AUTHORIZATION TO SOLICIT, SELL, DISTRIBUTE AND CHARGE; TRAVERSING
OF CITY.



   (A)   A franchise granted to provide service within the city shall
authorize and permit the grantee to solicit, sell, distribute, and make a
charge to subscribers within the city for connection to the cable television
system of grantee, and shall also authorize and permit the grantee to
traverse any portion of the city in order to provide service outside the city.



   (B)   An easement, license or other permit granted to anyone, other
than a grantee, to traverse any portion of the city in order to provide
service outside the city shall not authorize nor permit the person to
solicit, sell, distribute, or make any charge to subscribers within the city,
nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the city to the
cable television service system of grantee.



('83 Code, § 5.24.250A.)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.26  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   Each grantee shall be prohibited from directly or indirectly doing any
of the following:



   (A)   Engaging in the business of selling at retail, leasing,
renting, repairing or servicing of television sets or radios.



   (B)   Imposing a fee or charge for repair to subscriber owned
receiving devices except for the connection of its service or for the
determination by grantee of the quality of the signal to the recipients
thereof.



   (C)   Soliciting, referring, or causing or permitting the
solicitation or referral of any subscriber by persons engaged in any business
herein prohibited to be engaged in by grantee.



('83 Code, § 5.24.250B.)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 114.27  JURISDICTION; STANDARDS AND RATES CONTRACTUAL.



   (A)   If the Federal Communications Commission or the Public
Commission of the State of California or any other Federal or State body or
agency shall now or hereafter lawfully exercise jurisdiction over the subject
matter of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, then to the extent
such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction
by the city the jurisdiction of the city shall be suspended during such time
as such other jurisdiction shall lawfully exist.  The preemption or
preclusion of the exercise of the city of any of its police power shall not
diminish, impair, alter or affect any benefit nor any obligation of the city
or a grantee under any franchise issued hereunder.



   (B)   Any and all minimum standards governing the operation of a
system and any and all maximum rates and charges specified herein or in any
franchise issued hereunder existing now and at any time in the future,
including such time as any paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude
that of the city to determine, establish, or fix any of the same, are each
and all declared by the city and by a grantee accepting any franchise
hereunder to be contractual in nature and to be for the benefit of the city.



('83 Code, § 5.24.250D.)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.28  WRITTEN NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBER.



   Before providing cable television service to any subscriber, a grantee
shall provide a written notice to the subscriber substantially as follows:



   Subscriber is hereby notified that in providing cable television
service (name of company) is making use of public rights-of-way within the
City of Baldwin Park and that the continued use of such rights-of-way is in
no way guaranteed.  In the event the continued use of such rights-of-way is
denied to (name of company) for any reason, (name of company) will take every
reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes.  By accepting
cable television service, subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor
undertake any action against the City of Baldwin Park, its officers, or its
employees, if the service to be provided hereunder is interrupted or
discontinued.



('83 Code, § 5.24.250H.)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.29  FILING WITH CITY CLERK.



   When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be
filed with the city shall be filed with the City Clerk.



('83 Code, § 5.24.250G.)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)



§ 114.30  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or
maintain within any public street or alley in the city, or within any other
public property of the city, or within any privately-owned area within the
city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated
as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the
city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or
radio signals, through a system, unless a valid franchise authorizing such
use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter or, unless specifically permitted, pursuant to
this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make or use any
unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically,
inductively or otherwise within this city for the purpose of enabling himself
or others to receive or use any television signals, radio signals, picture,
program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of a
grantee, to willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires, or
equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals,
pictures, programs or sound.



('83 Code, § 5.24.260)  (Ord. 912, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 115:  DANCES



Section



   115.01   Definitions



   115.02   Permit required



   115.03   Issuance; denial



   115.04   Police protection



   115.05   Dance regulations



§ 115.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CABARET DANCE.  Any dance held or engaged in at any place or premises
licensed by the state to sell, serve or dispense intoxicating liquor for
consumption in or at such place or premises.



   CLUB DANCE.  Any dance held by a dancing club.



   DANCE.  A gathering of persons in or upon the premises where social
dancing is participated in as the main purpose for such a gathering, or as an
incident to some other purpose.



   DANCE PERMIT.  A permit required pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for the holding of a public dance, public dancehall, or cabaret dance.



   DANCING CLUB.  Any club or association of persons conducting dances
periodically, for its members and bona fide guests.



   PRIVATE DANCE.  Any dance which is not advertised publicly, and to
which the general public is not invited.



   PUBLIC DANCE.  A dance conducted by any person, whether or not for
profit, to which members of the public are admitted or allowed to participate
in such dancing with or without charge.



   PUBLIC DANCEHALL.  A place or location where a public dance is held or
conducted.



   SCHOOL DANCE.  A dance conducted as a part of the curriculum of any
public or parochial school, or any dance officially sanctioned by such
school, when conducted at school buildings or grounds, or other place when
supervised or sponsored by school officials.



   TEENAGE DANCE.  A dance sponsored by a service club, parents group, or
other similar organization open to members of the general public, who are
between the ages of 13 and 19 years of age to which no person over 19 years
of age or under 13 years of age is admitted as a participant.



('83 Code, § 5.28.010)



§ 115.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall permit, conduct or assist in conducting any
public dance, public dancehall, or cabaret dance within the city, without
first obtaining a permit therefor, in the manner prescribed in this chapter.



   (B)   Applications for such permits shall be filed with the City
Manager and shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, if a corporation
or partnership, the names and residence addresses of all officers, directors
or partners; if an unincorporated association, the names and addresses of all
principals.



      (2)   The location and description of facilities proposed to
be used.



      (3)   The date or dates, hours, estimated maximum attendance
at the proposed dance and the type of dance.  A filing and processing fee as
set by resolution of the City Council shall be required in all cases.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.28.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.03  ISSUANCE; DENIAL.



   (A)   Based upon his investigation, the City Manager, before
ordering the issuance of a dance permit, shall satisfy himself that the
public peace, safety, health and general welfare will not be endangered or
jeopardized by the issuance of the dance permit, and that the applicant
and/or its principals, are of good moral character.



   (B)   If the City Manager finds that the moral character of the
applicant and/or its principals is not good, or that the issuance of a dance
permit will endanger or jeopardize the public peace, safety, health, and
general welfare, the application shall be denied.



('83 Code, § 5.28.030)



§ 115.04  POLICE PROTECTION.



   (A)   Police protection shall be required at all public dances and
teenage dances, in accordance with the following schedule.



Number of Persons               Number of Police
in Attendance                   Officers Required



      0 -  50                  1



    50 - 100                  2



  100 - 200                  3



  200 - over                  3 plus 1 for each additional
100  persons



   (B)   When the services of public safety employees of the city are
to be utilized to comply with the above schedule, the fees there for shall be
paid to the Director of Administrative Services prior to the issuance of a
dance permit.  The fees shall be as set by resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   In lieu of city police officers, uniformed private patrol
personnel who are regularly employed by a private patrol, licensed to do
business in the city, may be utilized.



   (D)   The City Manager may, upon consideration of application for
such permits, require a greater number of police officers or the police
protection may be waived, if he finds that the protection is not required to
preserve the public peace, health and safety.



('83 Code, § 5.28.050)



§ 115.05  DANCE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Compliance.  The regulations set out in divisions (B) and (C)
shall be complied with by each permittee.



('83 Code, § 5.28.060)



   (B)   Cabaret dance permit.



      (1)   The dance floor area shall be plainly marked and
designated as a dancing area.  No dancing shall be permitted in the premises
except upon the dancing area thus marked and designated.



      (2)   During all hours during which dancing is permitted by
the permit issued under this chapter for the premises, no portion of the
dancing area shall be used for any purpose other than dancing and
entertainment.



      (3)   No premises at which cabaret dancing is conducted or
engaged in shall be used or operated as a private club between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any day.



('83 Code, § 5.28.070) (Ord. 811, passed -  -80)



   (C)   All dances for which permit required.



      (1)   No person, other than the permittee and his bona fide
employees acting in the course of their employment, shall possess any
intoxicating liquor at the dancehall, dancing club, club dance, cabaret dance
or any public dance unless the same has been lawfully sold, served or
dispensed thereat.



      (2)   No employee of any permittee conducting, or in charge
of, such dance, shall engage in dancing with any other person at his or her
place of employment.



      (3)   No permittee shall permit any person to enter into, to
be in or to remain in any place where such dance is being conducted, who is
intoxicated, boisterous, or disorderly.  No person shall conduct himself in
a boisterous or disorderly manner in or at any place where dancing is allowed
under this chapter.



      (4)   Each permittee shall:



         (a)   Maintain at all times within the room or place
provided for dancing a minimum amount of illumination which shall equal an
average of five footcandle at a distance of 30 inches from the floor of the
room or place;



         (b)   Maintain outside at all times within 20 feet of
every entrance, exit, loading area of the room or place provided for dancing
during the hours of operation a minimum amount of illumination which shall
equal an average of five footcandle at ground level; and



         (c)   Maintain outside at all times within 50 feet of
the building in which dancing is conducted during the hours of operation a
minimum amount of illumination which shall equal an average of three
footcandle at ground level.  In computing the average of three footcandle,
the five footcandle illumination required as set forth in division (2) above
may be included.



('83 Code, § 5.28.080)



   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 116:  ADVERTISING



Section




Handbills




   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Permit required



   116.03   Requirements for permit



   116.04   Consent to distribution



   116.05   Manner of distribution



HANDBILLS



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any handbill which is distributed for the
primary purpose of advertising for sale or lease, goods, wares, merchandise
or services or any other commercial activity.



   HANDBILL.  A printed (including all forms of reproduced writing) paper
or circular, which is circulated or distributed, other than by the United
States Postal Service, for the purpose of advertising for sale or lease,
goods, wares, merchandise or services, or soliciting order therefor or
drawing attention, or soliciting support or opposition, to any public issue
or political figure or party, partisan or nonpartisan.  HANDBILL includes
samples of goods, wares and merchandise.  HANDBILL does not include
newspapers.



   NEWSPAPER.  A periodical published primarily for the dissemination of
news and intelligence of a general character, which is printed and published
at regular intervals.



   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL.  Any handbill other than a commercial handbill.



   PERMIT.  A permit required pursuant to this subchapter for the
distribution of commercial handbills.



   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.  Any real property located within this city
which is, pursuant to Chapter 153, classified in any of the R Zones, or any
property which is, notwithstanding its zoning classification, utilized for
residential dwelling purposes.



('83 Code, § 5.32.010)



§ 116.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be
circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill in or upon any residential
property within this city without first obtaining a permit therefor in the
manner prescribed in this subchapter.  Nor shall any person distribute or
circulate or cause to be circulated or distributed any commercial handbill in
or upon any residential property in the city, except in compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.32.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.03  REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT.



   The City Manager shall not accept an application for a handbill
distribution permit from any person unless the following requirements are met:



   (A)   That a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the
City Council has been paid.



   (B)   That a valid business license for the business of handbill
distribution, in the name of such applicant, is in effect, or the fee has
been paid contemporaneously with the filing of the permit application;
provided, that no filing and processing fee shall be required for a handbill
distribution permit, if the distributing of handbills is limited to
advertising a business, which has a valid business license, issued by the
city.



('83 Code, § 5.32.030)



§ 116.04  CONSENT TO DISTRIBUTION.



   Notwithstanding the issuance of a permit under this subchapter, no
person shall circulate, distribute or cause to be circulated or distributed,
any commercial handbill on any residential property within the city which has
conspicuously posted, thereat or thereon, a sign or other visible notice,
which prohibits solicitation or the delivery of handbills in or upon such
premises.



('83 Code, § 5.32.040)



§ 116.05  MANNER OF DISTRIBUTION.



   Each commercial handbill distributed within the city, pursuant to this
subchapter, shall bear, conspicuously thereon, the name, address and city
permit number of the distributor.



('83 Code, § 5.32.050)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 117:  RESERVED



[Reserved for future legislation]



CHAPTER 118:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Operator’s permit required



   118.03   Exceptions



   118.04   Operator’s permit: applications



   118.05   Operators’ and managers’ examination required



   118.06   Operator’s permit: issuance or denial



   118.07   Operating requirements: general conditions



   118.08   Operating requirements: facilities



   118.09   Operating requirements: operations



   118.10   Inspections



   118.11   Operator’s permit: non-assignablity



   118.12   Change in ownership of business



   118.13   Change in location or name



   118.14   Applicability to existing massage establishments



   118.15   Massage practitioners: permit required



   118.16   Massage practitioners: permit application



   118.17   Massage practitioners: written examination required



   118.18   Massage practitioners: issuance and denial



   118.19   Massage practioners: general conditions



   118.20   Massage practitioners:  non- assignablity



   118.21   Massage practitioner: additional or change in locations



   118.22   Applicability to existing massage practitioners



   118.23   Out-call massage permit



   118.24   Out-call massage permit application



   118.25   Out-call massage permit: issuance and denial



   118.26   Out-call massage records required



   118.27   Out-call massage permit: non- assignability



   118.28   Permit: term and renewal



   118.29   Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal



   118.30   Notice



   118.31   Appeal



   118.32   New application after denial or revocation of permit



   118.33   Surrender of permit



   118.34   Fees



   118.35   Violation and penalty



§ 118.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ADULT-ORIENTED MERCHANDISE.  Any sexually-oriented implements,
paraphernalia, or novelty items, such as, but not limited to, condoms,
dildos, sexually-oriented vibrators, sexually-oriented lubricants, which are
designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs.



   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the City of Baldwin Park or
his or her designee.



   CITY. The City of Baldwin Park.



   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Baldwin Park.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER.  The Chief Executive Officer of the City of
Baldwin Park.



   CONVICTION or CONVICTED. A guilty plea, guilty verdict, or a conviction
following a plea of nolo contendere.



   CUSTOMER AREA. Areas open to customers of the establishment or the
general public.



   EMPLOYEE.  Any and all persons, other than a massage practitioner,
operator or manager, who renders any service, with or without compensation,
for the owner, operator, manager or agent of either an owner, operator or
manager of a massage establishment who and who has no physical contact with
customers or clients.  For purposes of this chapter the term EMPLOYEE shall
include independent contractors.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The Health Department of the County of Los Angeles.



   LOBBY.  One room or designated area, adjacent to the public entry,
which is used for an entry and/or waiting room for customers or other persons
authorized to enter the premises.



   MANAGER.  The person(s) designated by the operator of the massage
establishment to act as the representative and agent of the operator in
managing day-to-day operations with corresponding liabilities and
responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to,
evidence that the individual has the power to direct or hire and dismiss
employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules, or purchase
supplies. A manager may also be an owner. A MANAGER shall provide all of the
information required for and meet the standards and qualifications set forth
in §§ 118.04 and 118.05 to qualify as a manager.



   MASSAGE.  Any method of treating the external parts of the human body
for remedial, health, hygienic, relaxation or any other reason or purpose,
whether by means of pressure on, friction against or stroking, kneading,
tapping, pounding, vibrating, rubbing or any other manner of touching
external parts of the human body with the hands, or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without
supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil,
powder, cream, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in this
type of business or trade.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.  Any enterprise or establishment having a fixed
place of business conducted within the City of Baldwin Park, where any
person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of
individuals, engages in, conducts, carries on or permits to be conducted or
carried on, for money or any other consideration, the administration to
another person of a massage, bath or health treatment involving massages or
baths  including, but not limited to, fomentation, electric or magnetic
treatments, alcohol rubs, or any other type of system for treatment or
manipulation of the human body with or without any character of bath, such as
Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge,
mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath.



   MASSAGE ROOM. A cubicle, booth, room or enclosed or semi-enclosed area
within a massage establishment where massage services are performed on
patrons.



   MASSAGE PRACTITIONER.  Any person who administers to another person a
massage as defined herein, within a massage establishment for any form of
consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever. The terms
"massage therapist," "massage technician," "massage trainee", "masseur" or
"masseuse" are included within this definition for purposes of this chapter.



   OPERATOR.  All persons who have an ownership interest in the massage
establishment. A operator may also be a manager or an owner. A proposed
operator shall provide all of the information required for and meet all of
the standards and qualifications set forth in §§ 118.04 and 118.05 to
qualify as an operator.



   OPERATOR'S PERMIT.  The permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter required to operate and/or manage a massage establishment.



   OUT-CALL MASSAGE.  A massage performed or administered for money or
other consideration by a licensed massage practitioner at a location other
than a licensed massage establishment.



   OWNER. The individual(s) whose name appears on the city business
license and includes any and all persons who have any ownership interest in a
massage establishment. An OWNER may also be a operator or manager.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, individual, or corporation, partnership,
association or other group or combination of individuals acting as an entity.



   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the City of Baldwin Park.



   QUALIFIED MASSAGE ASSOCIATION. Any association which meets all of the
following criteria:



      (1)   Has established, as a minimum education requirement for
membership, the completion of at least 500 hours of training from a
recognized school of massage, and has a written and practical testing of
equivalency administered and overseen by its admissions committee or by a
national certified program endorsed by the National Commission for Certifying
Agencies (NCCA), which will be considered in lieu of the minimum education
requirement of 500 hours;



      (2)   Offers and/or requires participation and completion by
members of a minimum of eight hours of specified continuing education per
year as a condition of continuing membership;



      (3)   Is open to members of the general public, meeting the
requirements for membership on a national basis;



      (4)   Has minimum educational requirements or equivalents,
including at least 500 classroom hours or its equivalent in anatomy,
physiology, hygiene, sanitation, massage therapy and practice, ethics of
massage practice, first aid and CPR. Equivalency must be verified by written
and practical testing by the association;



      (5)   The association has established rules of ethics and has
enforcement procedures for the suspension or revocation of membership for
violation of such rules.



   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL OF MASSAGE.  Any school or institution of learning
which teaches, through state-certified instructors, the theory, ethics,
practice, profession, or work of massage, which school or institution
complies with the California Education Code, including but not limited to
§§ 94900 or 94905, and which requires a resident course of study before the
student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation.
Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring personal attendance
shall not be deemed a RECOGNIZED SCHOOL.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.02  OPERATOR’S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on,
or to permit the engagement in, conduct of or carrying on the business or
operation of a massage establishment within the city without first obtaining
an operator's permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and
complying with all other applicable provisions of this code, including, but
not limited to, securing the necessary business license and complying with
all applicable land use regulations.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.03  EXCEPTIONS.



   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals while engaged in performing the duties of their respective
professions:



   (A)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, acupuncturists, physical
therapists or osteopaths duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the state.



   (B)   A registered or licensed vocational nurse working on the
premises of, and under the direct supervision of, a state-licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath. Practical nurses or other persons that do
not meet the requisite qualifications for a massage practitioner, or any
other person not otherwise licensed by the state, whether or not employed by
physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, or physical
therapists, may not provide massage services or act as a massage practitioner.



   (C)   Hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care
facilities duly licensed by the State of California.



   (D)   Barbers, beauticians, aestheticians and manicurists who are
duly licensed by the State of California while engaging in the practice
within the scope of their respective licenses, except that this exemption
applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp of the
customer or client of said barber or beautician or in the case of a licensed
manicurist, the massaging of the forearm, hands, calfs and/or feet.



   (E)   Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or
universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their
employment.



   (F)   Trainers of amateur, semi-professional or professional
athletes or athletic teams.



   (G)   Any person who holds a current and valid certificate issued
pursuant to Chapter 10.5 of Division 2 of the Cal. Business and Professions
Code (commencing with § 4600) (the “State Regulations for Massage
Therapists”) and any business that employs or uses only persons who hold a
current and valid certificate issued pursuant to the State Regulations for
Massage Therapists as massage practitioners; except for the foregoing, all
other provisions not in conflict with the State Regulations for Massage
Therapists shall remain in full force and effect and are applicable to the
persons and businesses described in this chapter.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04; Am. Ord. 1330, passed 1-20-10)



§ 118.04  OPERATOR’S PERMIT: APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate and/or
manage a massage establishment shall submit a written application under
penalty of perjury on the required form to the Chief of Police who shall
conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a
non-refundable filing fee established by separate resolution of the City
Council to help defray the cost of the investigation required by this chapter.



   (B)   The application shall be completed and signed by the owner of
the proposed massage establishment if a sole proprietorship or if the
applicant is a corporation or partnership, it shall designate one of its
officers or general partners as its authorized representative. The authorized
representative shall complete and sign all application forms required for an
individual applicant under this chapter.



   (C)   The application and fee required pursuant to this section
shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any
other chapter of this Code or ordinance hereafter adopted. Only one
application fee shall be charged regardless of the number of owners or
operators designated in the application.



   (D)   The application for a permit does not authorize the operation
or management of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has
been properly granted, nor does the possession of a valid massage
establishment permit authorize the possessor to perform work for which a
massage practitioner permit is required.



   (E)   The application for a massage establishment permit shall
contain or be accompanied by the following information:



      (1)   The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether by
individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise.



         (a)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the
corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of
incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation
and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers,
directors and each stockholder holding more than 5%of the stock of that
corporation.



         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the application
shall set forth the name and residence addresses of each of the partners,
including limited partners.



         (c)   If the applicant is a limited partnership, it
shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the
Secretary of State. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the
provisions of this division pertaining to corporations shall apply.



      (2)   The true, full, and precise name under which the massage
establishment is to be conducted.



      (3)   The present or proposed address where the massage
establishment is to be conducted and all telephone numbers for the massage
establishment.



      (4)   A complete current list of the names and residence
addresses of all massage practitioners, aides, trainees and other employees
who are or will be employed in the massage establishment if known. If not
known at the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall
provide the required information no later than ten calendar days prior to
opening for business.



      (5)   The name and residence addresses of the proposed
operator or manager who will be principally in charge of the operation of the
massage establishment.



      (6)   A description of any other business operated on the same
premises as the proposed massage establishment, or within the city or the
state that is owned or operated by the owner or operator.



      (7)   The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real
property upon or in which the proposed business is to be conducted. In the
event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application
must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized affidavit from the
owner of the property acknowledging that a massage establishment will be
located on his or her property.



      (8)   The complete business, occupation and employment history
for eight years preceding the date of application, including, but not limited
to, a massage establishment or similar type of business history and
experience of the applicant.



      (9)   The complete massage permit history; whether such person
has ever had any similar type of permit or license issued by any agency,
board, city, county, territory or state; the date of issuance of such a
permit or license, whether the permit or license has been or was ever denied,
revoked or suspended; if a vocational or professional license or permit has
been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if the applicant has ever been
required to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal
charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked and
the reason therefor.



      (10)   All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo
contendere, within the last ten years including those convictions dismissed
or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor
traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason
therefor.



      (11)   A complete set of fingerprints taken by the Police
Department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any
fingerprinting fee.



      (12)   Four portrait photographs at least two inches by two
inches in size taken within the last month.



      (13)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to
seek verification of the information contained in the application.



      (14)   Such other identification and information as the Chief
of Police may reasonably require in order to discover the truth of the
matters herein specified and as required to be set forth in the application.



      (15)   A statement in writing and dated by the person
providing the information that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury
that all information contained in the application is true and correct.



      (16)   A certificate of compliance from any affected
department or agency, including, but not limited to, the city’s Development
Services Department, building division and the Los Angeles County Health
Department, must be submitted prior to the application’s final approval.
Any required inspection fees shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant. If the Chief of Police does not receive the certificates of
compliance within 90 calendar days of the date of filing of the application,
said application shall be deemed void. If any land use permit or other
entitlement for the use of the property as a massage establishment is
required, such permit or use entitlement shall be obtained by the applicant
prior to the massage establishment permit becoming effective.



   (F)   Every owner, operator and manager shall also provide the
following personal information:



      (1)   The full, true name and all aliases used;



      (2)   Date and place of birth, California driver's license,
California identification card, social security card and resident alien card,
if applicable.



      (3)   The current residence address and residence telephone
number and all previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight years
immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of
residence for each address;



      (4)   Acceptable written proof that the owner and/or operator
is at least 18 years of age;



      (5)   Height, weight, gender and color of hair and eyes;



   (G)   If, during the term of a permit, the permittee has any change
in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the
permittee shall notify the Police Department in writing of any such change
within ten business days thereafter.



   (H)   If an owner, operator or manager also desires to act as a
massage practitioner or out-call massage practitioner, he or she shall also
satisfy the requirements for the respective permit set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.05  OPERATORS’ AND MANAGERS’ EXAMINATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every operator and manager shall be required to take and pass
a written test dealing with the requirements of this chapter to ensure a
complete understanding of the owner’s, operator’s, manager’s and
employee’s respective duties prior to issuance of an operator's permit or
before engaging in work at a massage establishment.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall establish standards and procedures
governing administrating, grading and noticing of the examination required by
this section.



   (C)   The examination shall consist solely of a written test
regarding the rules and regulations for massage establishments and massage
practitioners and employees as set forth in this chapter.



   (D)   The examination shall be prepared, conducted and graded by the
city, or in its sole discretion, by a competent instructor certified by the
Council for Private Post-secondary and Vocational Education pursuant to
Education Code § 94311.1.



   (E)   A score of 70% or better is required on each section of the
written test. An applicant who fails to pass any section of the examination
shall not be eligible to take another examination until 60 calendar days
after the previous examination. An applicant who fails to pass upon a second
attempt, shall not again be eligible until six months thereafter. Any
applicant who has failed to pass the examination after their third attempt
shall not be eligible to reapply and take the examination for a period of two
years thereafter. If an applicant has three or more sustained municipal code
violations during any permit period, the applicant, upon renewal, must retake
and pass the written examination designated in this chapter.



   (F)   The examination will be in the English language. In the event
the applicant requires that any section of the examination be given in
another language, the applicant shall pay any additional fees or costs for a
court-certified and Baldwin Park Police Department-approved interpreter to
interpret the examination.  Proof of valid court certification must be
provided to the Chief of Police prior to the administration of any such
non-English language examination.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.06  OPERATOR’S PERMIT: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete written application for an
operator's permit, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to
ascertain whether a permit should be issued as requested. The Chief of Police
shall, within 60 calendar days of receipt of an application, approve,
conditionally approve or deny the application. The 60-day period may be
extended for up to 30 additional calendar days, if necessary, to complete the
investigation. The Chief of Police shall issue such permit as requested,
unless he or she makes any of the following findings:



      (1)   The applicant has not passed the written examination as
required by this chapter.



      (2)   The applicant, or any of the officers or directors of
the corporation, a partner or any person directly engaged or employed in the
massage establishment, has within eight years preceding the date of the
application:



         (a)   Been convicted of a violation of any provision of
law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions
of Penal Code § 290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code §§
266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code
§§ 647, 653.22, or convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to
commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving
dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude or when the prosecution
accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of
California Penal Code §§ 415, 602 or any lesser included or related
offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously
listed crimes, or any crime committed while engaged in the ownership of a
massage establishment or the practice of massage.



         (b)   Been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety
Code §11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or
possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code §§
11054 through 11058.



         (c)   Been convicted of any offense in any other state
that is the equivalent of any of the abovementioned offenses.



         (d)   Been subjected to a permanent injunction against
the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to §§ 11225 through
11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provisions of law in a
jurisdiction outside the State of California.



         (e)   Committed an act in another jurisdiction which, if
committed in this state, would have been a violation of law and, which, if
done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial,
suspension or revocation of the permit.



         (f)   Has had a massage operator or massage practitioner
permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for
cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing authority, or
has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending criminal
charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or revoked.



         (g)   Has engaged in conduct that would constitute
grounds for suspension or revocation under § 118.29 of this chapter.



      (3)   The owner and/or operator has made a false, misleading
or fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit
application process.



      (4)   The application does not contain all of the information
required by § 118.04.



      (5)   The owner and/or operator is not at least 18 years of
age.



      (6)   The massage establishment as proposed does not comply
with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire
and safety requirements and standards.



      (7)   The required fee(s) has not been paid and/or all other
requirements of this chapter have not been satisfied in the time specified.



   (B)   If the application is denied for failure to comply with
division (A)(2) or (3) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a
period of six months from the date the application was denied.



   (C)   If the Chief of Police, upon completion of the investigation,
determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth
in this chapter, the Chief of Police shall deny said application by dated
written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal
as set forth in § 118.31.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.07  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS: GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   All owners and operators shall comply with the following general
conditions and any other conditions specified by the Chief of Police:



   (A)   Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed
medical practitioner, no massage practitioner or employee shall massage the
genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any
female patron, nor shall any operator or manager of a massage establishment
allow or permit such a massage to the above specified areas. A massage shall
not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of a massage
practitioner, operator, manager or other employee of a massage establishment
unless the patron's genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and, if a female patron,
the female patron's breasts, are fully covered by a non-transparent covering.



   (B)   No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall use
any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or
her permit.



   (C)   All massage establishments required to be licensed under this
chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times the massage
establishment is open. The operator of each massage establishment shall file
a statement with the Chief of Police designating the person or persons with
power to act as a manager. The operator and/or on duty manager shall post, on
a daily basis, the name and photograph (a minimum size of 4 inches x 6 inches
of each on-duty manager and each on-duty practitioner in a conspicuous public
place in the lobby of the massage establishment. The operator, or the manager
in the operator's absence, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with
this chapter.



   (D)   The operator's permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous
public place in the lobby of the massage establishment.



   (E)   The hours of operation must be posted in the front window and
clearly visible from the outside.



   (F)   No massage establishment required to be licensed under this
chapter shall open for business without having at least one massage
practitioner who holds a current valid massage practitioner's permit for that
specific massage establishment. There shall be at least one massage
practitioner who holds a current valid massage practitioner's permit on the
premises, and on duty, at all times when the establishment is open.



   (G)   The operator and/or manager shall ensure that the massage
practitioner permit for each on-duty massage practitioner is conspicuously
displayed in a public place in the lobby and that each massage practitioner
is wearing the identification required by § 118.19(B) at all times when
working in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided
to a city official upon demand.



   (H)   The operator and/or manager shall ensure that all employees
are provided with an identification card that states, at a minimum, the
employee's first name and title and/or position.



   (I)   An operator and/or manager shall be responsible for the
conduct of all massage practitioners and employees while they are on the
massage establishment premises. Any act or omission of any massage
practitioner, employee or independent contractor constituting a violation of
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the
operator or manager for purposes of determining whether the operator's
license shall be revoked, suspended, denied or renewed.



   (J)   No operator and/or manager shall employ any person as a
massage practitioner who does not have a valid massage practitioner permit
issued pursuant to this chapter. Every operator or manager shall report to
the Chief of Police any change of massage practitioner or employees, whether
by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on the form and in
the manner required by the Chief of Police. The report shall contain the name
of the massage practitioner or employee and the date of hire or termination.
The report shall be made within five calendar days of the date of hire or
termination. The operator or manager shall deliver notice of the termination
of any massage practitioner or employee no longer employed by the operator or
manager to the Chief of Police within five calendar days of termination.



   (K)   All persons, whether massage practitioner or employee,
employed in the massage establishment shall be fully clothed at all times.
Clothing shall be of a fully opaque, non-transparent material and shall
provide complete covering from at least the mid-thigh to at least three
inches below the collarbone. Massage practitioners shall wear fully buttoned
or otherwise fully fastened opaque smocks over street clothing while
performing massage services or shall wear employee uniforms that, at a
minimum, meet the street clothing specifications set forth in this section
and which are approved by the Chief of Police.



   (L)   The operator and/or manager shall maintain a register of all
massage practitioner and employees. The employee register shall be maintained
on the premises for a minimum period of two years following a massage
practitioner or employee's termination. The operator and/or manager shall
make the employee register immediately available for inspection upon demand
of a representative of the police department at all reasonable times. The
employee register shall include, but not be limited to the following
information:



      (1)   The name, nicknames and/or aliases used by an massage
practitioner or employee.



      (2)   The massage practitioner or employees home address and
relevant phone numbers (including, but not limited to home, cellular and
pager numbers).



      (3)   The massage practitioner or employee's age, date of
birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes.



      (4)   The massage practitioner or employee's social security
number.



      (5)   The date of employment and termination, if any.



      (6)   The duties of each massage practitioner or employee.



   (M)   The operator and/or manager shall ensure that all massage
practitioner's are wearing their police issued identification cards and that
all employees are wearing their employer issued identification cards at all
times when working in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be
provided to a city official upon demand. The identification card shall be
worn on outer clothing with the photo side facing out. If a massage
practitioner changes his or her business address, he or she shall, prior to
such change, obtain from the Chief of Police a new photo identification card
and advise the police department, in writing, of the new business address.



   (N)   No massage establishment shall operate as a school of massage,
or use the same facilities as that of a school of massage.



   (O)   At all times, the operator, manager, massage practitioner and
employees shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and any applicable
provisions of this code.



   (P)   Insurance. No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the
business of a massage establishment unless there is on file with the city
clerk, in full force and effect at all times, a policy of insurance issued by
an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that
the permittee is insured under a liability insurance policy providing minimum
coverage of $1,000,000 for injury or death to one person arising out of the
operation of any massage establishment and the administration of a massage.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.08  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS: FACILITIES.



   All owners, operators and managers shall comply with the following
operating requirement for facilities and any other conditions specified by
the Chief of Police:



   (A)   Structure. Massage establishments shall be carried on in a
structure that is located in a zoning district that permits such use. When a
massage establishment is newly constructed, three sets of plans shall be
submitted to the city and the county health care agency for approval and
shall be accompanied by the appropriate plan check fee.



   (B)   Signs.  Any signs shall be in conformance with the current
ordinances of the city. Each operator and/or manager shall post and maintain,
adjacent to the main entrance and the front of the business, a readable sign
identifying the premises as a massage establishment. A sign, nor the front of
the business, shall not be illuminated by strobe or flashing lights.



   (C)   Services list. Each operator and/or manager shall post and
maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services in the
lobby of the massage establishment in a conspicuous public place and in any
other location on the premises as the operator and/or manager deems
appropriate. No operator or manager shall permit, and no massage practitioner
shall offer or perform, any service other than those posted.



   (D)   Lighting. Minimum lighting for a massage establishment shall
be provided in accordance with Article 220 of the National Electric Code or
successor provision or provisions. White light illumination shall be
activated at all times while the patron is in a massage room. No strobe, or
flashing lights shall be used. No colored lights shall be used nor shall any
coverings be used which change the color of the primary light source.



   (E)   Ventilation.  The operator and/or manager shall provide in
each massage room, minimum ventilation in accordance with the Section 304.5
of the Uniform Building Code or successor provision or provisions.



   (F)   Toilet facilities.  A minimum of one toilet and one separate
wash basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which
basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all
times and shall be located within close proximity to the massage rooms. A
permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service
towel dispenser shall be provided at the restroom wash basin. Bar soaps shall
not be used. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room.



   (G)   Bathing, dressing and locker facilities.  If provided, there
shall be a minimum of one shower and one dressing room containing a separate
locker capable of being locked for patrons to be served at the massage
establishment. The shower facility shall be equipped with soap or detergent
and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close
proximity to the massage rooms. Bar soaps shall not be used.



   (H)   Separate rooms.  If male and female patrons are to be treated
simultaneously at the same massage establishment, separate massage rooms,
dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female patrons.
Each separate facility or room shall be clearly marked as such.



   (I)   Maintenance. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or
cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool
baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected with a
disinfectant approved by the county health department, as needed, but at
least once each day the premises are open. All facilities for the massage
establishment must be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and
sanitized at least on a daily basis when the business is in operation. All
walls, floors and ceilings of each restroom and shower area shall be
constructed with materials that are smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting
shall be installed in any of these specified areas.



   (J)   Massage tables. A massage table shall be provided in each
massage room and all massages shall be performed on the massage table. The
tables should have a minimum height of 18 inches. Two-inch thick foam pads
with a maximum width of four feet may be used on a massage table and must be
covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material
acceptable to the county health department. Beds, floor mattresses and
waterbeds shall not be permitted on the premises.



   (K)   Front door.  One front door that enters into the lobby and/or
other waiting room shall be provided for customer use. All customers and any
other persons other than massage practitioners or employees shall be required
to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.09  OPERATING REQUIREMENTS: OPERATIONS.



   All owners, operators and managers shall comply with the following
operating requirements and any other conditions specified by the Chief of
Police:



   (A)   Equipment.  Each operator and/or manager shall provide and
maintain on the premises adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing
instruments used in massage.



   (B)   Linen. Common use of towels or linen shall not be permitted.
Towels and linen shall be laundered or changed promptly after each use.
Separate enclosed cabinets shall be provided for the storage of clean and
soiled linen and shall be plainly marked "clean linen" and "soiled linen" and
shall have doors or covers.



   (C)   Living quarters prohibited. No person or persons shall be
allowed to reside, dwell, occupy or live inside the massage establishment at
any time. Living quarters, if any, shall be completely separate from the
massage establishment. No cooking or food preparation of any kind shall be
prepared for sale or sold in the establishment unless an appropriate food
vending permit is granted by the city and the County of Los Angeles and a
full service kitchen is installed. Such a kitchen, if any, shall be for the
sole use of employees, and shall be installed in an "employees only" area.
The full service kitchen shall have a minimum of a sink with hot and cold
running water, a refrigerator, a stove, and sufficient cabinets to store
cooking utensils.



   (D)   Alcoholic beverages/drugs.  No person shall enter, be in or
on, or remain in or on, any part of a massage establishment while in
possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of, any alcoholic
beverage or controlled substance. The operator and/or manager shall be
responsible to ensure that no such person shall enter or remain upon the
premises of the massage establishment. Service of alcoholic beverages shall
not be permitted.



   (E)   Lotions and oils. All lotions, oils, liniment, antiseptic,
powder, cream, ointment or other similar preparations commonly used in
massage establishments as supplementary aids for massage shall be maintained
in hygienic and properly labeled containers.



   (F)   Adult-oriented merchandise prohibited. The use or possession
of adult-oriented merchandise in or on any part of a massage establishment is
expressly prohibited.



   (G)   Recordings. No electrical, mechanical or artificial device
shall be used by the operator and/or manager, massage practitioner or any
employee of the massage establishment for audio and/or video recording or for
monitoring the performance of a massage, or the conversation or other sounds
in the massage rooms without the knowledge and written consent of the patron.



   (H)   Coverings.  Each massage establishment shall provide to all
patrons clean, sanitary and opaque coverings of a minimum size of 30 inches x
60 inches, capable of covering the patrons' specified anatomical areas,
including, but not limited to, the genital area, anus and female breasts. No
common use of such coverings shall be permitted and re-use is specifically
prohibited unless adequately cleaned prior to its re- use.



   (I)   Records.  Every operator and/or manager shall keep a record
of the dates and hours of each treatment or service, the name and address of
the patron, the name of practitioner administering such service and a
description of the treatment or service rendered. A short medical history
form shall be completed by the operator and/or manager to determine if the
patron has any communicable diseases, areas of pain, high blood pressure or
any physical condition that may be adversely affected by massage. These
records shall be prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and
shall be retained for a period of 24 months after such treatment or service.
These records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials
charged with enforcement of this chapter or emergency personnel for emergency
purposes and for no other purpose. The police department may periodically
inspect the records to ensure compliance with this section. The information
furnished or secured as a result of any such records shall be used only to
ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter, or any other applicable
state or federal laws and shall remain confidential. Any unauthorized
disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city
shall constitute a misdemeanor.



   (J)   Hours of operation. Massage operations shall be carried on or
conducted, and the premises shall be open, only between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. The operator and/or manager must advise the city, in
writing, at the time of submission of the application for a massage
establishment permit of the hours of operation within the times set forth
above. The operator and/or manager shall notify the city, in writing, at
least 30 calendar days prior to the date of the effective change, of any
changes in the hours of operation. No person shall operate a massage
establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment or
administer a massage pursuant to an off premises massage permit between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. A massage begun any time before 10:00 p.m.
must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. All customers, patrons and visitors
shall be excluded from the massage establishment during these hours and be
advised of these hours. The hours of operation must be displayed in a
conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in
the front window clearly visible from the outside.



   (K)   Advertising.  No massage establishment shall place, publish
or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising
matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably
suggest to prospective customers or clients that any service is available
other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the
premises as required by this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment or
out-call massage service employ language in the text of any advertising that
would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is
available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on
the premises as required by this chapter.



   (L)   Handicapped areas.  All massage establishments must comply
with all state and federal laws and regulations for handicapped customers.



   (M)   Compliance. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions
of this Code shall be provided.



   (N)   Doors. All exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors
used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment)
shall remain unlocked during business hours. All interior doors, including,
but not limited to, all doors leading to customer areas, the front reception,
hallway or front exterior doors, shall not have any locking mechanisms. A
door leading from the lobby area to customer areas, if any, shall not have
any locking mechanism or be capable of being locked or blocked to prevent
entry in any manner.



   (O)   Massage and dressing room doors. All massage and dressing
rooms shall be screened off by curtains, draw drapes, or doors that are
mounted in compliance with the building code. No massage may be given within
any massage room within a massage establishment that is fitted with a door
capable of being locked.



   (P)   Access. No person(s) other than the owner, operator,
operator's employees, holders of valid massage practitioner permits issued
pursuant to this chapter and customers will be allowed beyond the front
lobby, which lobby shall be located directly inside the front door entrance,
during the hours of operation. Any other person(s) found beyond the first
interior door leading to the inside of the business including, but not
limited to, hallways, massage rooms, reception/business offices or lounge
area will be in violation of this section. Entry doors to any room shall not
be obstructed by any means.



   (Q)   Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or
exclude patrons on the basis of the race, sex, religion, age or handicap.



   (R)   Notices. The Chief of Police shall require that the following
notice be posted in the event that any massage practitioner or employee of
the massage establishment or any person who has been aided and abetted by an
employee of the massage establishment has been found, after full hearing by
administrative proceeding or by a state court, to have violated any of the
offenses that would be grounds for denial under §§ 118.06 or 118.18:



NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS



THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE
PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE BALDWIN PARK POLICE DEPARTMENT
WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE.



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall provide the language for said
notice set forth above. Every owner, operator and/or manager required to post
such notice shall be required to pay for the cost of any and all notices
required by this section.



      (2)   The notice shall be conspicuously posted in a location
within the massage establishment that is easily visible to any person
entering the premises and in each massage room. The notices shall be posted
for 12 months following the violation of any of the offenses set forth above.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.10  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Police Chief and the County Health Department, or their
authorized representatives, shall have the right to enter the massage
establishment at any time during business hours for the purpose of making
reasonable unscheduled inspections to observe and enforce compliance with
applicable regulations, laws, and provisions of this chapter. During an
inspection, the police department may also verify the identity of all
employees.



   (B)   The city's building and safety, fire department, police
department and the county health department may, from time to time, make an
inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that
the provisions of this chapter, state law or other applicable laws or
regulations are met. Criminal investigations may be conducted as directed by
the Chief of Police. The police department may inspect the occupied massage
rooms for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are
met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in § 118.09(R) that
would require the posting of the "Notice to All Patrons".



   (C)   Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted
during business hours.



   (D)   An operator, manager, their agents, servants, massage
practitioner or employee commits a punishable offense if he or she refuses to
permit, delays or interferes with a lawful inspection of the premises by a
representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open
for business.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.11  OPERATOR’S PERMIT: NON- ASSIGNABILITY.



   No operator's permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a
permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such
sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment,
shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such
permit shall thereafter be null and void except as hereinafter set forth.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.12  CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   If the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the
partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by
purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners
without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such
case, the permit, upon notification to the Chief of Police, shall be placed
in the name of the surviving partners. One or more proposed partners in a
partnership granted a permit hereunder may make application to the Chief of
Police, together with the fee established by the City Council, to amend the
original application providing all information as required for partners in
the first instance and, upon approval thereof, the transfer of the interests
of one or more partners to the proposed partner or partners may occur.



   (B)   If the permit is issued to a corporation, stock may be sold,
transferred, issued, or assigned to stockholders who have been named on the
application. If any stock is sold, transferred, issued, or assigned to a
person not listed on the application as a stockholder, the permit shall be
deemed terminated and void; provided, however, the proposed transferee may
submit to the Chief of Police, together with a fee established by the City
Council, an application to amend the original application providing all
information as required for stockholders in the first instance, and, upon
approval thereof, the transfer may then occur.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.13  CHANGE IN LOCATION OR NAME.



   (A)   Every operator and/or manager shall report immediately to the
police department any and all changes of name or designation under which the
business is to be conducted, and all changes of address or telephone numbers
of the massage establishment. The Chief of Police may approve a change of
location of the massage establishment provided there is compliance with all
applicable regulations of the city.



   (B)   No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or
carry on the business of a massage establishment under any name other than
the person's name and the name of the massage establishment specified in the
permit.



   (C)   Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or
other place of business of a massage establishment shall require
inspection(s) and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this
chapter and all other city ordinances including, but not limited to, zoning
ordinances and building, safety and occupancy standards.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.14  APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.



   (A)   Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, all permits for a massage establishment are to be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all
persons and businesses described herein whether the described activities were
established before or after the effective date of this chapter, except that
massage establishments legally in business prior to the effective date hereof
shall have six months or until the expiration of their current business
license, whichever is greater, to comply with the terms hereof.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.15  MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS: PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall perform or administer a massage, or advertise to
provide massage services in the city, unless such person has in effect a
valid massage practitioner permit issued pursuant to § 118.18 of this
chapter. Each massage practitioner permit holder shall be issued a photo
identification badge and a massage practitioner permit. The permit holder
shall wear the identification badge on his or her person at all times when
working in the massage establishment and shall ensure that the massage
practitioner permit is displayed in a conspicuous place in the lobby during
business hours. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the Chief
of Police any identification badge and massage practitioner permit issued by
the city upon the suspension, revocation, or expiration of such permit.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.16  MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS: PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a massage practitioner permit
shall file a written application under penalty of perjury on the required
form with the Chief of Police who shall conduct an investigation. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by
separate resolution of the City Council to help defray the cost of the
investigation required by this chapter.



   (B)   The application and fee required pursuant to this section
shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any
other chapter of this Code or ordinance hereafter adopted.



   (C)   The application for a massage practitioner permit shall
contain or be accompanied by the following information:



      (1)   A statement of the exact location at which the applicant
will be working as a massage practitioner, including the full street address
and all telephone numbers associated with said location. In the event the
applicant seeks to conduct out-call massage services not listed in the
original application, an additional application and fee must be submitted.



      (2)   The applicant's complete business, occupation and
employment history for eight years preceding the date of application,
including, but not limited to, a massage practitioner license or similar type
of business history and experience of the applicant;



      (3)   The complete massage practitioner permit history of the
applicant; whether such person has ever had any similar type of permit or
license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state; the
date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license
has been or was ever denied, revoked or suspended; if a vocational or
professional license or permit has been or was ever denied, revoked or
suspended; if the applicant has ever surrendered a permit or license as a
result of pending criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being
suspended or revoked and the reason therefore;



      (4)   All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo
contendere, within the last ten years including those dismissed or expunged
pursuant to Penal Code § 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and
the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefore;



      (5)   A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police
department. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of any
fingerprinting fee.



      (6)   Four portrait photographs of the applicant at least two
inches by two inches in size taken within the last month.



      (7)   A certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice
in the state stating that the applicant has, within at least 30 calendar days
immediately preceding the date of application, been examined and found to be
free of any contagious or communicable disease.



      (8)   Such other information and identification as the Chief
of Police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters herein
specified and as required to be set forth in the application.



      (9)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to
seek verification of the information contained in the application.



      (10)   A statement in writing, and dated, by the applicant
that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information
contained in the application is true and correct.



   (D)   Each applicant shall also provide the following personal
information concerning the applicant:



      (1)   The full, true name and all aliases used by the
applicant;



      (2)   Date and place of birth, California driver's license or
California identification card, social security card and resident alien card,
if applicable.



      (3)   The current residence address and residence telephone
number and all previous residential addresses for a minimum of eight years
immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of
residence for each address;



      (4)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least
18 years of age;



      (5)   Height, weight, color of hair, eyes and gender.



   (E)   If, during the term of a permit, a permit holder has any
change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the
permit holder shall notify the police department of such change within ten
business days thereafter, in writing.



   (F)   In addition to the above information, each applicant must also
furnish:



      (1)   An original or certified copy of a diploma or
certificate and certified transcript of graduation from a recognized school
of massage; and



      (2)   Either one of the following documents:



         (a)   Proof of passage of an independently prepared and
administered national certification exam which has been recognized by
objective standards to fairly evaluate professional levels of skill, safety
and competence as determined by a qualified massage association; or



         (b)   Proof of membership or the ability to obtain
membership in a qualified massage association.



   (G)   The applicant must also supply a course description, an
outline of material covered, and a letter to the city from the school
administrator verifying completion.



   (H)   The applicant must also supply an original, valid state CPR
certificate.



   (I)   Any outside course of study submitted for approval shall meet
the State of California's Office of Post-secondary Education's minimum
requirements and shall be for a minimum of completion of 500 hours of
on-premises training.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.17  MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS: WRITTEN EXAMINATION REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every massage practitioner shall be required to take and pass
a written test prior to issuance of a massage practitioner's permit and
before engaging in work at a massage establishment.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall establish standards and procedures
governing administrating, grading and noticing of the examination required by
this section.



   (C)   The Chief of Police, in his sole discretion, may accept an
applicant's passing written test results, or equivalent thereof, from another
city in lieu of the applicant taking the written test required by this
section. Notwithstanding that such test results may be accepted by the Chief
of Police, an applicant shall still be required to comply with all other
requirements of this chapter.



   (D)   The written test required by this section shall test the
competency and ability of the applicant to engage in the practice of massage,
including, but not limited to, the applicant's knowledge of the following
basic subjects: anatomy, physiology, ethics, hygiene, the practice and theory
of massage, as massage is defined in this code, and CPR. The test shall also
test the applicant's knowledge of the rules and regulations set forth in this
chapter to ensure a complete understanding of the massage practitioner's
duties established herein.



   (E)   The examination shall be prepared, conducted and graded by the
city, or in its sole discretion, by a competent instructor certified by the
Council for Private Post-secondary and Vocational Education pursuant to
Education Code §  94311.1.



   (F)   A score of 70% or better is required on each section of the
written test. An applicant who fails to pass any section of the examination
shall not be eligible to take another examination until 60 calendar days
after the previous examination. An applicant, who fails to pass upon a second
attempt, shall not again be eligible until six months thereafter. Any
applicant who has failed to pass the examination after their third attempt
shall not be eligible to reapply and take the examination for a period of two
years thereafter. If an applicant has three or more sustained municipal code
violations during any permit period, the applicant, upon renewal, must retake
and pass the written examination designated in this chapter.



   (G)   The examination will be in the English language. In the event
the applicant requires that any section of the examination be given in
another language, the applicant shall pay any additional fees or costs for a
court-certified and Baldwin Park Police Department-approved interpreter to
interpret the examination.  Proof of valid court certification must be
provided to the Chief of Police prior to the administration of any such
non-English language examination.



   (H)   An identification number shall be issued to all applicants
sitting for an examination. Within seven calendar days of the completion of a
scheduled examination, a pass/fail score, listed by identification number,
shall be posted on the first floor of city hall on the public notice board
for a period of 30 calendar days. All test scores are final and not subject
to appeal.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.18  MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS: ISSUANCE AND DENIAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a written application for a massage
practitioner's permit, the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to
ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. The Chief of
Police shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application within 60
calendar days of the filing of an application. The 60-day period may be
continued for an additional 30 calendar days if necessary to complete the
investigation. The Chief of Police shall issue such permit as requested,
unless he or she makes any of the following findings:



      (1)   The applicant has not passed every section of the
practical and written examination as required by this chapter.



      (2)   The applicant has within ten years preceding the date of
the application been convicted of any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of any provision of law pursuant to
which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code §
290, or conduct in violation of California Penal Code §§ 266h, 266i, 314,
315, 316, 318, subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Penal Code §§ 647, 653.22, or
convicted of an attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above
mentioned offenses, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit,
moral turpitude or an act of violence or when the prosecution accepted a plea
of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal
Code §§ 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction
of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or any crime
committed while engaged in the ownership of a massage establishment or the
practice of massage.



         (b)   A violation of Health and Safety Code § 11550 or
any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a
controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Sections 11054
through 11058; or



         (c)   Any offense in any other state that is the
equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses.



      (3)   That the applicant has committed an act in another
jurisdiction that, if committed in this state, would have been a violation of
law and, which, if done by a permittee under this chapter, would be grounds
for denial, suspension or revocation of the permit.



      (4)   That the applicant has engaged in conduct which would
constitute grounds for suspension or revocation under § 118.29 of this
chapter.



      (5)   The applicant has had a massage operator or massage
practitioner permit or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or
revoked for cause by the city, any state, local agency or other licensing
authority, or has had to surrender a permit or license as a result of pending
criminal charges or in lieu of said permit or license being suspended or
revoked within eight years prior to the date of the application.



      (6)   The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or
fraudulent statement or omission of fact to the city in the permit
application process.



      (7)   The application does not contain the information
required by § 118.16.



      (8)   The applicant is not at least 18 years of age.



      (9)   The applicant has not paid the required fee(s) and/or
satisfied all other requirements of this chapter in the time specified.



   (B)   If the application is denied for failure to comply with
divisions (A)(5) or (A)(6) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for
a period of six months from the date the application was denied.



   (C)   If the Chief of Police, upon completion of the investigation,
determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth
in this chapter, the Chief of Police shall deny said application by dated
written notice to the applicant. The applicant shall have the right of appeal
as set forth in § 118.31.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.19  MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS: GENERAL CONDITIONS.



   All massage practitioners shall comply with the following conditions
and any other conditions specified by the Chief of Police on issuance of the
massage practitioner's permit:



   (A)   Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state-licensed
medical practitioner, no massage practitioner shall massage or allow a
massage practitioner aide, or employee to massage the genitals, gluteal fold,
or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron. Nor shall any
massage practitioner, massage practitioner aide or employee solicit or allow
a patron to touch or massage in any manner the genitals, gluteal fold, or
anal area of a massage practitioner, massage practitioner aide or employee,
or the breasts of any female massage practitioner, massage practitioner aide
or employee. A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the
presence of a massage practitioner, massage practitioner aide, operator,
manager or other employee of a massage establishment unless the patron's
genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and, if a female patron, the female patron's
breasts, are fully covered by a non-transparent covering.



   (B)   The massage practitioner shall wear on their person a photo
identification card prepared and issued by the city at all times when present
in the massage establishment. Such identification shall be provided to the
Chief of Police upon demand. The identification card shall be worn on outer
clothing with the photo side facing out. If a massage practitioner changes
his or her business address, he or she shall, prior to such change, obtain
from the Chief of Police a new photo identification card and advise the
police department, in writing, of the new business address.



   (C)   Massage practitioners shall not perform any massage at any
location other than the location specified on the permit, unless performing
an out-call massage pursuant to a separate permit.



   (D)   While on duty, the massage practitioner shall not use any name
or designation or conduct business under any other name or designation than
the name specified in his or her permit and photo identification card.



   (E)   Massage attendants shall be fully clothed at all times.
Clothing shall be of a fully opaque, non- transparent material and provide
complete covering from at least the mid-thigh to at least three inches below
the collarbone. Massage practitioners shall wear fully buttoned or otherwise
fully fastened opaque smock over street clothing while performing massage
services or shall wear employee uniforms that, at a minimum, meet the street
clothing specifications set forth in this section and which are approved by
the Chief of Police.



   (F)   A massage practitioner shall consent to, and shall not
prevent, delay or interfere with an inspection of the massage establishment
by the city's development services, fire department, police department and
the health department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of
this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met. The massage
practitioner shall consent to the inspection of the occupied massage rooms by
the police department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of
this chapter are met.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.20  MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS: NON- ASSIGNABILITY.



   No massage practitioner permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by
a permittee, or any operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any
such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment,
shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such
permit shall thereafter be null and void.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.21  MASSAGE PRACTITIONER: ADDITIONAL OR CHANGE IN LOCATIONS.



   In the event a massage practitioner currently licensed by the city
seeks employment at a massage establishment in addition to or different from
the establishment indicated on the original application, the permittee shall
notify the city in writing within ten calendar days from the date the
permittee is employed by the establishment where the permittee is to provide
massage services. No additional fee shall be required.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.22  APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS.



   (A)   Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, all permits for a massage practitioner are to be issued in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all
persons and businesses described herein whether the described activities were
established before or after the effective date of this article, except that
massage practitioners legally permitted to do business in the city prior to
the effective date hereof shall have six months or until the expiration of
their current permit, whichever is greater, to comply with the terms hereof.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.23  OUT-CALL MASSAGE PERMIT.



   It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment or massage
practitioner to provide, or to offer to provide, massage at any location
except at the place of business approved in the permit for a massage
establishment or massage practitioner; provided, however, that a massage
establishment or massage practitioner may obtain a special endorsement to
their respective permit specifically authorizing out-call massage services.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.24  OUT-CALL MASSAGE PERMIT APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any massage establishment or massage practitioner desiring to
provide out-call massage services shall submit to the Chief of Police an
application to provide out-call massage services within the city. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by
separate resolution of the city council to help defray the cost of the
investigation required by this chapter. In addition to the requirement herein
pertaining to an operator's permit and/or massage practitioner permit
application, the applicant shall also submit detailed information, on the
form provided by the police department, setting forth the manner and means of
transporting, to and from the premises where out-call massage services are to
be performed; clean, sanitary towels, coverings, linens and sterilized
instruments to be utilized, as well as any supplementary aids, equipment or
devices to be utilized and the method(s) of disposal thereof.



   (B)   The application and fee required pursuant to this section
shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required by any
other chapter of this code or ordinance hereafter adopted.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.25  OUT-CALL MASSAGE PERMIT: ISSUANCE AND DENIAL.



   Upon receipt of a complete written application for a permit, the Chief
of Police shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether such permit
should be issued as requested. The Chief of Police shall approve,
conditionally approve or deny the application within 60 calendar days of the
filing of an application. The 60-day period may be continued for an
additional 30 calendar days if necessary to complete the investigation. The
Chief of Police shall issue such permit as requested, unless he or she makes
any of the findings as set forth in § 118.18 of this chapter.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.26  OUT-CALL MASSAGE RECORDS REQUIRED.



   All massage practitioners authorized to perform out-call massage
services hereunder shall keep a separate written record, at the massage
practitioner's principal place of business, of all out-call massage services
performed. The record shall include, but not be limited to the dates and
hours of each treatment or service, the full name and complete address of the
patron, the name of practitioner administering such service and a description
of the treatment or service rendered. A short medical history form shall be
completed by the out-call massage practitioner to determine if the patron has
any communicable diseases, areas of pain, high blood pressure or any physical
condition which may be adversely affected by massage. These records shall be
prepared prior to administering any out-call massage or treatment and shall
be retained for a period of 24 months after such treatment or service. These
records shall be open to inspection upon demand only by officials charged
with enforcement of this chapter or emergency personnel for emergency
purposes and for no other purpose. The Police Department may periodically
inspect the records to ensure compliance with this section. The information
furnished or secured as a result of any such records shall be used only to
ensure and enforce compliance with this chapter, or any other applicable
state or federal laws and shall remain confidential. Any unauthorized
disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city
shall constitute a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.27  OUT-CALL MASSAGE PERMIT: NON-ASSIGNABILITY.



   No out-call massage permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a
permittee, or any operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such
sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment,
shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such
permit shall thereafter be null and void.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.28  PERMIT: TERM AND RENEWAL.



   (A)   Permits for massage establishments, massage practitioners and
out-call massage shall be for a period of one year, unless sooner revoked as
set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   No permit granted herein shall confer any vested right to any
person or business for more than the permit period. All massage operators and
practitioners subject to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter and as they may be amended hereafter.



   (C)   Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with
the Chief of Police at least 60 calendar days before the expiration of
then-current permit. Temporary permits will not be issued. Any permittee
allowing his or her permit to lapse or which permit expires during a
suspension shall be required to submit an new application and pay the
corresponding original application fees.



   (D)   Any person desiring to obtain a renewal of his or her
respective permit shall file a written application under penalty of perjury
on the required form with the Chief of Police who shall conduct an
investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing
fee established by separate resolution of the city council to help defray the
cost of the investigation required by this chapter. An applicant shall be
required to update the information contained in his/her original permit
application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be
reasonably required by the Chief of Police in order to determine whether said
permit should be renewed.



   (E)   A massage practitioner permittee shall also be required to
submit with his or her renewal application the following documents:



      (1)   A certificate, under penalty of perjury, from a medical
doctor licensed to practice in the state stating that the applicant has,
within at least 30 calendar days immediately preceding the date of
application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or
communicable disease.



      (2)   Proof that the applicant, has within four years
immediately preceding the date of filing an application for renewal, passed
the written examination described in § 118.17 or submits proof of completion
of at least 50 hours of continuing education courses in massage from a
recognized school of massage or a qualified massage association. A maximum of
eight hours may be applied toward the 50 hours of continuing education
required by this section for obtaining the state CPR certificate required by
§ 118.16(H).



      (3)   Failure to provide the above documents shall be grounds
for non-renewal of the massage practitioner's permit.



   (F)   The Chief of Police shall have 60 calendar days to investigate
the renewal application and shall render a decision within said 60 calendar
days, but no later than the date of expiration of the permit.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.29  SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, DENIAL AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Violation and noncompliance. Failure of a permittee to comply
with any requirement imposed by this chapter or any other conditions imposed
pursuant to the permit shall be grounds for non-renewal, suspension or
revocation of the permit.



      (1)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
if an operator or manager has been convicted of any law specified in §
118.06(A).



      (2)   The Chief of Police makes any of the findings necessary
to deny a permit under § 118.06.



      (3)   If there have been repeated violations of the provisions
of this chapter which requires ongoing supervision or action by law
enforcement officers which demonstrates that the operator and/or manager is
unable to operate or manage the massage establishment in a law abiding manner.



   (B)   Suspension, non-renewal or revocation of massage practitioner
or out-call massage permit. The Chief of Police may suspend, revoke or refuse
to renew a massage practitioner or out-call massage permit if any of the
following conditions exists:



      (1)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
if a massage practitioner has been convicted of any law specified in §
118.18(A).



      (2)   The Chief of Police makes any of the findings necessary
to deny a permit under § 118.18.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.30  NOTICE.



   When the Chief of Police concludes that grounds for denial, suspension,
revocation or refusal to renew a permit exist, the Chief of Police shall
serve the applicant or permit holder, either personally or by certified mail
addressed to the address listed on the application, with a notice of denial,
non-renewal or notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit (the "notice").
This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective
date of the decision, the right of the applicant or permit holder to appeal
the decision to the Chief Executive Officer and that the Chief of Police's
decision will be final if no appeal is filed within the time stated.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.31  APPEAL.



   (A)   The right to appeal to the Chief Executive Officer shall
terminate upon the expiration of 15 calendar days from the date service of
the above notice. The appeal shall be personally delivered to or sent by
certified mail to the office of the City Clerk. The time for filing an appeal
shall begin from the date of personal service or the date of acknowledgment
on the certified mail of the above notice.



   (B)   In the event an appeal is timely filed, the suspension or
revocation shall not become effective until a final decision has been
rendered by the Chief Executive Officer. If no appeal is filed, the
suspension or revocation shall become effective upon the expiration of the
period for filing an appeal.



   (C)   The Chief Executive Officer shall set a date, time and place
for a hearing on appeal and shall notify the appellant of such date, time and
place of the hearing. Said notice shall be sent by certified mail with proof
of service attached, to the appellant, applicant or permittee at least ten
calendar days prior to the date of the hearing, addressed to the address
listed on the respective application or, the address given in the notice of
appeal. The appellant, applicant or permittee shall be entitled to notice of
the basis for the proposed action, a copy of the documents upon which the
notice was based and will have the opportunity to present contrary evidence
at the hearing.



   (D)   The Chief Executive Officer, in his sole discretion, may grant
or deny a request for a continuance.



   (E)   The Chief Executive Officer shall preside over the hearing on
appeal or, in the alternative, the Chief Executive Officer may appoint a
hearing officer to conduct the hearing and receive relevant evidence. The
Chief Executive Officer or his designee shall render a written decision
within 45 calendar days from the date of the hearing. The decision of the
Chief Executive Officer or his designee shall be final.



   (F)   The following rules and evidence shall apply at the hearing:



      (1)   Oral evidence shall be taken only under oath or
affirmation. The Chief Executive Officer or designee shall have authority to
administer oaths, and to receive and rule on admissibility of evidence.



      (2)   Each party shall have the right to call and examine
witnesses, to introduce exhibits, and to cross-examine opposing witnesses who
have testified under direct examination. The Chief Executive Officer or his
or her designee may also call and examine any witness.



      (3)   Technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall
not apply to hearings provided for in this chapter. Any relevant evidence may
be admitted if it is material and is evidence customarily relied upon by
responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the
existence of any common law or statutory rule that might make admission of
such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay testimony may
be admissible and used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any
evidence given in direct examination, but shall not be sufficient in itself
to support a finding unless such testimony would be admissible over objection
in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent
they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant,
collateral, undue, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.32  NEW APPLICATION AFTER DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   A person may not apply for a permit pursuant to this chapter within one
year from the denial or revocation of such permit.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.33  SURRENDER OF PERMIT.



   Any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter
shall immediately surrender his or her permit to the Chief of Police upon its
suspension or revocation.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.34  FEES.



   The City Council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time
may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. The city shall
include in this resolution a health services fee schedule prescribing annual
fees to be paid by the operator of each massage establishment, such fees to
be paid directly to the Los Angeles County Health Department and retained by
the county as reimbursement for said services related to this chapter. Fees
required by this chapter shall be in addition to any other fees that may be
required under any other chapter of this code.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



§ 118.35  VIOLATION AND PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained
contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared
to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city may, in addition to or in
lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or
actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment
thereof, in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and
shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such
relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and
enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage
establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   The penalties set forth herein, including, but not limited to,
the requirement for posting the notice described in § 118.09(R), are
cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations and penalties
set forth in this chapter, or in any other ordinances, laws, rules or
regulations of the city, the county and the state.



(Ord. 1233, passed 5-4-04)



CHAPTER 119:  GARAGE, YARD AND PATIO SALES



Section



   119.01   Definition



   119.02   Garage sale regulations



§ 119.01  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE, YARD or PATIO SALE.  A sale of goods, wares or merchandise
from residential property where the public is invited onto such property to
purchase such items; provided, however that a garage sale shall not include
any sale of the personal belongings of a recently deceased resident of such
property.  "Garage," "yard" or "patio sale" shall hereinafter be referred to
as "garage sale."



(Ord. 1085, passed 7-20-94)



§ 119.02  GARAGE SALE REGULATIONS.



   No person shall conduct, or allow to be conducted, a garage sale on his
property in violation of the following regulations:



   (A)   Garage sales may only be conducted on the first weekend of the
months of March, June, September, and December.  For purposes of this
section, WEEKEND means Saturday and Sunday.



   (B)   Garage sales shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.



   (C)   No garage sale shall be conducted, and no goods or merchandise
sold or offered at any garage sale shall be displayed on any public sidewalk,
parkway, street or alley.



   (D)   All items sold at garage sales must be used goods, wares, or
merchandise of a household nature, from that household or its surrounding
neighborhood, and not acquired elsewhere for resale.



   (E)   Garage sales' advertising signs may not be posted on telephone
poles, street lights, traffic signs, or any  other structure in the public
right-of-way. Such signs may not be posted anywhere earlier than two days
prior to the day the sale is to commence, and shall be removed by 7:00 p.m.
on the day the sale is terminated.  No more than two signs, placards, or
other form of advertisement shall be placed upon the premises used for such
sale, and shall not exceed three square feet in size.



   (F)   All goods, products, and merchandise offered for sale at a
garage sale shall be made available to inspection at the place where the sale
is to be conducted by any representative of the Police Chief, and if
requested by the representative, the person conducting the sale shall
establish evidence of title to the goods, products and merchandise offered
for sale.



   (G)   Goods and merchandise sold or offered at any garage sale shall
not be displayed before 7:00 a.m. and shall be completely removed from the
premises by 7:00 p.m.



   (H)   Any person violating or causing a violation of this section
shall be guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to § 10.99 of this code
and fine pursuant to Chapter 15 of this code.



(Ord. 1085, passed 7-20-94; Am. Ord. 1315, passed 5-21-08)  Penalty, see §
10.99



CHAPTER 120:  PRIVATE PATROLS



Section



   120.01   Definitions



   120.02   Registration required



   120.03   Application for registration; information required



   120.04   Issuance; denial



   120.05   Transfer and duration of registration; reorganization of
business entity



   120.06   New employees



   120.07   Inspection of records



Statutory reference:



   Private patrol operators, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 7544 et seq.



   Local regulation of private patrol officers, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§ 7524



§ 120.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   APPLICANT.  A person applying for registration as a private patrol
operator pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  Applicant also means
and includes any of the following:



      (1)   In the case of a corporation, an officer, director,
managing employee, or any person holding 5% or more of the stock issued by
the corporation.



      (2)   In the case of a partnership, each partner whether
general or limited and any managing employee.



   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the city.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council of the city.



   PRIVATE PATROL OFFICER or PATROLMAN.  A person defined as such
pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 7512 et seq.



   PRIVATE PATROL OPERATOR.  A person, defined as such, in the Cal. Bus.
& Prof. Code §§ 7500 et seq.



('83 Code, § 5.44.010)



Statutory reference:



   For definition of private patrol officer, see 16 Cal. Code of Regs. §
600.1



§ 120.02  REGISTRATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall act as, or perform any of the services, directly or
indirectly, of a private patrol operator within the city unless he is
registered as such pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.44.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 120.03  APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION; INFORMATION REQUIRED.



   Each person applying for registration pursuant to this chapter shall
make written application therefor upon forms provided for this purpose by the
City Manager, together with the following:



   (A)   An accurate statement of the business, occupation or
employment of the applicant and each proposed private patrol officer for the
five years immediately preceding the date of application.



   (B)   A statement of work experience containing sufficient
information to establish that the applicant is qualified to operate a private
patrol and to supervise persons who will act as private patrol officers.



   (C)   Such other identification, including, but not limited to,
fingerprints and/or photographs of such persons and information deemed
reasonably necessary by the City Manager to permit a full investigation and
to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.44.030)



§ 120.04  ISSUANCE; DENIAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a written application for registration as a
private patrol operator, the City Manager shall conduct an appropriate
investigation in order to ascertain whether the registration shall be granted
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.  He shall grant the registration
requested, unless, as a result of such investigation, he finds any of the
following facts to be present:



      (1)   The applicant or any proposed private patrol officer has
been finally convicted of a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude,
within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of application.



      (2)   The applicant, any partner or principal officer of an
applicant, or any proposed private patrol officer, is of bad moral character.



      (3)   The applicant, or any proposed private patrol officer,
is not licensed pursuant to the Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 7500 et seq.



   (B)   The City Manager shall be authorized to impose such reasonable
conditions, including, but not limited to, approval of the type of badges
and/or uniforms utilized by a private patrol officer, upon the granting of
registration as he may deem necessary or expedient to insure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter, and to protect the public peace, health,
safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants.



('83 Code, § 5.44.040)



§ 120.05  TRANSFER AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION; REORGANIZATION OF BUSINESS
ENTITY.



   No registration issued under this chapter shall be transferable. 
Registrations issued under this chapter shall be valid until revoked. 
Should any private patrol operation registered as such pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, change its business organization by becoming a
partnership, corporation or individual proprietorship, the former
registration shall be deemed automatically revoked if within 30 days after
the effective date of the reorganization a new application is not filed and
approved pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.44.050)



§ 120.06  NEW EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Each private patrol operator registered under this chapter,
prior to employing any person who will be directly engaged in the private
patrol operation, including, but not limited to, solicitors, patrol officers,
investigators, and office operators, after issuance of registration, shall
file with the City Manager a written application relating to such proposed
employee, in a form prepared for that purpose by the City Manager.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the application, the City Manager shall
conduct an investigation to determine whether the proposed employee is
qualified pursuant to § 120.04.



   (C)   If the person is so qualified, the City Manager, by written
notice to the registered operator, shall add the person's name to the list of
persons authorized to engage in the patrol operation.



   (D)   Where if as a result of his investigation, the City Manager
determines that the proposed employee does not qualify pursuant to § 120.04,
he shall give notice of the decision to the operator and to the proposed
employee, within five calendar days from receipt of the application.



   (E)   The operator shall have the right of appeal to the City
Council, from the decision, in the time and manner set forth in § 30.04.



('83 Code, § 5.44.060)



§ 120.07  INSPECTION OF RECORDS.



   The City Manager shall be authorized to inspect, at any reasonable
time, the business records of any registered applicant.  Refusal to allow
the inspection shall be basis for revocation of registration.



('83 Code, § 5.44.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 121:  SOLICITATIONS



Section




Charitable and Religious Solicitations




   121.01   Permit required



   121.02   Issuance or denial of application



   121.03   Fees



   121.04   Conditions for suspension and appeal



   121.05   Exemption



   121.06   Solicitation by mail or telephone



Solicitation of Alms



   121.15   Purpose and intent



   121.16   Definitions



   121.17   Solicitation prohibited



Cross-reference:



   Bingo games, nonprofit charitable organization operations of, see Ch.
113



CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS



§ 121.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, without having first obtained a permit therefor, as provided
in this chapter, shall make any appeal to members of the public for a
charitable or religious purpose, either by soliciting or collecting gifts,
contributions, donations or subscriptions, or by promoting or conducting any
sale, bazaar or exhibition or by any other means, at any place or to any
person within the city.



('83 Code, § 5.48.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 121.02  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.



   The City Manager shall consider the application, and other relevant
information obtained by him as a result of his investigation.  If he finds
that the applicant has not stated true facts in the application, or that if a
permit were to be granted to the applicant, a fraud, in all probability,
would be perpetrated upon members of the general public, he shall refuse to
issue the permit.  If he finds that the application is truthful, that the
applicant is acting in good faith, and that, in all probability, a fraud
would not be so perpetrated, he shall issue the permit to the applicant for a
period off time, as requested by the applicant, not to exceed a period of 90
days from and after the issuance of the permit.



('83 Code, § 5.48.020)



§ 121.03  FEES.



   No filing or processing fee shall be required by this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.48.030)



§ 121.04  CONDITIONS FOR SUSPENSION AND APPEAL.



   (A)   The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall suspend any
permit issued under this chapter, if he or she finds:



      (1)   The permittee in its operation is, in fact, perpetrating
a fraud upon members of the general public;



      (2)   Except as otherwise permitted by law, the permittee is
soliciting on private property after being requested to cease that
solicitation by the owner, tenant or person in apparent control of that
property;



      (3)   The permittee inhibits any other person's ability to
continue on that other person's path of travel to or from any structure or
vehicle; or



      (4)   The permittee fails to follow valid directions of a city
peace officer.



   (B)   The permittee whose permit has been suspended pursuant to this
section may appeal that suspension order to the Chief Executive Officer
(CEO), or his or her designee, subject to the following:



      (1)   There shall be no cost charged to the permittee for that
appeal;



      (2)   The CEO shall schedule and hold the hearing for that
appeal within ten days after the appeal is filed;



      (3)   The CEO shall allow the Chief of Police, or his or her
designee, and the permittee, or his or her or its representative, to provide
testimony and evidence at that hearing.  The city will record the
proceedings at the hearing by an audio recorder, court reporter or other
method agreed to by the CEO and permittee;



      (4)   The CEO shall issue his or her decision within three
business days after the hearing is concluded;



      (5)   The Chief of Police shall have the burden of proof, by a
preponderance of evidence, to show the permit should have been suspended;



      (6)   The time periods for the appeal may be extended at the
permittee's request;



      (7)   The suspended permit shall not be effective unless the
CEO decides in the permittee's favor or any of the time periods established
in divisions (B)(2), (B)(4) or (B)(6) of this section lapse without any
decision from the CEO; and



      (8)   The CEO's decision is final and no other administrative
appeal is available.



('83 Code, § 5.48.040)  (Am. Ord. 1326, passed 4-15-09)



§ 121.05  EXEMPTION.



   No permit shall be required for any of the acts or activities described
in § 121.01 by the members of any religious or charitable organization which
has been in existence and which regularly has maintained a headquarters or a
place of worship, in the city for a period of at least one year next
preceding the date on which such activity is proposed to be commenced.



('83 Code, § 5.48.050)



§ 121.06  SOLICITATION BY MAIL OR TELEPHONE.



   No permit shall be required for any such solicitation carried on,
exclusively by the United States Postal Service, or by telephone.



('83 Code, § 5.48.060)



SOLICITATION OF ALMS



§ 121.15  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   It is not the intent of the City Council of the city to completely
prohibit the solicitation of alms in the city. Rather, it is the purpose and
intent of the City Council, through adoption of this subchapter, to provide
additional enforcement tools to protect businesses and their potential
customers from harassment by beggars or solicitors of alms, and from persons
soliciting donations in exchange for token service. Victims of the conduct
prohibited by this section include the persons accosted, the owners and
employees of businesses which lose customers because such begging or
soliciting has caused the potential customers to feel intimidated and/or
harassed, and the city as a whole, which loses sales tax revenues because of
lost sales.



(Ord. 1099, passed 3-1-95)



§ 121.16  DEFINITIONS.



   ALMS.  Includes, but is not limited to charitable donations, money, or
other charitable aid.



   TOKEN SERVICE.  Includes, but is not limited to the wiping or cleaning
of glass on automotive vehicles.



(Ord. 1099, passed 3-1-95)



§ 121.17  SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall accost any other person in, or on, any public place, or
in, or on, any place open to the public for the purpose of begging for alms
or soliciting alms in exchange for a token service that has been provided or
promised. This section shall apply only to areas within 50 feet of the
entrance or exit of a business establishment, unless such business
establishment is located in a shopping mall or shopping center, in which case
this section shall also apply to the parking areas and common areas of that
shopping mall or shopping center. Further, this section shall not apply to
individuals or groups who are soliciting donations or services on behalf of a
duly licensed non-profit or charitable organization.



(Ord. 1099, passed 3-1-95)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 122:  STREET VENDORS



Section




General Provisions




   122.01   Definitions



   122.02   Sales from human-powered devices prohibited



   122.03   Exemptions



   122.04   Regulations for sales from vehicles



Permits



   122.15   Application for operator's permit; contents; required fee



   122.16   Application for vendor's permit; contents; required fee



   122.17   Investigation of applications



   122.18   Issuance



   122.19   Denial



   122.20   Revocation



   122.21   Appeals




   122.99   Penalty



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 122.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GOODS or SERVICES.  This shall include items and products of every
kind and description, including all foods, produce, beverage items,
merchandise, wares, as well as the provision of any service or labor.



   HUMAN-POWERED DEVICE.  Any device moved by human power including, but
not necessarily limited to, any pushcart, wagon, bicycle, tricycle or other
wheeled contained or conveyance.



   OPERATOR.  Any person or entity owning,  operating or otherwise
controlling any business involving the vending of goods or services from a
vehicle.



   PARKWAY.  That area between the edge of the  roadway and the adjacent
property line, including sidewalks.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity of any kind or nature.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any real property, or interest therein, owned,
leased, operated or otherwise controlled by the city other than a street,
alley, parkway, or sidewalk.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.  That portion of land dedicated to the city, in
fee, as an easement, or otherwise, for public use for public street purposes
which includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys, sidewalks
and all other public ways and paths.



   VEHICLE.  This term shall be defined as in the Vehicle Code of the
state and shall not include any human-powered device.



   VEND, VENDING, SELL or SELLING.  The sale or offering for sale of any
goods or services to the public from a vehicle.



   VENDOR.  Any person who engages in the act of vending from a vehicle
or drives or otherwise operates any such vehicle for the purpose of vending
therefrom.



('83 Code, § 12.05.010)  (Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.02  SALES FROM HUMAN-POWERED DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or to operate
a human powered device or conduct any business for the purpose of causing the
sale of or offering for sale, any goods or services from any human-powered
device parked, stopped, or standing upon any public street, alley, parkway,
sidewalk or other public property in the city.



('83 Code, § 12.05.020)  (Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)  Penalty, see §
122.99



§ 122.03  EXEMPTIONS.



   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:



   (A)   Any person delivering any goods or services by vehicle where
such goods or services have been ordered in advance for such delivery from
any business located at a permanent location and which goods or services are
being delivered from such location to the customer by vehicle, regardless of
the  point of sale thereof.



   (B)   Any person engaged in the vending of goods or services on
public property where such person has been authorized by the city to engage
in such activity by a permit, lease, real property license, agreement or
other entitlements issued by the city for such purpose.



   (C)   Charitable solicitations conducted by or for nonprofit
organizations exempt under 26 U.S.C.



§ 501(c)(3). ('83 Code, § 12.05.030)  (Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



Statutory reference:



   Charitable solicitations, see Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17510



§ 122.04  REGULATIONS FOR SALES FROM VEHICLES.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or operate any
vehicle or conduct any business for the purpose of causing the sale or for
offering for sale, any goods or services from any vehicle parked, stopped or
standing upon any public street, alley,  parkway, sidewalk or other public
property in the city except in accordance with all applicable provisions of
the code and in compliance with each of the following requirements.



   (A)   Such vending shall be only by means of a vehicle duly
registered and licensed by the state with an unladen weight of less than
6,000 pounds.



   (B)   Such vending shall be limited to public streets only and shall
not be permitted upon any alley, parkway, sidewalk, or other public property.



   (C)   Each operator shall possess and at all times  display in
conspicuous view upon each such vehicle a city business license pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.



   (D)   Each operator shall possess and at all times  display in
conspicuous view upon such vehicle an unexpired and unrevoked operator's
permit issued pursuant to § 122.15.



   (E)   It is unlawful for any vendor to sell or offer for sale any
goods or services from any vehicle pursuant to this section unless such
person shall possess and at all times while conducting such vending maintain
upon his or her person an unexpired and unrevoked vendor's permit issued
pursuant to § 122.16.



   (F)   It is unlawful for any operator to permit or allow any vendor
under such operator's control, direction, charge or employ to vend any goods
or  services from any vehicle pursuant to this section unless such vendor
possesses an unexpired and unrevoked vendor's permit issued pursuant to §
122.16.



   (G)   Each operator causing the sale of or offering for sale any
produce or other food item for which a food handling permit or other health
permit is required by law shall possess and at all times display such
required permit(s) in conspicuous view upon such vehicle.



   (H)   No vending from such vehicle shall be permitted within 100
feet of any intersection of two or more public streets nor within 500 feet of
any public or private elementary, junior high, or high school.



   (I)   No vending from such vehicle shall be permitted for a period
of time in excess of ten minutes in any one location and said vehicle must be
moved a distance of not less than 100 feet between consecutive stops at which
vending occurs.



   (J)   No vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in any
manner which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts
the free movement of other vehicles upon the public street.



   (K)   Each vehicle shall be equipped with a trash  receptacle of a
size adequate to accommodate all trash and refuse generated by such vending.



   (L)   Each vendor shall pick up and deposit in the trash receptacle
on the vehicle any paper, cups, wrapper, litter or other refuse of any kind
which were a part of the goods or services supplied from the vehicle and
which have been left or abandoned within 25 feet of such vehicle on any
public property other than in a trash receptacle provided for such
purposes.  No vendor or operator shall dispose of any trash or refuse in any
such public or private trash receptacle  other than a trash receptacle
owned, operated or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor
or operator.



   (M)   No vending shall be permitted except after the vehicle has
been brought to a complete stop and  parked adjacent to the curb in a lawful
manner.



   (N)   Any vehicle from which vending occurs  pursuant to this
section shall have the name, address and telephone number of the holder of
the operator's permit permanently affixed on both the left and right sides of
the vehicle.  Such information shall be in contrast to the color of the
background upon which the letters are placed.



   (O)   No vending shall be permitted by an operator or conducted by
any vendor except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of each day.



   (P)   Any use of amplified sound making devices, including vehicle
horns, to advertise, draw attention to or announce the presence of any such
vehicle  shall comply with the limitations and provisions set forth in §§
130.40 et seq. of this code of ordinances. No amplified sound making devices
shall be used for such purposes upon any public street immediately contiguous
to any residentially zoned property within the city. Nonamplified
sound-making devices shall be permitted for such purposes provided such
sounds shall not be made while the vehicle is stopped, parking or otherwise
in a stationary position; and such sounds shall not be audible to a person
with normal hearing for a distance of more than 200 feet.



   (Q)   Any operator or vendor using scales or any other weighing or
measuring devices shall have all such scales and devices inspected and sealed
by the Weights and Measures Division of the Los Angeles Department of
Agriculture.



   (R)   All foods, beverages, utensils and equipment offered for sale
or utilized on vending vehicles shall at all times be protected from
contamination and pollution by dust, dirt, flies, vermin, rodents, animals,
unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage, insecticides,
rodenticide, cleaning compounds and other poisonous or deleterious
substances, and all other forms of contamination.



   (S)   Any ice cream truck shall be equipped at all times, while
engaged in vending in a residential area, with signs mounted on both the
front and rear and clearly legible from a distance of 100 feet under daylight
conditions, incorporating the words "WARNING" and "CHILDREN CROSSING".  Each
sign shall be at least 12 inches by 48 inches wide, with letters of a dark
color, at least four inches in height, a one-inch wide solid border, and a
sharply contrasting background.



   (T)   The driver of the ice cream truck shall be required to place
an orange cone at the left rear portion of the vehicle after the vehicle has
been stopped and parked adjacent to the curb.



   (U)   No ice cream trucks shall be permitted to vend on streets with
a speed limit of more than 25 miles per hour.



   (V)   The driver of the ice cream truck shall have an unobstructed
view for 200 feet in both directions along the street and of any traffic on
said street.



   (W)   Unless otherwise waived by the city police department and, in
addition to other equipment required by law, each food vending vehicle shall
be equipped with the following:



      (1)   A convex mirror mounted so that the occupant of the
driver's seat can see the area in front of the truck which is obscured by the
vehicle's hood.



      (2)   A back-up alarm audible for a distance of at least 100
feet.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94; Am. Ord. 1265, passed 8-17-05)  Penalty, see §
122.99



PERMITS



§ 122.15  APPLICATION FOR OPERATOR'S PERMIT; CONTENTS; REQUIRED FEE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain an operator's permit to conduct
or otherwise operate the business of vending goods or services from a vehicle
pursuant to this section shall make application to the City Clerk.  The
application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in such
amount as established by resolution of the City Council.  Any such permit
shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable
application fee paid yearly for the renewal application.



   (B)   Each applicant for an operator's permit shall furnish the
following information and documentation as part of or in conjunction with
such application:



      (1)   The present or proposed address from which the business
is to be conducted.



      (2)   The full true name under which the business will be
conducted.



      (3)   The full true name and any other names used by the
applicant.



      (4)   The present residence and business addresses and
telephone numbers of the applicant.



      (5)   A description of the goods or merchandise which the
business will vend.



      (6)   The number of vehicles to be owned, operated or
controlled by the applicant and the makes, body styles, years, serial and
engine numbers, state license plate numbers, and names and addresses of the
registered and/or legal owners of each vehicle.



      (7)   A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and
any other distinguishing characteristics of applicant's vehicles.



      (8)   A certificate of insurance or other additional proof as
may be required by the City Attorney or Risk Manager showing evidence of a
public liability and property damage insurance policy for vehicle liability
coverage protecting the operator from all claims for damage to property or
bodily injury including death,  which may arise from the operation of
vehicles under the permit or in connection therewith.  The insurance shall
provide coverage of not less than $100,000 for bodily injury for each person,
$300,000 per occurrence and property damage coverage of $50,000 per
occurrence.  The insurance shall provide that the policy shall not terminate
or be cancelled without 30 days advance written notice to the city.



      (9)   The full true names and residence addresses of all
persons employed or intended to be employed or with whom the applicant has
contracted or intends  to contract as drivers and/or vendors and the
respective capacities in which they will be employed including the California
driver's license numbers of all persons who will be employed or engaged as
drivers of vehicles in conjunction with such business.



      (10)    The applicant, if an individual; or each of the
directors, officers or stockholders holding more than 5% of the stock of the
corporation; or each of the partners including limited partners, or profit
interest holders, managers or other persons principally in charge of the
operation of the existing or proposed business shall also furnish the
following information:



         (a)   California driver's license or social security
numbers of the above described natural persons.



         (b)   Dates of birth of the above described natural
persons.



         (c)   The permit histories of the above described
natural persons for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, including whether such persons, in previously
operating in this or any other city, county, state, or territory, have ever
had any similar license or permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if
so, the circumstances of such suspension or revocation.



         (d)   All criminal convictions including pleas of guilty
or nolo contendere, suffered by the above-described natural persons,
including code and ordinance violations, but excepting minor traffic offenses
(any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor
traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature and sentence of each such
conviction.



      (11)    The applicant, if other than an individual, shall also
furnish the following information.



         (a)   Each business address of the applicant for the
three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application and the
inclusive dates of each business.



         (b)   The nature of the business or firm for the
three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application.



         (c)   The permit history of the applicant for the
three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant, in previously operating in
this or any other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar
license or permit, or franchise revoked or suspended and, if so, the
circumstances of such suspension or revocation.



         (d)   All criminal convictions, including pleas of
guilty or nolo contendere, suffered by the applicant including ordinance
violations, stating the date, place, nature, and sentence of each such
conviction.



      (12)    Such other identification and/or information as the
City Clerk may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required
to be set forth in the application.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.16  APPLICATION FOR VENDOR'S PERMIT; CONTENTS; REQUIRED FEE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a vendor's permit to engage in
the vending of goods or services from a vehicle, or driving of such vehicle,
pursuant to this section shall make application to the City Clerk. 



   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council.  Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually  and a
separate nonrefundable application fee paid yearly for the renewal
application.



   (C)   Each applicant for a vendor's permit, or an operator or
applicant for an operator's permit on behalf of the proposed vendor, shall
furnish the following information and documentation as part of or in
conjunction with the application.



      (1)   The present or proposed address from which the business
is to be conducted.



      (2)   The full true name under which the business will be
conducted.



      (3)   The full true name and any other names used by the
applicant.



      (4)   The present residence address and telephone number of
the applicant.



      (5)   California driver's license number of the applicant.



      (6)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least
18 years of age.



      (7)   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair,
and date of birth.



      (8)   The business, occupation or employment history of the
applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the
application.



      (9)   The permit history of the applicant, for the three-year
period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application,
including whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any
other city, county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or
permit, or franchise revoked or suspended, and if so, the circumstances of
the suspension or revocation.



      (10)    All criminal convictions, including pleas of guilty or
nolo contendere, suffered by the applicant, including ordinance violations,
and traffic offenses.



      (11)    Written proof satisfactory to the City Attorney or
Risk Manager that the applicant is insured under the policy of insurance
required for such business pursuant to § 122.15(H).



      (12)    Such other identification and/or information as the
City Clerk may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required
to be set forth in the application.



      (13)    When any change occurs regarding the written
information required by divisions (C)(1) through (12) of this section prior
to issuance of a permit, the  applicant shall give written notification of
the change to the City Clerk within two weeks after such change.



      (14)    If the applicant is an individual who intends to own,
operate and drive his or her own vehicle, it is not necessary to pay a fee
for the vendor's permit application separate from the fee paid for the
operator's permit application.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.17  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS.



   The City Clerk shall investigate all applications  for operator's
permits and vendor's permits made pursuant to this chapter, and shall within
30 days after the date of the filing of the application, render a written
decision as to approval or denial of the application for the permit based
upon the criteria set forth in § 122.18.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.18  ISSUANCE.



   The City Clerk shall grant the vendor's permit or operator's permit
only if he or she finds that all of the following requirements have been met:



   (A)   The required fees have been paid.



   (B)   The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation of
fact in the application.



   (D)   The applicant has not had a similar permit denied or revoked
by the city within a period of one year prior to the date of such application.



   (E)   (1)   The applicant if an individual; or any of the
directors, officers or stockholders holding more than 5% of the stock of the
corporation; or any of the partners, including limited partners, or profit
interest holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the existing or proposed business of vending from a vehicle or a
natural person employed or contracted with to be a driver or vendor, has not
been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or guilty within five years prior
to his application for a permit to a misdemeanor or felony crime of moral
turpitude or drug-related misdemeanor or felony crime, including, but not
limited to, the following:



         (a)   The sale of a controlled substance specified in
Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 11054 through 11058.



         (b)   The sale, distribution or display  of harmful or
obscene matter.



         (c)   Indecent exposure.



         (d)   In the case of applications for a vendor's permit
by a person who will be a driver of a vehicle pursuant to this section,
alcohol or drug-related traffic offenses.



      (2)   The investigating city employee is specifically
authorized to obtain state summary criminal history record information as
provided for in Cal. Penal Code § 11105.  Any complaint for the charges
listed in division (1) above pending before a court of law shall cause the
application to be considered pending until adjudication of the complaint.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.19  DENIAL.



   (A)   If the City Clerk does not find that all of the requirements
set forth in §§ 122.15, 122.16 or 122.17, as applicable have been met, he
or she shall deny the application for the vendor's or operator's permit.  In
the event the application for the permit is denied by the City Clerk, written
notice of the denial shall be given to the applicant specifying the ground or
grounds of such denial.  Notice of denial of the application for the permit
shall be deemed to have been served upon the date it is personally served on
the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with postage
prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address as set
forth in the application for the permit.



   (B)   Any applicant whose application for a vendor's or operator's
permit has been denied by the City Clerk may appeal such denial to the City
Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten
days following the date of service of the decision and payment of he appeal
fee prescribed by resolution of the City Council.  The date of filing of the
notice of appeal shall be the date the notice and appeal fee are received by
the City Clerk. 



   (C)   No person or entity whose permit is finally denied shall be
eligible to apply for a new permit for  a period of one year following the
final denial.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.20  REVOCATION.



   Any vendor's or operator's permit may be revoked by the City Clerk for
good cause shown, including but not necessarily limited to any of the
following reasons.



   (A)   Falsification of any information supplied by the permittee
upon which issuance of a permit was based.



   (B)   Conviction of a violation, or a plea of guilty or nolo
contendere, by a permittee of any crime occurring while such person was
engaged in conducting vending operations from a vehicle, whether within or
outside the city, involving moral turpitude, or the possession or sale of any
controlled substance specified in Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 11054
through 11058, or the violation  of any provision of Cal. Penal Code Title
9, Part 1, Chapters 1, 5, 7.5, 7.6 or 8, or an alcohol or drug-related
offense in the case of a vendor's permit held by a person who is a driver of
a vehicle operated pursuant to this section.



   (C)   Exercise of the permit in a manner contrary  to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare.



   (D)   No such revocation shall become effective until expiration of
the appeal period specified in this section.  Notification of the permit
holder shall be made either by personal delivery or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the permit holder at
such permit holder's residence address as set forth on the application for a
permit. Service shall be deemed made on the permit holder on the date
personally delivered or on the date of mailing.  A permit holder may appeal
the revocation to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with
the City Clerk within ten days following the date of service of the decision
and payment of the appeal fee as prescribed by resolution of the City
Council.  The date of filing of the notice of appeal shall be the date the
notice and appeal fee are received by the City Clerk.  If a timely appeal is
filed, the revocation shall be stayed pending the decision of the City
Council.  Otherwise the revocation shall be effective after the expiration
of the appeal period.



   (E)   No person or entity whose permit is revoked shall be eligible
to apply for a new permit for a period of one year following the revocation.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.21  APPEALS.



   Upon receipt of a timely appeal the City Council shall hear such appeal
within 20 days following the date of the appeal and shall give the appellant
not less than five days advance notice of the date of the hearing.  The
decision of the City Council shall be based upon the same criteria as set
forth in this section which are applicable to the issuance or revocation of
the permit.  The appellant shall be notified of the decision of the City
Council by mailed, written notice.  The decision of the City Council shall
be final.  No revocation of a permit pursuant to this section shall be
deemed effective during the pendency of a timely filed appeal until the date
of mailing of the City Council's decision; provided, however, no permit
holder shall operate during any period of time in which the insurance
coverage required by this section is not in full force and effect.



(Ord. 1082, passed 5-18-94)



§ 122.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute
a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a $1,000 fine or six months in the
county jail or both the fine and imprisonment.



      (B)   Any violation of § 122.02 shall constitute either a
misdemeanor or an infraction.  If the violation constitutes a misdemeanor,
then a conviction shall be punishable by up to a $1000 fine or by
imprisonment for a term of not exceeding six months in the county jail or by
both such fine and imprisonment.  If the violation constitutes an
infraction, then a conviction shall be punishable as set forth at § 10.99(D).



('83 Code, § 12.05.040)  (Ord. 1070, passed -  -93; Am. Ord. 1127, passed
9-3-97)



CHAPTER 123:  TAXICABS



Section




General Provisions




   123.01   Definitions



   123.02   Certificate required



   123.03   Application; fee



   123.04   Hearing of application



   123.05   Issuance of certificate



   123.06   Grounds for denial



   123.07   Insurance required



   123.08   Conditions for revocation



   123.09   Application for permission to change



   123.10   Refusal to pay fare



Rules and Regulations



   123.20   Rules and regulations



   123.21   Reserved



   123.22   Standing



   123.23   Consent of passenger



   123.24   Safe and direct carriage



   123.25   Mechanical conditions



   123.26   Driver's license



   123.27   Posting necessary information



   123.28   Driver to remain near cab



   123.29   Charge



   123.30   Clean compartment



   123.31   Fire extinguisher



   123.32   Taxi emergency notification system



Statutory reference:



   Taxicabs, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 16500 et seq., and 21100 and 21112



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 123.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CERTIFICATE.  A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to this chapter.



   TAXICAB.  Every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of
which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the city,
not over a regular or defined route, irrespective of whether the operation
extends beyond the boundary limits of the city or not.



('83 Code, § 5.52.010)



§ 123.02  CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of providing taxicab
service or of operating a taxicab upon any public street within the city
without having obtained a certificate to do so.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.03  APPLICATION; FEE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to obtain a certificate shall pay a filing
and processing fee as set by resolution of the City Council contemporaneously
with the filing with the City Clerk of an application of the certificate.



   (B)   The application shall set forth the following:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, and if the same
be a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same is a
partnership, association, or fictitious company, the names of the partners or
persons comprising the association or company, with the address of each.



      (2)   A complete schedule of the fares or rates proposed to be
charged.



      (3)   A description of every motor vehicle which is proposed
for certificated use, giving the:



         (a)   Trade name;



         (b)   Motor and serial number;



         (c)   State license number;



         (d)   Seating capacity; and



         (e)   Body style.



      (4)   The street number and exact location of the place where
the applicant proposes to establish taxi stands.



      (5)   The name of the legal and registered owner of each such
vehicle.



      (6)   The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or
insignia, which shall be used on the taxicabs.



      (7)   If any proposed stand is in the public street, the
application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all the
occupants of the ground floor of any building or lot in front of which the
taxicab is to be located, and for 25 feet each way there from, or if there is
no such occupant, by the written consent thereto of the owner or lessee of
the building or lot.



('83 Code, § 5.52.030)



§ 123.04  HEARING OF APPLICATION.



   Upon receipt of any application referred to in § 123.03, the City
Clerk shall set a time, not less than ten nor more than 30 days thereafter
for the hearing of the application before the City Council, and shall give
written notice of the time and place of the hearing, to the applicant.



('83 Code, § 5.52.040)



§ 123.05  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.



   At the time set for the hearing of the application, the City Council
may examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter set forth
in the application, and shall determine whether or not the public interest,
convenience and necessity, require the issuance of the certificate applied
for.  If it is found by the Council that the public interest, convenience
and necessity require the issuance of the certificate applied for, it shall
order the City Manager to issue a certificate in accordance with the
application, subject to the provisions of this chapter, and such conditions
of approval as may be imposed by the City Council including, but not limited
to, rates to be charged.



('83 Code, § 5.52.050)



§ 123.06  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.



   Any of the following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of the
certificate:



   (A)   That the application is not in the form, and does not contain
the information required to be contained therein by this chapter.



   (B)   That the vehicles described therein are inadequate or unsafe
for the purposes for which they are to be used.



   (C)   That the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia to be used
upon such automobiles would be in conflict with or imitate any other
certificate.



   (D)   That the location of the stand, as requested would congest or
interfere with travel on any public street, or that the proposed stand is
within 300 feet of any other taxi stand theretofore fixed by the City Council
on the same street.



   (E)   That the City Council finds that there are a sufficient number
of taxicabs and automobiles for hire in the city to fully serve the public
and that the granting of more certificates would unduly congest the traffic
and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public, and that
the public interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of
the certificate.



('83 Code, § 5.52.060)



§ 123.07  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   Before a certificate is issued by the City Manager, the applicant to
whom a certificate will be awarded, shall deliver to the City Manager a
certificate of insurance, executed by a company duly authorized under the
laws of the state to do an insurance business by the provisions of which
policy the company promises and undertakes to pay in full all claims for
damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the automobile
referred to in the application; provided, that the maximum amount for which
liability shall be assumed for injury to or death of one person in any one
accident shall be in minimum amounts set by the City Manager.



('83 Code, § 5.52.070)



§ 123.08  CONDITIONS FOR REVOCATION.



   Any certificate granted under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the City Council, after the conduct of a hearing hereon, noticed
as provided in § 123.04, for any of the following reasons:



   (A)   That the insurance required hereby has not been given or has
been withdrawn or lapsed, for any reason.



   (B)   For the nonpayment to the city of any license fee required by
this code.



   (C)   For failure to observe any of the rules and regulations or
provisions set out in this chapter or in the certificate.



   (D)   For the violation of any applicable law by any certificate
holder, operator or driver of any taxicab covered by the certificate.



   (E)   For the failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public.



   (F)   For any cause which in the opinion of the City Council makes
it contrary to the public interest, convenience and necessity for the
certificate to be continued in effect.



('83 Code, § 5.52.080)



§ 123.09  APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO CHANGE.



   In the event that any certificate holder desires to change his schedule
of rates and charges or the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on
the taxicab, or to substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle
described in the application, or to increase or decrease the number of
vehicles used by him as taxicabs, he shall first pay a filing and processing
fee as set by resolution of the City Council contemporaneously with the
filing with the City Clerk of an application for permission to do so from the
City Council, which permission shall be granted if, in the discretion of the
City Council, it deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be
served by such change, and if the certificate holder has complied with all
provisions of this chapter.



('83 Code, § 5.52.090)



§ 123.10  REFUSAL TO PAY FARE.



   (A)   No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare for the hire of
any taxicab, after having hired the taxicab, with the intent to defraud the
person from whom it is hired.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.100)  Penalty, see § 10.99



RULES AND REGULATIONS



§ 123.20  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The rules and regulations set out in this chapter shall be observed by
all persons operating taxicabs.



('83 Code, § 5.52.110)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.21  RESERVED.



§ 123.22  STANDING.



   (A)   No taxicab driver shall, when soliciting passengers, remain
standing upon any public street except for loading and unloading passengers,
and then not for a period of more than five minutes, except at an approved
taxi stand.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.130)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.23  CONSENT OF PASSENGER.



   (A)   No operator, driver or owner of any taxicab shall solicit or
carry any passenger after the taxicab shall have been engaged or while in use
for another passenger without the consent of the passenger first engaging the
same, having been obtained.  A passenger or passengers engaging the taxicab
shall have the exclusive right to full and free use of the passenger
compartment and the whole thereof if he desires the same.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.140)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.24  SAFE AND DIRECT CARRIAGE.



   (A)   The driver of any taxicab shall carry any passengers engaging
the same safely and expeditiously to their destination by the most direct and
accessible route.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.150)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.25  MECHANICAL CONDITIONS.



   (A)   All taxicabs shall be kept in good mechanical condition.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.160)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.26  DRIVER'S LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall drive a taxicab in the city without first
having obtained a California Chauffeur's License.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.170)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.27  POSTING NECESSARY INFORMATION.



   (A)   Every taxicab shall have posted in the passenger's
compartment, a schedule of rates and charges for the hire of the vehicle. 
Also a card bearing the driver's name and address and the owner's name,
address and telephone number, the cab number, and the City Police Department
phone number, all contained in a small container or holder at least three to
four inches in size, and placed in a conspicuous place in the passenger
compartment.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.180)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.28  DRIVER TO REMAIN NEAR CAB.



   (A)   The driver of a taxicab shall remain immediately adjacent to
the taxicab while parked at any approved taxi stand.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.190)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.29  CHARGE.



   (A)   No charge shall be made by any operator or owner of a taxicab
in excess of the approved rates.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.200)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.30  CLEAN COMPARTMENT.



   (A)   No taxicab shall be operated unless the passenger compartment
is kept clean and in sanitary condition.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.210)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.31  FIRE EXTINGUISHER.



   (A)   Every taxicab shall be equipped at all times with a standard
type of fire extinguisher in operating condition.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 5.52.220)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 123.32  TAXI EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION SYSTEM.



   Every taxicab shall be equipped at all times with one or more of the
following taxi emergency notifications systems:



   (A)   A warning light system mounted on the roof which is operable
from the interior of the taxicab;



   (B)   An emergency signal on the taxicab’s radio which transmits
to the taxicab’s dispatcher;



   (C)   An automobile vehicle locator system (e.g., On-Star or
equivalent);



   (D)   A Lojack locating device, or its equivalent;



   (E)   A shield separating the front seats of the taxicab from the
back seats;



   (F)   Another safety device or safety policy consistent with the
intent of this section and as approved by the Police Department of the city.



(Ord. 1254, passed 12-1-04; Am. Ord. 1255, passed 1-5-05)



CHAPTER 124:  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



Section



General Provisions



   124.010   Definitions



   124.020   Permits required



Application and Permits



   124.030   Adult-oriented business permit required



   124.040   Applications



   124.050   Investigation and action on application



   124.060   Decision to grant or deny permit



   124.070   Transfer of adult-oriented business permits



   124.080   Adult-oriented business performer permit



   124.090   Investigation and action on application



   124.100   Suspension or revocation of adult-oriented business
permits and adult-oriented business performer permits



   124.110   Appeal of denial, suspension, or revocation



Facilities and Employees



   124.120   Adult-oriented business development and performance
standards



   124.130   Register and permit number of employees



   124.140   Display of permit and identification cards



   124.150   Employment of and services rendered to persons under the
age of 18 years prohibited



Miscellaneous Provisions



   124.160   Inspection



   124.170   Regulations nonexclusive



   124.180   Employment of persons without permits unlawful



   124.190   Time limit for filing application for permit



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 124.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES.  Any one of the following:



      (1)   ADULT ARCADE.  An establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one or more video machines, computers, DVD players, still or
motion picture projectors or similar machines used for presenting live
entertainment or displaying an image, for viewing by five or fewer persons
each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures,
video cassettes, DVD’s, slides, or other photographic reproductions, 30% or
more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      (2)   ADULT BOOKSTORE.  An establishment that has 30% or more
of its stock in trade or display, which could include but not be limited to
books, magazines, periodicals and/or other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, DVD’s, slides, tapes, records, or
other form of visual or audio representations, which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas.



      (3)   ADULT CABARET.  A nightclub, restaurant, or similar
business establishment which:



         (a)   Regularly features live perform- ances which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or



         (b)   Regularly features persons who appear semi-nude;
and/or



         (c)   Shows films, computer generated images, motion
pictures, video cassettes, DVD’s, slides, or other photographic
reproductions, 30% or more of the number of which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (4)   ADULT HOTEL or MOTEL.  A hotel or motel or similar
business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of
consideration which:



         (a)   Provides patrons with closed- circuit television
transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video
cassettes, DVD’s, slides, or other photographic reproductions, 30% or more
of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and



         (b)   Rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a
six-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in
a 24-hour period.



      (5)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER.  A business establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated  images,
motion pictures, video cassettes, DVD’s, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are shown, 30% or more of the number of which are distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      (6)   ADULT THEATER.  A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features
live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      (7)   MODELING STUDIO.  A business which provides, for
pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire, or reward,
figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, display
specified anatomical areas to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted,
sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying such consideration. 
MODELING STUDIO does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set
by the State Board of Education.  MODELING STUDIO further does not include a
studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual
artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make
available specified sexual activities.



   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATOR or OPERATOR.  A person who
supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls, or in any other
way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented
business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.



   APPLICANT.  A person who files an application for a permit under this
chapter, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a
corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an
adult-oriented business.



   BAR.  Any commercial establishment licensed by the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control to serve any alcoholic beverages on the premises.



   DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON.  The dominant or
essential theme of the object described by such phrase.  For instance, when
the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas,” the films so described are those the dominant
or predominant character and theme of which are the depiction of the
enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas.  See Pringle v. City of
Covina, 115 Cal. App.3d 151 (1981).



   ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ADULT- ORIENTED BUSINESS.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented
business as a new business;



      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not
an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business defined herein;



      (3)   The addition of any of the adult- oriented businesses
defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or



      (4)   The relocation of any such adult- oriented business.



   FIGURE MODEL.  Any person who, for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire, or reward, poses in a modeling studio to be observed,
sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Health Officer of the city or his or her duly
authorized representative(s).



   INDIVIDUAL VIEWING AREA.  An area designed for fewer than five persons
to view still or motion pictures, live entertainment, computer generated
images, or other photographic reproduc- tions, 30% or more of the number of
which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



   NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY.  The showing of the human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the
showing of the female breast at the upper radius of the areola or below with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing
of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.



   OPERATE AN ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS.  The supervising, managing,
inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being
responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an
adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.



   PERFORMER.  Any dancer, entertainer, model, or other person who
performs specified sexual activities or displays specified anatomical parts
in an adult oriented business, regardless of whether such person performs for
compensation.



   PERMITTEE.  The person to whom an adult- oriented business permit or
adult-oriented business performer permit has been issued.



   PERSON.  Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm,
association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in
whatever form or character.



   REGULARLY FEATURES.  With respect to an adult theater or adult
cabaret, means presented as a regular and substantial course of conduct of
the person, business, or establishment making the presentation or at which
the presentation is made.  The fact that live performances which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more
occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day
period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the
extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of
conduct.



   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION.  As used in this chapter, is a structure which
is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities at
least two days per week.



   SCHOOL.  Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning
for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses
of study required by the Cal. Educ. Code and maintained pursuant to standards
set by the state Board of Education.  This definition includes a nursery
school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior
high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include
a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a
community or junior college, college, or university.



   SEMI-NUDE.  A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as
portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals
or pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above
the top of the areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



      (3)   Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of
the body parts included in divisions (1) or (2) of this definition.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.  Any of the following, whether performed
directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:



      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;



      (2)   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse,
oral copulation, or sodomy;



      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;



      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the other activities described in divisions (1) through (3) of this
definition.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)



§ 124.020  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or
carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on in or upon
any premises in the city the operation of an adult-oriented business unless
the person first obtains and thereafter maintains a valid adult-oriented
business permit, and, if necessary, adult-oriented business performer
permit(s) as required under this chapter, a city business license, and any
other permits required by state or federal law.  All such permits shall be
maintained in full force and effect during the life of the adult-oriented
business.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any persons to engage in or
participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or
involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, unless
the person first obtains from the city and thereafter maintains a valid
adult-oriented business performer permit as required under this chapter, if
necessary: a business license, and any other permit required by state or
federal law.  All such permits shall be maintained in full force and effect
during the life of such persons engagement in such actions.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



APPLICATION AND PERMITS



§ 124.030  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Every person who proposes to maintain, operate, or conduct an
adult-oriented business in the city shall file an application with the City
Clerk upon a form provided by the city and shall pay a non-refundable filing
fee, as established from time to time by resolution adopted by the City
Council.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 124.040  APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   Adult-oriented business permits are nontransferable, except in
accordance with § 124.070. Therefore, all applications shall include the
following information:



      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall
state his or her legal name (including any aliases), address, telephone
number(s) and date of birth.  The applicant shall also submit satisfactory
proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age.  With the exception of the
applicant’s name, the information submitted pursuant to this division shall
be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law.



      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall
state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names, aliases if any,
addresses, telephone numbers and dates of birth of all partners, and whether
the partnership is general or limited, and shall attach a copy of the
partnership agreement, if any.  The applicant shall also submit satisfactory
written proof that each of the partners is at least 18 years of age.  With
the exception of the partner’s names, the information submitted pursuant to
this division shall be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law.



      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall
provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the
corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names,
aliases if any, addresses, telephone numbers, dates of birth, and capacity of
all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and
the address of the registered office for service of process.  The applicant
shall also submit satisfactory proof that each of the above referenced people
is at least 18 years of age.  With the exception of the name of the
corporation, and the names and titles of the officers, the information
submitted pursuant to this division shall be kept confidential to the extent
permitted by law.



   (B)   If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the
application.  If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of
the business entity or an individual with a 10% or greater interest in the
business entity shall sign the application.



   (C)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented
business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall
file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of
registration of the fictitious name.



   (D)   A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which
the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented
business will operate, plus the names, aliases if any, phone numbers, dates
of birth and addresses of the owners and, if applicable, lessors of the
adult-oriented business site.



   (E)   The address to which all notices related to the application
and the operation of the business are to be mailed.



   (F)   The full names, aliases if any, addresses, telephone numbers
and dates of birth of all employees, independent contractors, and other
persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by
§ 124.080 to obtain an adult-oriented business per-former license.  (For
ongoing reporting requirements, see § 124.080).



   (G)   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the
premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the
adult-oriented business.  The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale.



   (H)   (1)   A certificate and straight-line, to scale drawing
prepared by a registered architect showing:



         (a)   The scale and the north arrow.



         (b)   The street address of the lot or lots to be
included as part of the adult-oriented business.



         (c)   The size of lots accurately dimensioned.



         (d)   The size and location of all existing and proposed
structures.



         (e)   The size and location of all existing and proposed
parking stalls.



         (f)   The location of all landscaped areas.



         (g)   The location of all trash areas.



         (h)   The location of the proposed exterior lighting
system required by this chapter.



         (i)   The property lines if any religious institution,
school, park, residential zone or use within 1,000 feet of the adult-oriented
business as described in § 153.120.030.



      (2)   The drawing shall be prepared within 30 days prior to
the submission of the application, and the preparer shall state on the face
of the drawing the date on which it was prepared.



   (I)   The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or
city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement
of obtaining an adult-oriented business permit.



   (J)   A statement signed and verified by the applicant if an
individual, each partner if a partnership, and each corporate officer and
each person owning a 25% or greater interest in the corporation attesting to
the fact that within the past five years none of the above has been convicted
of or plead guilty or nolo contendre to any of the following:  Cal. Penal
Code, §§ 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j,
267, 288, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or Cal. Penal Code, § 647(a), (b) or
(d); any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Cal. Penal
Code, § 290 or Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11590; or any felony offense
involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation,
furnishing or giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Cal. Health
and Safety Code, §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058; or any equivalent
violation of the code of another state, or the applicant has had an adult
oriented permit revoked by this city or any other governmental entity with
the past three years.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)



§ 124.050  INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall, within 15 days of submission of an
application, determine whether the application is complete.  If the City
Clerk determines the application is incomplete or the applicant has completed
the application improperly, the City Clerk shall, within the aforementioned
time period, notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the
applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time to complete the
application properly.  In addition, the applicant may request an extension
of the time for the City Clerk to act on the application.  The time period
for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which
the applicant is granted an extension of time.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the
application and permit fees, the City Clerk shall immediately stamp the
application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in
the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an
adult-oriented business permit.



   (C)   Within 30 days of receipt of the completed application, the
City Clerk shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in
accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant
as follows:



      (1)   The City Clerk shall write or stamp “Granted” or
“Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.



      (2)   If the application is denied, the City Clerk shall
attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.



      (3)   If the application is granted, the City Clerk shall
attach to the application an adult-oriented business permit.



      (4)   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if
any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)



§ 124.060  DECISION TO GRANT OR DENY PERMIT.



   (A)   Upon determination an application is complete, the City Clerk
shall promptly grant the application and issued the adult-oriented business
permit unless:



      (1)   The building, structure, equipment, or location used by
the business for which an adult- oriented business permit is required does
not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire,
and safety laws of the city and the state, or with the requirements of this
chapter and § 153.120.030.



      (2)   The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner,
director, officer, shareholder, or manager has knowingly made any false,
misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for
an adult-oriented business permit.



      (3)   An applicant,  his or her partner, or any director,
officer, or 25% or greater shareholder of an applicant corporation is under
18 years of age.



      (4)   The required application fee has not been paid.



      (5)   Within the past five years, the applicant, his or her
partner, or any director, officer, or 25% or greater shareholder of an
applicant corporation has been convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendre
to any of the following offenses:  Cal. Penal Code, §§ 243.4, 261, 266a,
266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314, 315, 316, 318,
653.22 or Cal. Penal Code, § 647(a), (b) or (d); any offense requiring
registration under provisions of either Cal. Penal Code, § 290 or Cal.
Health and Safety Code, § 11590; or any felony offense involving the
possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving
away, of a controlled substance specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or any equivalent violation of the
code of another state; or has had an adult oriented permit revoked by this
city or any other governmental entity within the past three years.



   (B)   If the City Clerk grants the application or if the City Clerk
neither grants nor denies the application within 30 days after it is stamped
as received (except as provided in § 124.050(A)), the applicant may begin
operating the adult-oriented business for which the permit was sought,
subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards
and requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to the
requirements of § 124.120.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)



§ 124.070  TRANSFER OF ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMITS.



   (A)   A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under
the authority of an adult-oriented business permit at any place other than
the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the
permit.



   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an
adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business permit to
another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the
permit from the City Clerk stating that the transferee is now the
permittee.  Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files
an application with the City Clerk in accordance with §§ 124.040 and
124.050, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by
resolution of the City Council, and the City Clerk determines in accordance
with § 124.060 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an
original adult-oriented business permit.



   (C)   No permit may be transferred when the City Clerk has notified
the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.



   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly
in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be
deemed revoked.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 124.080  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMIT.



   (A)   No person shall engage in any live performance depicting
specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an
adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business performer
permit issued by the city.  All persons who have been issued an
adult-oriented business permit shall promptly supplement the information
provided as part of the application for the permit required by § 124.030,
with the names of all performers required to obtain an adult-oriented
business performer permit, within five days of any change in the information
originally submitted.  Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for
suspension and/or revocation of the adult-oriented business permit.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall grant or deny adult business performer
permits as provided herein.



   (C)   The application for an adult-oriented business performer
permit shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk.  An original and
two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with
the City Clerk.



   (D)   The completed application shall contain the following
information (which shall be kept confidential by the city to the extent
permitted by law) and be accompanied by the following documents:



      (1)   The applicant’s legal name and any other names,
including “stage names” and aliases, used by the applicant;



      (2)   The applicant’s age, date, and place of birth;



      (3)   The applicant’s height, weight, hair, and eye color;



      (4)   The applicant’s present residence address and
telephone number;



      (5)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of or
plead guilty or nolo contendre to:



         (a)   Any of the offenses set forth in Cal. Penal Code,
§§ 243.4, 261, 266a, 266b, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267,
288, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22 or subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Cal. Penal
Code, § 647; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either
Cal. Penal Code, § 290 or Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11590; or any
felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale,
transportation, furnishing or giving away, of a controlled substance
specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code, §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or
11058 as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered;
or



         (b)   The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside
the state.



      (6)   Whether the applicant is or has ever been licensed or
registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other
jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction.  If any
person mentioned in this division has ever been licensed or registered as a
prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage
in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such
registration, licensing, or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates
during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage
in prostitution.



      (7)   The applicant’s state driver's license or
identification number;



      (8)   Satisfactory written proof that the applicant, his or
her partner, or any director, officer, or 25% or greater shareholder of an
applicant corporation is at least 18 years of age;



      (9)   The applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the
Police Department, and a color photograph at least 2 x 2 clearly showing the
applicant’s face.  Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant;



      (10)   Whether the applicant has ever had an adult oriented
business performer permit (or equivalent permit in another jurisdiction) or
adult business permit (or equivalent permit in another jurisdiction) revoked.



   (E)   The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee.  The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the
City Council.



   (F)   Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the
application fees, the City Clerk shall immediately stamp the application as
complete and promptly investigate the application.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)



§ 124.090  INVESTIGATION AND ACTION ON APPLICATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall, within five days of submission of an
application determine whether the application is complete.  If the City
Clerk determines that the application is incomplete or that the applicant has
completed the application improperly, the City Clerk shall promptly notify
the applicant of such fact and grant the applicant an extension of time to
complete the application properly.  In addition, the applicant may request
an extension of the time for the City Clerk to act on the application.  The
time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the
period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.



   (B)   Within five days after receipt of the properly completed
application, the City Clerk shall grant or deny the application and so notify
the applicant as follows:



      (1)   The City Clerk shall write or stamp “Granted” or
“Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.



      (2)   If the application is denied, the City Clerk shall
attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.



      (3)   If the application is granted, the City Clerk shall
attach to the application an adult-oriented business performer permit.



      (4)   The application as granted or denied and the permit, if
any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid,
addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall grant the application and issue the
permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set
forth in division (E) of this section.



   (D)   If the City Clerk grants the application or if the City Clerk
neither grants nor denies the application within five days after it is
stamped as complete (except as provided in § 124.090(A), the applicant may
begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall deny the application for any of the
following reasons:



      (1)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or
in any report or document required to be filed with the application;



      (2)   The applicant, his or her partner, or any director,
officer, or 25% or greater shareholder of an applicant corporation is under
18 years of age;



      (3)   The adult-oriented business performer permit is to be
used for performing in a business prohibited by state or city law;



      (4)   The applicant has been registered in any state as a
prostitute;



      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of or  pled guilty or
nolo contendre to any of the offenses enumerated in § 124.080(D)(5) or
convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendre to an offense outside the state
that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within
the state, provided, however, that a permit shall be issued, if the applicant
otherwise qualifies, to any person convicted of or who pled guilty or nolo
contendre to the described crimes if the conviction of plea occurred more
than five years prior to the date of the application.



      (6)   The applicant has had an adult oriented business
performer permit (or equivalent permit in another jurisdiction) or adult
business permit (or equivalent permit in another jurisdiction) revoked,
provided, however, that a permit shall be issued, if the applicant otherwise
qualifies, if the revocation was more than three years prior to the date of
the application.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 124.100  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMITS AND
ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERFORMER PERMITS.



   (A)   An adult-oriented business permit or adult- oriented business
performer permit may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this section.



   (B)   On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the
City Clerk shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or
revocation to the permittee.  Such notice shall set forth the time and place
of a hearing, and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the
pertinent code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in
support thereof.  The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to
the last known address of the permittee, or shall be delivered to the
permittee personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date.  Hearings
shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the City
Clerk but at a minimum shall include the following:



      (1)   All parties involved shall have a right to offer
testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be
represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and
cross-examine witnesses.



      (2)   The hearing officer shall not be bound by the formal
rules of evidence.  Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort
of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs.  Any hearing under this section may be continued
for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.



      (3)   The status quo shall be maintained pending the hearing
officer’s decision on the suspension or revocation, unless the permittee
seeks judicial review pursuant to Cal. Civil Code, § 1094.8, in which case,
the status quo shall be maintained until a trial court decision on the writ.



   (C)   A permittee may be subject to suspension or revocation of his
or her permit, or be subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for
any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the
permittee or an employee, performer, independent contractor, agent, partner,
director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business:



      (1)   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a permit, or
in any report or record required to be filed with the city.



      (2)   (a)   The permittee, employee, agent, partner,
director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly
allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent
the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult-oriented
business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performer, the
permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the
premises of an adult-oriented business:



            1.   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense
which requires registration under Cal. Penal Code, § 290 or Cal. Health And
Safety Code, § 11590



            2.   The occurrence of acts of lewdness,
assignation, prostitution, or sexual misconduct such as any act of unlawful
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation or use of the
establishment as a place where lawful solicitations for sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur including any conduct
constituting violations of Cal. Penal Code, §§ 243.4, 261. 266a, 266b,
266c, 266d, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 267, 288, 314, 315, 316, 318,
653.22 or 647(a), (b) or (d).



            3.   Any act constituting a violation of
provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or
distribution of harmful matter to minors, including but not limited to Cal.
Penal Code, §§ 311 through 313.4.



            4.   Any act constituting a violation of
provisions of the California Health and Safety Code relating to the
possession , possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing or giving
away, of a controlled substance as specified in Cal. Health and Safety Code,
§§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058.



            5.   Any conduct prohibited by this chapter.



         (b)   For the purposes of this section, an
adult-oriented business permittee has knowingly permitted a violation when a
violation occurs any time after having received written notice of a previous
violation.



      (3)   Failure to abide by an disciplinary action previously
imposed by an appropriate city official.



   (D)   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of
this section, if the hearing officer finds and determines that there are
grounds for disciplinary action, based upon the severity of the violation,
the City Clerk shall impose one of the following:



      (1)   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to
exceed six months;



      (2)   Revocation of the permit.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)



§ 124.110  APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION.



   After denial of an application for an adult-oriented business permit or
an adult-oriented business performer permit, or after denial of renewal of a
permit, or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or person to
whom the permit was granted may seek review of such administrative action by
the City Manager in the manner provided herein.  Any person seeking to
appeal a decision of the City Clerk shall file a written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk no later than 15 days after the date of the notice
denying the application or permit renewal or imposing the suspension or
revocation.  The notice shall state, with specificity, the specific factual
and legal basis of the appeal.  The City Clerk shall, within ten days,
schedule a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee and notify
the appellant, in writing, of the day, time, and location of the hearing
which shall be held no later than 30 days from the data the appeal had been
filed.  The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with the same procedures
established by the City Clerk pursuant to § 124.100(A).  The City Manager
shall provide the appellant with a written decision within ten days of the
conclusion of the hearing.  If the denial, suspension, or revocation is
affirmed on review, the applicant permittee may seek prompt judicial review
of such administrative action pursuant to Cal. Civil Proc. Code, § 1094.5. 
The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review, if
sought by the permittee.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)



FACILITIES AND EMPLOYEES



§ 124.120  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles, and fire equipment
shall be regulated, designed, and provided in accordance with the fire
department and building regulations and standards adopted by the city.



   (B)   No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner
that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting,
describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas from any location outside the building of such
establishment.  This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign,
show window, or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises
shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any
exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.



   (C)   All off-street parking area and premise entries of the
sexually-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of
operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking surface
and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to
provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the
adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and
to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct.  The lighting
shall be shown on the sketch or diagram of the premises required by §
124.040.



   (D)   The premises within which the adult-oriented business is
located shall provide sufficient sound absorbing insulation so that noise
generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent
property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other
separate unit within the same building.



   (E)   Except for those businesses also regulated by the state
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be
open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight on any
particular day.



   (F)   The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be
clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18
years of age are precluded from entering the premises.  Said notice shall be
constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the City Clerk or designee. 
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at
any time.



   (G)   All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which
patrons are permitted, except rest rooms, shall be open to view by the
management at all times.



   (H)   Any adult-oriented business which is also an “adult
arcade” shall comply with the following provisions:



      (1)   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such
a manner that there is an unobstructed view with the naked eye, and without
the aid of any cameras, mirrors, or other devices from a manager's station
which is no larger than 32 square feet of floor area with no single dimension
being greater than eight feet and which is located in a public portion of the
establishment of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose, including but not limited to the entire interior of
individual viewing area, but specifically excluding restrooms.  Restrooms
may not contain video reproduction equipment.  The view required in this
division must be direct line of sight from the manager's station.



      (2)   The view area specified in division (H)(5) shall remain
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other
materials at all times.  No patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.



      (3)   No individual viewing area may be occupied by more than
one person at any one time.



      (4)   The walls or partitions between individual viewing areas
or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes or
other openings in any wall or partition of any individual viewing area such
as to allow physical contact through a partition between the occupant of any
such individual viewing area and a person on the outside.  All individual
viewing areas shall be separated from other Individual viewing Areas by a
five-foot buffer.



      (5)   Customers, patrons, or visitors shall not be allowed to
stand idly by in the vicinity of any such individual viewing area or from
remaining in the common area of such business, other than the rest-rooms, who
are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available
on display for purchase or viewing.  Signs prohibiting loitering shall be
posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.



      (6)   The floors, seats, walls, and other interior portions of
all individual viewing areas shall be maintained clean and free from waste
and bodily secretions.



   (I)   All areas of the Adult-oriented Business shall be illuminated
at a minimum of the following foot candles, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level:



 

Area
 
Footcandles


Bookstores and other retail establishments
 
20


Theaters and cabarets
 
5 (except during performances, in which times lighting shall be at least 1.25
foot-candles)


Arcades
 
10


Motels/hotels
 
20 (in public areas)


Modeling studios
 
20



 



   (J)   The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain
separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female
patrons and employees.  Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from
using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be
prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties
of repair, maintenance, and cleaning of the restroom facilities.  The
restrooms shall be free from any adult material.  Restrooms shall not
contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection,
recording, or reproduction equipment.



   (K)   The following additional requirements shall pertain to
adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting specified
anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:



      (1)   Live entertainment shall only be performed either: (a)
on a stage raised at least 18 inches above the floor and separated from
patrons by a fixed rail at least 30 inches in height placed at a distance of
not less than six feet from the stage and around the perimeter of the stage;
or (b) in a location other than on the stage such that the performer is
separated from any patron by not less than six feet.  This provision does
not apply to an individual viewing area where the area in which the
entertainer is performing is completely separated from the individual viewing
area, or other area occupied by a patron, by a floor to ceiling permanent,
solid barrier which eliminates the opportunity for any patron/entertainer
physical contact.



      (2)   The adult-oriented business shall provide separate
dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to
the performer’s use.



      (3)   The adult-oriented business shall provide an
entrance/exit for performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by
patrons.



      (4)   The adult-oriented business shall provide access for
performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely
separated from the patrons.  If such separate access is not physically
feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide
walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with
a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers
capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact
between patrons and entertainers.



      (5)   No performer then performing adult live entertainment
characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron
shall have physical contact with any performer, while the performer is
performing on the premises.  In addition, while on the premises, no
performer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have
physical contact with a performer, which physical contact involves the
touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, public area, buttocks, cleft
of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or
area of any other person’s body either before or after any adult live
entertainment by such performer.  This prohibition does not extend to
incidental touching.  Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no
touching requirements by signs conspicuously placed on the barrier between
patrons and performers.  If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the
separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent
contractors of the adult business.



      (6)   Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be
maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons
required by this division.



      (7)   No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
performer, and no performer will accept any directly paid gratuity from any
patron.  For the purposes of this section, the phrase “directly pay”
shall mean the person-to-person transfer of the gratuity.  This section
shall not prohibit the establishment of a non-human gratuity receptacle
placed at least six feet from the stage or area which the performer is
occupying.



      (8)   No owner or other person with managerial control over an
adult-oriented business shall permit any person on the premises of the
adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or natal cleft with less than a fully opaque
coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage
over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.  This provision may not be complied with by
applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified
anatomical part required to be covered.



   (L)   Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in
order to maintain the public peace and safety based upon the following
standards:



      (1)   Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment
shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is
open.  If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an
additional security guard shall be on duty.  One additional security guard
shall be added for each additional increase in occupancy of 35 persons.



      (2)   Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses
shall be required at a ratio of one guard for every 100-person occupancy
limit.



      (3)   Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing
violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of
these regulations.  Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so
as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be
duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable pro-visions of
state law.  No security guard required pursuant to this division shall act
as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole
occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard.



   (M)   The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be
deemed conditions of adult- oriented business permit approvals, and failure
to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for suspension or
revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96; Am. Ord. 1301, passed 4-4-07)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 124.130  REGISTER AND PERMIT NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides
live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving
specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so
performing on the premises and their permit numbers.  Such register shall be
available for inspection during regular business hours by any police office
or health officer of the city.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 124.140  DISPLAY OF PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARDS.



   (A)   Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times
during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the
same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.



   (B)   The City Clerk shall provide each adult-oriented business
performer required to have a permit pursuant to this chapter with an
identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and permit
number of such performer.



   (C)   An adult-oriented business performer shall have such card
available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the
premises of the adult-oriented business.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 124.150  EMPLOYMENT OF AND SERVICES RENDERED TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF
18 YEARS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other
person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any
service for which it requires such permit to, any person who is not at least
18 years of age.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other
person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter or remain
within the adult-oriented business any person who is not at least 18 years of
age.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



§ 124.160  INSPECTION.



   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Planning Division, or other
city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented
business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law and the
development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses
at any time it is occupied or opened for business.  A person who operates an
adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of
the provisions of this section if he or she refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 124.170  REGULATIONS NONEXCLUSIVE.



   The provisions of this subchapter regulating adult-oriented businesses
are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse
noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of
businesses as adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)



§ 124.180  EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS WITHOUT PERMITS UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in
charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live
entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified
sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is
not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business performer
permit.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 124.190  TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   All persons who possess an outstanding business license heretofore
issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons
required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business performer
permit must apply for and obtain such a permit within 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter.  Failure to do so and continued operation of
an adult-oriented business, or the continued performances depicting specified
anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business
after such time without a permit shall constitute a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1117, passed 9-4-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 125:  TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSING



Section



   125.010   Definitions



   125.020   Requirements and prohibitions



   125.030   Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer license



   125.040   Application procedure



   125.050   Issuance of license



   125.060   License renewal and expiration



   125.070   Licenses nontransferable



   125.080   License conveys a limited, conditional privilege



   125.090   Fee for license



   125.100   Compliance monitoring



   125.110   Revocation of license



   125.120   Tobacco retailing without a license



   125.130   Enforcement



§ 125.010  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARM'S LENGTH TRANSACTION.  A sale in good faith and for valuable
consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between
two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to
participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies
or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect
of the violations of this chapter is not an arm’s length transaction.



   DEPARTMENT.  Community Development Department, and any agency or
person designated by the Chief Executive Officer to enforce or administer the
provisions of this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any natural person, partnership, cooperative association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.



   PROPRIETOR.  A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a
business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a
10% or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other
than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be
deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over
the day-to-day operations of a business.



   SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY.  The open display or storage of tobacco products
or tobacco paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way
to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of
the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and
the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of
self-service display.



   SMOKING.  Possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco
paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including a lighted pipe,
cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and means the lighting of a
tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including
a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind).



   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA.  Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders
of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other
item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of
tobacco products.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT.  Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but
not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff,
chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of
tobacco; and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically
active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or
otherwise distributed with the expectation the product or matter will be
introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product
specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for
use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence.



   TOBACCO RETAILER.  Any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or
offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products
or tobacco paraphernalia.



   TOBACCO RETAILING.  The doing of any of the activities mentioned in
the definition of tobacco retailer. This definition is without regard to the
quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered
for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.020  REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   Tobacco retailer license required.  It shall be unlawful for
any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining
and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this chapter
for each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing
without a valid tobacco retailer's license is a nuisance as a matter of law.



   (B)   Lawful business operation.  In the course of tobacco
retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location
for which a license issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a
licensee, or any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local,
state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia,
or tobacco retailing.



   (C)   Display of license.  Each tobacco retailer license shall be
prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location.



   (D)   Positive identification required.  No person engaged in
tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco
paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of 27 years
without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that
the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and
possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia.



   (E)   Minimum age for persons selling tobacco. No person who is
younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or
possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing.



   (F)   Self-service displays prohibited.  Tobacco retailing by means
of a self-service display is prohibited.



   (G)   False and misleading advertising prohibited. A tobacco
retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including,
for example, a person whose license has been revoked:



      (1)   Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco
paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of tobacco products or
tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco
retailing without a license under § 125.010; and



      (2)   Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco
products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of
such products from the tobacco retailer's location or that could lead a
reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that
location.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.030  LIMITS ON ELIGIBILITY FOR A TOBACCO RETAILER LICENSE.



   (A)   No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at
other than a fixed location. For example, tobacco retailing by persons on
foot or from vehicles is prohibited.



   (B)   No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any
location that is exclusively zoned for residential uses (R-1, RG or R3 zones).



   (C)   No license may be issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any
location that is licensed under state law to serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises (such as an "on-sale" license issued by the
California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) and no license may be
issued to authorize tobacco retailing at any location offering food for sale
for consumption on the premises. For example, and without limitation, tobacco
retailing is prohibited in bars and restaurants. This provision shall take
effect on November 1, 2009, which is one year after the effective date of the
ordinance adopting this chapter.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.040  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   (1)   Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be
submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct tobacco
retailing and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent
thereof.



      (2)   It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be
informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those
laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. No proprietor
may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the city the
proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A
license issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the
basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be
revoked pursuant to § 125.080 of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco
retailer's license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in
contravention of any provision of law.



      (3)   All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied
by the Department and shall contain the following information:



         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of each
proprietor of the business seeking a license.



         (b)   The business name, address, and telephone number
of the single, fixed location for which a license is sought.



         (c)   A single name and mailing address authorized by
each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized
address") required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of
this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall
be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address
specified in division (b) above.



         (d)   Proof the location for which a tobacco retailer's
license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by
the California Board of Equalization.



         (e)   Whether or not any proprietor or any agent of the
proprietor has admitted violating, or has been found to have violated, this
chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the
previous five years. If person filing the application for a tobacco retailer
does not disclose past violations and a license is issued, the license can be
revoked as soon as the past violations are discovered pursuant to § 125.110
below.



         (f)   Such other information as the Chief Executive
Officer deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter
as specified on the application form required by this section.



   (B)   A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the Department in
writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a
tobacco retailer's license within ten business days after a change.



   (C)   All information specified in an application pursuant to this
section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records
Act (California Government Code § 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law,
subject to the laws' exemptions.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.050  ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.



   Upon the receipt of a completed application for a tobacco retailer's
license and the license fee required by this chapter, the Department shall
issue a license unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of
the following bases for denial exist:



   (A)   The information presented in the application is inaccurate or
false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a
violation of this chapter.



   (B)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a
location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer
licenses. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial
of a license if the applicant provides the city with documentation
demonstrating by clear and convincing evidence the applicant has acquired or
is acquiring the location or business in an arm’s length transaction.



   (C)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for
a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a license to be issued.



   (D)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that
is prohibited pursuant to this chapter, that is unlawful pursuant to this
code, including, without limitation, the zoning ordinance, building code, and
business license tax ordinance, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.060  LICENSE RENEWAL AND EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Renewal of license.  A tobacco retailer's license is invalid
if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the
license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year. Each
tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer's
license and submit the annual license fee no later than 30 days prior to
expiration of the term.



   (B)   Expiration of license.  A tobacco retailer's license that is
not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a license
not timely renewed pursuant to division (A), the proprietor must:



      (1)   Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and



      (2)   Submit a signed affidavit affirming the proprietor:



         (a)   Has not sold and will not sell any tobacco product
or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the
license is renewed; or



         (b)   Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period
established for tobacco retailing without a license, as set forth in §
125.120(A) of this chapter, before seeking renewal of the license.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.070  LICENSES NONTRANSFERABLE.



   (A)   A tobacco retailer's license may not be transferred from one
person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer's
license is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change in
proprietor(s).



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior
violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and
license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:



      (1)   The location has been fully transferred to a new
proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and



      (2)   The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and
convincing evidence the new proprietor(s) have acquired or is acquiring the
location in an arm’s length transaction.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.080  LICENSE CONVEYS A LIMITED, CONDITIONAL PRIVILEGE.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person
obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right
other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at
the location in the city identified on the face of the permit. For example,
nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supercede,
or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not
limited to, any provision of this Code, including, without limitation, the
zoning ordinance, building codes, and business license tax ordinance, or any
condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment
pursuant to Cal. Lab. Code § 6404.5. For example, obtaining a tobacco
retailer license does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale tobacco
shop" for the purposes of Cal. Lab. Code § 6404.5.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.090  FEE FOR LICENSE.



   The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer's license shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The fee
shall be annual and shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of
administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, for example,
issuing a license, administering the license program, retailer education,
retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and
prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory
program authorized by this chapter. All fees and interest upon proceeds of
fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable
except as may be required by law.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.100  COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the
Department. In addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions
of this chapter. The city may designate any number of additional persons to
monitor compliance with this chapter.



   (B)   The Department or other person designated to enforce the
provisions of this chapter shall check the compliance of each tobacco
retailer at least as often as established by the Chief Executive Officer
which could be as often as three times per a 12-month period. The Department
may check the compliance of tobacco retailers previously found to be in
compliance a fewer number of times so the Department may check the compliance
of new licensees and tobacco retailers previously found in violation of the
licensing law more frequently. Nothing in this section shall create a right
of action in any licensee or other person against the city or its agents.



   (C)   Compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the
Department to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting
business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to
tobacco. When the Department deems appropriate, the compliance checks shall
determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing.



   (D)   The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age
for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be
in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth
decoy") if the potential violation occurs when:



      (1)   The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check
supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the city;



      (2)   The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person
designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter; or



      (3)   The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check
funded in part, either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the
Los Angeles County Health Department or the California Department of Health
Services.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.110  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Revocation of license for violation.  In addition to any
other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license shall be
revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the Department
finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee is
afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, the licensee, or any of the
licensee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements,
conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, "no
contest" or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated
in § 125.020 above.



   (B)   New license after revocation.



      (1)   After revocation for a first violation of this chapter
at a location within any five-year period, no new license may issue for the
location until ten days have passed from the date of revocation.



      (2)   After revocation for a second violation of this chapter
at a location within any five-year period, no new license may issue for the
location until 30 days have passed from the date of last revocation.



      (3)   After revocation for a third violation of this chapter
at a location within any five-year period, no new license may issue for the
location until 90 days have passed from the date of last revocation.



      (4)   After revocation for four or more violations of this
chapter at a location within any five-year period, no new license may be
issued for the location until five years have passed from the date of the
last revocation.



   (C)   Appeal of revocation.  A decision of the Department to revoke
a license is appealable to the Chief Executive Officer and must be filed with
City Clerk within ten days after mailing of the Department's decision. If
such an appeal is made, then it shall stay enforcement of the appealed
action. An appeal to the Chief Executive Officer is not available for a
revocation made pursuant to division (D) below. The decision by the Chief
Executive Officer shall be the final decision of the city.



   (D)   Revocation of license wrongly issued.  A tobacco retailer's
license shall be revoked if the Department finds, after the licensee is
afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, one or more of the bases for
denial of a license under § 125.050 existed at the time application was made
or at any time before the license issued. The decision by the Department
shall be the final decision of the city. Such a revocation shall be without
prejudice to the filing of a new license application.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.120  TOBACCO RETAILING WITHOUT A LICENSE.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court
of competent jurisdiction determines, or the Department finds based on a
preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, any
person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco
retailer's license, either directly or through the person's agents or
employees, then the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued,
a tobacco retailing license as follows:



      (1)   After a first violation of this section at a location
within any five-year period, no new license may be issued for the person or
the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been
transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until 30 days have passed from
the date of the violation.



      (2)   After a second violation of this section at a location
within any five-year period, no new license may be issued for the person or
the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been
transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until 90 days have passed from
the date of the last violation.



      (3)   After of a third or subsequent violation of this section
at a location within any five-year period, no new license may be issued for
the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location
has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until five years have
passed from the date of the last violation.



   (B)   Tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia offered for sale or
exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by the
Department or any peace officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and
any other owner of the tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia seized is
given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate the tobacco
products and tobacco paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in
violation of this chapter. The decision by the Department or peace officer
may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 125.110(C).
Forfeited tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia shall be destroyed after
all internal appeals have been exhausted and the time in which to seek
judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 or
other applicable law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such
a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final.



   (C)   For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this
chapter, each day on which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is
offered for sale in violation of this chapter or each individual retail
tobacco product and each individual retail item of tobacco paraphernalia that
is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



§ 125.130  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.



   (B)   Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained
in any part through the participation of a person under the age of 18 years
old, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any
civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the
alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and
persuasiveness of the evidence presented.



   (C)   Each violation of this chapter is subject to a civil action
brought by the City Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than $250
and not exceeding $1,000 per violation.



   (D)   Each violation of this chapter may, in the discretion of the
City Attorney, be prosecuted as an infraction or a misdemeanor when the
interests of justice so require.



   (E)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation
of this chapter.



   (F)   Each violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance.



   (G)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by
other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action
brought by the City Attorney, including, for example, administrative
citation, judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code
enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief.



(Ord. 1321, passed 10-1-08)



CHAPTER 126:  TRASH RECEPTACLES AT DRIVE-THROUGH EATING FACILITIES



Section



   126.01   Definitions



   126.02   Trash receptacle required



   126.03   Phased enforcement



§ 126.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY.  The use of land, buildings, structures or
parts thereof to provide products or services, either wholly or in part,
through an attendant or a window or automated machine, to persons remaining
seated in motorized vehicles within a designating vehicular stacking lane. A
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY may be in combination with other uses, including, but
not limited to, bank teller windows, pharmacies, dry cleaners and eating
establishments.



   DRIVE-THROUGH TRASH RECEPTACLE. A trash receptacle with an elongated
trash collection chute that is placed near the exit point of the designating
vehicular stacking lane of a drive-through facility, after the pick-up
window, on the driver-side of vehicles and in a location that will (i) not
inhibit pedestrian or vehicular circulation and (ii) allow the driver of the
vehicle, while seated in the vehicle, to dispose of trash.



   EATING ESTABLISHMENT.  Any establishment, which provides as a
principle use, the sale of any food, frozen desert or beverage and which is
ready for immediate consumption.



(Ord. 1352, passed 11-7-12)



§ 126.02  TRASH RECEPTACLE REQUIRED.



   (A)   The operator and owner of a drive-through facility associated
with an eating establishment shall install and maintain a drive-through trash
receptacle.



   (B)   The owner and operator of the drive-through facility
associated with an eating establishment for which a drive-through receptacle
is required shall empty the drive-through trash receptacle of trash on a
regular basis to ensure customers using that drive-through facility are able
to deposit trash into that receptacle.



(Ord. 1352, passed 11-7-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 126.03  PHASED ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Installation of the drive-through trash receptacle at a
drive-through facility associated with an eating establishment, as required
by § 126.02, shall be completed prior to the issuance of a new business
license or certificate of occupancy for that drive-through facility.



   (B)   For each drive-through facility associated with an eating
establishment legally operating before December 7, 2012, the owner and
operator of that drive-through facility shall install a drive-through trash
receptacle on or before June 7, 2013; provided, that the Zoning Administrator
may grant one extension of no more than six months, if good cause, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, is shown by the operator or owner of
that drive-through facility.



   (C)   The owner or operator of a drive-through facility associated
with an eating establishment may request an exemption from § 126.02;
provided that the owner or operator provides sufficient evidence, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, of specific unusual structural
constraints related to that facility, which make compliance with § 126.02
impossible for physical and financial reasons.



(Ord. 1352, passed 11-7-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 127: MEDICAL AND ADULT USE COMMERCIAL CANNABIS



Section



   127.01   Purpose



   127.02   Definitions



   127.03   Relationship to other laws



   127.04   Outdoor cultivation



   127.05   Permitted use



   127.06   Development agreement required



   127.07   Permitted zones; distance and other conditions for approval



   127.08   No transfer or change in ownership or location



   127.09   Changing, altering, or modifying licensed premises



   127.10   Grounds for denial of permit; additional conditions imposed



   127.11   Security



   127.12   Fees and charges



   127.13   Limitations on city’s liability



   127.14   Inspections



   127.15   Public nuisance prohibited



   127.16   Appeals



   127.17   Statewide regulation



   127.18   Interpretation



§ 127.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate all commercial
cannabis activity in the City of Baldwin Park, as defined in § 26000 et seq.
of the Cal. Business and Professions Code, to the extent authorized by state
law and in a manner designed to minimize negative impact on the city, and to
promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of residents and
businesses within the city.



   (B)   This chapter is further adopted and established pursuant to
the specific authority granted to the city in § 7 of Art. XI of the Cal.
Constitution and § 26000 of the Cal. Business and Professions Code. These
regulations shall govern all commercial cannabis activity that occurs within
the jurisdiction of the city.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Unless otherwise defined herein, the terms in this chapter shall have
the same meaning as set forth in the MAUCRSA ("Medicinal and Adult-Use
Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act") and any rules promulgated under it. In
addition, the following terms shall be defined as follows:



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS. The use of cannabis for recreational purposes as
distinguished from cannabis for medicinal purposes.



   ADULT-USE CANNABIS LICENSEE. Has the same meaning as that term
A-LICENSEE as defined by § 26001(f) of the Cal. Business and Professions
Code.



   APPLICANT. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by § 26001(c)
of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   CANNABIS. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by § 26001(f)
of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   CITY. The City of Baldwin Park, California.



   CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER. The Chief Executive Officer of the city or a
duly authorized designee.



   CODE. The Baldwin Park Municipal Code.



   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as that term is
defined by § 26001(k) of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   CULTIVATION SITE. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by §
26001(m) of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   DAY-CARE. Any child day care facility other than a family day care home
and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and
school-age child care centers.



   DISTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by §
26001(r) of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   ENCLOSED LOCKED STRUCTURE. A structure that: (1) does not allow for the
visibility of the interior from the outside; (2) is secured with a
non-residential lock; (3) is completely surrounded on all sides by a wall
(i.e., fully enclosed); and (4) is roofed. ENCLOSED LOCKED STRUCTURES may
include greenhouses, provided that only the roof of the greenhouse is made of
transparent glass. All enclosed locked structures shall comply with the city
and state building codes, city and state fire codes, and all other applicable
laws.



   GOOD CAUSE. For purposes of denying an initial license under this
chapter, for revoking a permit, or for denying a permit renewal or
reinstatement, means at least one of the following:



      (1)   The applicant has not obtained approval by the City
Council of a development agreement setting forth the general terms for the
operation of a business under this chapter or a licensee breaches the terms
of an applicable development agreement;



      (2)   The applicant or licensee has violated any of the terms,
conditions, or provisions of this chapter, state law, any regulations
promulgated under state law, any applicable local ordinances or rules, or any
special terms or conditions placed upon its state license, local license, or
permit;



      (3)   The licensed premises has been or is operated in a
manner that adversely affects the public health, safety, or welfare of the
immediate neighborhood in which the establishment is located;



      (4)   The applicant or licensee has knowingly made false
statements, misrepresentations or material omissions on an application form,
renewal form, or any other document submitted to the city;



      (5)   The applicant or licensee's criminal history does not
indicate that the applicant or licensee is of good moral character; or the
applicant or licensee has been convicted of an offense that is substantially
related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the business or
profession for which the application is made, except that, if the local
licensing authority has issued a local license to the applicant or licensee,
the city shall not consider any criminal history of the applicant or licensee
that was disclosed to or discovered by the local licensing authority prior to
the issuance of the local license and is confirmed by the applicant. For any
criminal history that was not disclosed to or discovered by the local
licensing authority prior to the issuance of the local license or that arose
after the issuance of the local license, the city shall conduct a thorough
review of the nature of the crime, conviction, circumstances, and evidence of
rehabilitation of the applicant or licensee and shall evaluate the
suitability of the applicant or licensee to be issued a permit based on the
evidence found through the review. In determining which offenses are
substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the
business or profession for which the application is made, the city shall
consider the factors as set forth in § 26057(b)(4) of the Cal. Business and
Professions Code;



      (6)   The applicant or licensee is employing or allowing to
volunteer any person whose criminal history indicates that person is not of
good moral character;



      (7)   The applicant or licensee fails to allow inspection of
the security recordings, activity logs, or business records of the licensed
premises by city officials; or



      (8)   An applicant or licensee is a licensed physician
providing written recommendations to patients for cannabis.



   GOOD MORAL CHARACTER. Having a personal history that demonstrates the
propensity to serve the public in the licensed area in a manner that reflects
openness, honesty, fairness, and respect for the rights of others and for the
law. In determining good moral character, the following standards apply:



      (1)   A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a
judgment in a civil action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of
an individual's lack of good moral character. Such judgment may be used as
evidence in the determination, and when so used, the individual shall be
notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that, at the
current time, he or she has the ability to and is likely to serve the public
in a fair, honest and open manner, that he or she is rehabilitated, or that
the substance of the former offense is not substantially related to the
occupation or profession for which he or she seeks to be licensed.



      (2)   Notwithstanding Ch. 2 of Division 1.5 of the Cal.
Business and Professions Code, a prior conviction where the sentence,
including any term of probation, incarceration, or supervised release is
completed for possession of, possession for sale, sale, manufacture,
transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance, is not considered
substantially related, and shall not be the sole ground for denial of a local
license, except that any of the following convictions shall be deemed
substantially related and may be the sole grounds for denying a local license
or permit:



         (a)   A felony conviction for hiring, employing, or
using a minor in transporting, carrying, selling, giving away, preparing for
sale, or peddling, any controlled substance;



         (b)   A felony conviction for selling, offering to sell,
furnishing, offering to furnish, administering, or giving any controlled
substance to a minor; or



         (c)   A felony conviction for drug trafficking with
enhancements pursuant to  § 11370.4 or § 11379.8 of the Cal. Health and
Safety Code.



         (d)   Conviction for any controlled substance felony
subsequent to issuance of a permit shall be grounds for revocation of a
permit or denial of the renewal of a permit.



   IMMATURE CANNABIS PLANT. A cannabis plant, whether male or female, that
has not yet flowered and that does not yet have buds that are readily
observed by unaided visual examination. This is distinguished from a MATURE
plant, which has flowered and has buds.



   LICENSED PREMISES. The designated area on a single or immediately
adjoining parcel(s), as identified by valid street address and Assessor
Parcel Number, specified in an application for a permit under this chapter,
which is owned or in the possession of the applicant or licensee and within
which the applicant or licensee is applying for authorization to cultivate,
manufacture, distribute, test, or is applying for multiple permitted uses, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the MAUCRSA, any development
agreement approved by City Council, and any rules adopted pursuant thereto.



   LICENSEE. A person who has been issued a commercial cannabis business
permit under this chapter for a licensed premises.



   LIMITED ACCESS AREA. A building, room, or other area that is part of
the licensed premises whose access is limited to certain authorized persons.



   MANUFACTURE. To compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or
prepare a cannabis product.



   MANUFACTURER. A licensee that conducts the production, preparation,
propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly
or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a
fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or
labels or relabels its container.



   MEDICAL CANNABIS BUSINESS. Any person engaged in commercial cannabis
activity.



   MEDICINAL AND ADULT-USE CANNABIS REGULATION AND SAFETY ACT or MAUCRSA.
Means Division 10 of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   MEDICINAL CANNABIS. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by §
26001(ai) of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   OUTDOORS. Any location within the city that is not within an enclosed
structure.



   OWNER. Any of the following, pursuant to § 26001(al) of the Cal.
Business and Professions Code:



      (1)   A person with an aggregate ownership interest of 20% or
more in the person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest
is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance.



      (2)   The Chief Executive Officer of a nonprofit or other
entity.



      (3)   A member of the Board of Directors of a nonprofit.



      (4)   An individual who will be participating in the
direction, control, or management of the person applying for a license.



   PERSON. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by § 26001(an) of
the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   PERMIT. A CANNABIS PERMIT that authorizes an entity to conduct
commercial cannabis activity under this chapter.



   PHYSICIAN. An individual who possesses a license in good standing to
practice medicine or osteopathy from the State of California.



   STATE LAW. Means and includes Cal. Health and Safety Code, § 11362.5
(Compassionate Use Act of 1996); Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 to
11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act); the California Attorney General's
Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical
Use issued in August, 2008, as such guidelines may be revised from time to
time by action of the Attorney General; MAUCRSA, and all other applicable
laws of the State of California.



   STATE LICENSE. Has the same meaning as that term is defined by §
26001(y) of the Cal. Business and Professions Code.



   STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY. Shall mean the Bureau of Cannabis Control
within the State Department of Consumer Affairs, the State Department of
Public Health, State Department of Food and Agriculture, or any other state
agency responsible for the issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of a state
license issued pursuant to Division 10 of the Cal. Business and Professions
Code or any state agency authorized to take disciplinary action against such
local license.



   WRITTEN DOCUMENTATION. Shall have the meaning set forth in §
11362.7(i) of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.



   YOUTH CENTER. Any public or private facility that is primarily used to
host social activities for minors, including, but not limited to, social
service teenage club facilities, video arcades, or similar amusement park
facilities.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.03  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.



   Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this chapter
incorporates the requirements and procedures set forth in Division 10
(commencing with § 26000) of the Cal. Business and Professions Code. In the
event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and state statutes
or regulations, state law controls.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.04  OUTDOOR CULTIVATION.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance, and a
violation of this chapter for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or
having charge or possession of any parcel within any zoning district in the
city to use or allow such premises to be used for the outdoor cultivation of
cannabis plants.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.05  PERMITTED USE.



   (A)   Cannabis businesses shall only be permitted to operate in the
city following issuance of a permit approved by the City Council or staff
designee and a business license issued by the city in accordance with the
criteria and procedures set forth in this chapter and in compliance with this
municipal code. No land-use entitlement, permit (including building permit)
approval, site plan, certificate of occupancy, zoning clearance, or other
land-use authorization for a medical cannabis business shall be granted or
permitted unless it complies with the provisions of this chapter and the
applicable building standards and this municipal code. If there is a conflict
between the requirements of another chapter in the code and this chapter, the
requirements of this chapter shall prevail.



   (B)   All persons who are engaged in or who are attempting to engage
in commercial cannabis activity in any form shall do so only in strict
compliance with the terms, conditions, and restrictions of the MAUCRSA,
regulations promulgated under MAUCRSA, the provisions of this chapter, and
all other applicable state and local laws.



   (C)   The Chief Executive Officer is authorized to make policies and
procedures consistent with the intent and spirit of this chapter concerning
the applications, the application process, the information required of
applicants, the application procedures, and the administration and procedures
to be used and followed in the application and process.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.06  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED.



   Prior to operating in the city and as a condition of issuance of a
permit, the applicant shall enter into a development agreement with the city
setting forth the terms and conditions under which the facility will operate
that is in addition to the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, public outreach and education, community service, payment of fees
and other charges as mutually agreed upon, approval of architectural plans
(including site plan, floor plan, and elevation, to conform with
manufacturing uses under this municipal code), and such other terms and
conditions that will protect and promote the public health, safety, and
welfare of all persons in the city.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.07  PERMITTED ZONES; DISTANCE AND OTHER CONDITIONS FOR APPROVAL.



   No more than 25 licensed premises for each permitted use may be
allowed, maintained, or operated in the city at any time. If there is a
conflict between the requirements of this chapter and any other chapter, the
requirements of this chapter shall prevail.



   (A)   Manufacturing site.



      (1)   No manufacturing shall be located within 600 feet of a
school, day-care center, or youth center or within 50 feet of a residential
zone.



      (2)   Subject to the distance and other requirements of this
chapter and the code, a licensed premises may only be located on a property
within the Industrial (I) and Industrial-Commercial (I-C) zones, and
following the application for and granting of a development agreement by the
City Council and a business permit in accordance with this chapter. The
proposed use shall comply with the minimum requirements set forth in this
chapter for distance separations between manufacturing sites and other
specific land uses.



      (3)   All manufacturing of cannabis shall occur in an enclosed
structure.



      (4)   Licensed sites shall not exceed the 22,000 square feet
authorized pursuant to the controlling development agreement.



      (5)   From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior
evidence of the manufacturing of cannabis or manufactured cannabis except for
any signage authorized by this code.



      (6)   All licensed sites shall comply with the city's lighting
standards including, without limitation, fixture type, wattage, illumination
levels, and shielding and secure the necessary approvals and permits as
needed.



      (7)   All windows on the licensed premises of the
manufacturing site shall be appropriately secured and all cannabis securely
stored.



      (8)   A licensed site, all operations conducted therein, and
all equipment used must be in compliance with all applicable state and local
laws, including all building, electrical, and fire codes.



      (9)   If hazardous materials, flammable gas, flammable
liquefied gas, flammable and combustible liquids, or other flammable
material, as those terms are defined in CFC § 202, are to be used in the
processing of medical cannabis or adult use, then the provisions of CFC §
407 shall be applicable where hazardous materials subject to permits under
CFC § 50 (Hazardous Materials) are located on the licensed premises.



      (10)   Storage, use, and handling of compressed gases in
compressed gas containers, cylinders, tanks and systems shall comply with CFC
Ch. 53. Partially full compressed gas containers, cylinders or tanks
containing residual gases shall be considered as full for the purposes of the
controls required. Compressed gases classified as hazardous materials shall
also comply with CFC Ch. 50 for general requirements and CFC Ch. 53
addressing specific hazards, including CFG Ch. 58 (Flammable Gases), CFC Ch.
60 (Highly Toxic and Toxic Materials), CFC Ch. 63 (Oxidizers, Oxidizing Gases
and Oxidizing Cryogenic Fluids) and CFC Ch. 64 (Pyrophoric Materials). A
manufacturer shall prevent, control and mitigate dangerous conditions related
to storage, use, dispensing, mixing and handling of flammable and combustible
liquids shall be in accordance with CFC Chs. 50 and 57.



      (11)   Licensed sites are permitted under this chapter under a
Group F-1 (Factory Industrial Moderate-Hazard) Occupancy under the Fire Code.
All new construction shall be fire sprinkled per the Fire Code. For
manufacturing sites that will be sited in an existing structure, an automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a
Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:



         (a)   A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet.



         (b)   A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three
stories above grade plane.



         (c)   The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on
all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 22,000 square feet.



      (12)   Suitability of the proposed property. Proposed property
possesses air scrubbers or a filtration system capable of eliminating odors
from escaping the building or commitment to do so before operating.



   (B)   Cultivation sites.



      (1)   No cultivation site shall be located within 600 feet of
a school, daycare center, park, or youth center, or within 50 feet of a
residential zone.



      (2)   Subject to the distance and other requirements of this
chapter and the code, a cultivation site may only be located on a property
within the Industrial (I) and Industrial-Commercial (I-C) zones, and
following the application for and granting of a development agreement by the
City Council and a business permit in accordance with this chapter. The
proposed use will comply with the minimum requirements set forth in this
chapter for distance separations between manufacturing sites and other
specific land uses.



      (3)   All cultivation of cannabis shall occur in an enclosed
locked structure.



      (4)   Cultivation sites shall not exceed the 22,000 square
feet authorized pursuant to the permit.



      (5)   From a public right-of-way, there should be no exterior
evidence of the cultivation of medical and adult use cannabis except for any
signage authorized by this chapter.



      (6)   All cultivation sites shall comply with the city's
lighting standards including, without limitation, fixture type, wattage,
illumination levels, and shielding and secure the necessary approvals and
permits as needed.



      (7)   All windows on the licensed premises of a cultivation
site shall be appropriately secured and all cannabis securely stored.



      (8)   Areas where cannabis is cultivated are wet locations,
and the electrical system in such areas must comply with Title 8 of this
code, Art. 300.6(D) of the National Electric Code, city and California
building codes, fire codes, electrical codes, and all other applicable laws.



      (9)   Cultivation sites are under a Group F-1 (Factory
Industrial Moderate-Hazard) Occupancy under the Fire Code. All new
construction is required to be fire sprinkled under the Fire Code. For
cultivation sites that will be sited in an existing structure, an automatic
sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing a
Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists:



         (a)   A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 12,000 square feet.



         (b)   A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three
stories above grade plane.



         (c)   The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on
all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 22,000 square feet.



      (10)   In addition to a manufacturing or cultivation permit, a
cannabis business applicant may apply for another use as permitted by
MAUCRSA, a development agreement approved by City Council, this chapter, and
any rules adopted pursuant thereto.



      (11)   Suitability of the proposed property. Proposed property
possesses air scrubbers or a filtration system capable of eliminating odors
from escaping the building or commitment to do so before operating.



   (C)   Distribution of cannabis. A cannabis distribution licensee may
carry or move cannabis within the city in accordance with MAUCRSA and state
regulations.



   (D)   Nonconforming use. Any cannabis business or cannabis
dispensary established or operating in the city in violation of this chapter
or the ban established by § 153.120.320 of the Baldwin Park zoning code,
shall not be considered a lawful or permitted nonconforming use, and no
cannabis business operating unlawfully is eligible for a cannabis business
permit. Further, any such unlawfully established cannabis business shall
constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement by the city, pursuant to §
95.09.



   (E)   Distances. All distances specified in this section shall be
measured in the following manner:



      (1)   For schools, day-care centers, parks, or youth centers,
the distance shall be measured in a straight line from the subject building
to the closest building on the lot on which the cannabis business is to be
located without regard to intervening structures.



      (2)   For determining distance to residential zones, the
distance shall be measured in a straight line from the subject building to
the closest building on the lot on which the cannabis business is to be
located without regard to intervening structures.



   (F)   Factors considered for permit approval. Approval of a permit
shall take into account the safety of the public, including, but not limited
to, the following factors:



      (1)   Suitability of the proposed property;



      (2)   Suitability of security plan;



      (3)   Suitability of business plan and financial record
keeping;



      (4)   Criminal history;



      (5)   Regulatory compliance history;



      (6)   Good legal standing;



      (7)   Community engagement;



      (8)   Environmental impact; and



      (9)   Labor relations.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.08  NO TRANSFER OR CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR LOCATION.



   An owner of a cannabis business who obtains a permit under this chapter
may not sell, transfer, pledge, assign, grant an option, or otherwise dispose
of his or her ownership interest in the medical cannabis business covered by
any permit issued under this chapter.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.09  CHANGING, ALTERING, OR MODIFYING LICENSED PREMISES.



   (A)   Persons permitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
or those making application for such permits, must demonstrate proof of
lawful possession of the licensed premises. Evidence of lawful possession
consists of properly executed deeds of trust, leases, or other written
documents.



   (B)   The licensed premises shall only be the geographical area that
is specifically and accurately described in executed documents verifying
lawful possession. No licensee is authorized to relocate to other areas or
units within a building structure without first filing a change of location
application and obtaining approval from the City Council, regardless of any
possessory interest or right to possession to such additional space. No
licensee shall add additional units or areas, thereby altering the initially
approved premises, without filing an application to modify the licensed
premises on forms prepared by the Chief Executive Officer and paying any
applicable processing fees.



   (C)   Subletting not authorized. No licensee is authorized to sublet
any portion of any licensed premises for any purpose, unless all necessary
forms and application to modify the existing location to accomplish any
subletting have been approved by the City Council.



   (D)   Application required to alter or modify licensed premises.
After issuance of a permit, the licensee shall not make any physical change,
alteration, or modification of the licensed premises that materially or
substantially alters the premises, production estimates, or the usage of the
premises from the plans originally approved with the development agreement,
without the prior written approval of the City Council or its designee. The
licensee whose premises are to be materially or substantially changed is
responsible for filing an application for approval on current forms provided
by the city.



   (E)   What constitutes a material change. Material or substantial
changes, alterations, or modifications requiring approval include, but are
not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Any increase or decrease in the total physical size or
capacity of the location;



      (2)   The sealing off, creation of, or relocation of a common
entryway, doorway, passage, or other such means of public ingress and/or
egress, when such common entryway, doorway, or passage alters or changes
limited access areas, such as the cultivation within the licensed premises;



      (3)   The installation or replacement of electric fixtures or
equipment, the lowering of a ceiling, or electrical modifications made for
the purpose of increasing power usage to enhance cultivation activities.



   (F)   Application. The City Council or its designee may grant
approval for the types of changes, alterations, or modifications described
herein upon the filing of an application by the licensee and payment of any
applicable fee. The licensee must submit all information requested by the
City Council or its designee including but not limited to documents that
verify the following:



      (1)   The licensee will continue to have exclusive possession
of the premises, as changed, by ownership, lease, or rental agreement, and
sole control of all production; and



      (2)   The proposed change conforms to any and all city
restrictions related to the time, manner, and place of regulation of the
commercial cannabis activity.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.10  GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF PERMIT; ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS IMPOSED.



   (A)   The Chief Executive Officer or designee may reject an
application upon making any of the following findings:



      (1)   The applicant made one or more false or misleading
statements or omissions on the registration application or during the
application process;



      (2)   The applicant's business entity, if applicable, is not
properly organized in strict compliance pursuant to the applicable law,
rules, and regulations;



      (3)   The applicant fails to meet the requirements of this
chapter or any regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter;



      (4)   The applicant's facility or its location is in violation
of any building, zoning, health, safety, or other provision of this code, or
of any state or local law or the facility or its location is not permitted in
the proposed area, or the issuing or continuation of a permit would be
contrary to the public health, welfare, safety, or morals;



      (5)   The applicant, or any of its officers, directors,
owners, managers, or employees is under 21 years of age;



      (6)   The applicant, or any of its officers, directors, or
owners, or any person who is managing or is otherwise responsible for the
activities of the licensed premise, or any employee who participates in the
dispensing, cultivation, processing, manufacturing, delivery, or transporting
of medical marijuana or who participates in the daily operations of the
medical and adult use marijuana facility, has been convicted of a violent
felony, a felony, or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, embezzlement, or
moral turpitude;



      (7)   The applicant or any of its officers, directors, owners,
or managers is a licensed physician making patient recommendations for
cannabis;



      (8)   The applicant or any of its officers, directors, owners,
or managers has been sanctioned by the city, the State of California, or any
county for unregistered medical cannabis activities or has had a registration
revoked under this chapter in the three prior years;



      (9)   The applicant did not pay to the city the required
application and processing fees;



      (10)   Good cause exists to deny the application, as defined
in this chapter.



      (11)   Applicant's application does not reflect the purpose of
this chapter, to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of
residents and businesses within the city.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.11  SECURITY.



   (A)   General security requirements.



      (1)   Security cameras shall be installed and maintained in
good working condition, and used in an on-going manner with at least 240
continuous hours of digitally recorded documentation in a format approved by
the Chief of Police and/or his or her designee. The cameras shall be in use
24 hours per day, seven days per week. The areas to be covered by the
security cameras include, but are not limited to, the storage areas,
manufacturing or cultivation areas, all doors and windows, and any other
areas as determined by the Chief of Police and/or his or her designee.



      (2)   Entrances to any storage areas shall be locked at all
times and under the control of licensee's staff.



      (3)   The business entrance(s) and all window areas shall be
illuminated during evening hours. The applicant shall comply with the city's
lighting standards regarding fixture type, wattage, illumination levels,
shielding, etc., and secure the necessary approvals and permits as needed.



      (4)   All windows on the licensee's building shall be
unopenable or locked and all product securely stored.



      (5)   Each licensee shall implement a system to track the
cultivation and manufacturing of cannabis in order to prevent the licensee
from diverting or transporting cannabis to any location not authorized by
state laws or any local law.



      (6)   All waste and disposal containers shall be stored in a
secure area and be under the control of the licensee's staff.



   (B)   Security alarm systems; minimum requirements.



      (1)   Each licensed premises shall have a security alarm
system, installed by a licensed alarm company that alerts the alarm
monitoring company on all premises entry points and windows.



      (2)   Each licensed premises must be continuously monitored by
an alarm monitoring company.



      (3)   The licensed premises shall maintain up-to-date records
and existing contracts on the premises that describe the location and
operation of each security alarm system, a schematic of security zones, the
name of the licensed alarm company, and the name of any vendor monitoring the
premises.



      (4)   Upon request, each licensee shall make available to the
Chief Executive Officer or any state or local law enforcement agency, for a
purpose authorized by this chapter or state or local law enforcement purpose,
all information related to security alarm systems, recordings, monitoring,
and alarm activity.



   (C)   Lock standards; minimum requirement. On all doors, the
licensee shall ensure the use of commercial-grade, nonresidential door locks.



   (D)   Video surveillance requirements.



      (1)   Prior to exercising the privileges of a permit under
this chapter, an applicant must install a fully operational video
surveillance and camera recording system. The recording system must record in
digital format and meet the requirements outlined in this section.



      (2)   All video surveillance records must be stored in a
secure area that is only accessible to the management staff of the licensed
premises.



      (3)   Video surveillance records and all recordings must be
made available upon request to the Chief of Police or any other state or
local law enforcement agency for a purpose authorized by this chapter or for
any other state or local law enforcement purpose.



      (4)   Video surveillance records shall be held in confidence
by all employees and representatives of the Chief Executive Officer, except
that the Chief of Police or his or her designee may provide such records and
recordings to a state or local law enforcement agency for a purpose
authorized by this chapter or for a state or local law enforcement purpose.



      (5)   A sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place near each
point of public access that shall be not less than 12 inches wide and 12
inches high, composed of letters not less than one inch in height, stating
"All Activities Monitored by Video Camera" or "These Premises Are Being
Digitally Recorded" or otherwise advising all persons entering the licensed
premises that a video surveillance and camera recording system is in
operation at the licensed premises and recording all activity as provided in
this chapter.



      (6)   The licensed premises should use video surveillance
equipment and a camera system that can be accessed remotely 24 hours a day by
the Police Department and the city, as specified in each development
agreement.



   (E)   Video surveillance equipment.



      (1)   Video surveillance equipment shall, at a minimum,
consist of digital or video recorders, cameras capable of meeting the
recording requirements described in this section, video monitors, digital
archiving devices, and a color printer capable of delivering still photos.



      (2)   All video surveillance systems must be equipped with a
failure notification system that provides prompt notification to the licensed
premises of any prolonged surveillance interruption or the complete failure
of the surveillance system.



      (3)   Licensed premises are responsible for ensuring that all
surveillance equipment is properly functioning and maintained so that the
playback quality is suitable for viewing and the surveillance equipment is
capable of capturing the identity of all individuals and activities in the
monitored areas.



      (4)   All video surveillance equipment shall have sufficient
battery backup to support a minimum of four hours of recording in the event
of a power outage.



   (F)   Placement of cameras and required camera coverage.



      (1)   Camera placement shall be capable of identifying
activity occurring within 20 feet of all points of ingress and egress and
shall allow for the clear and certain identification of any individual and
activities on the licensed premises.



      (2)   All entrances and exits to the facility shall be
recorded from both indoor and outdoor vantage points.



      (3)   The system shall be capable of recording all
pre-determined surveillance areas in any lighting conditions. If the licensed
premises has a cannabis cultivation area, a rotating schedule of lighted
conditions and zero-illumination can occur as long as ingress and egress
points to those areas remain constantly illuminated for recording purposes.



      (4)   Areas in which cannabis is grown, tested, cured,
manufactured, or stored shall have camera placement in the room facing the
primary entry door at a height that provides a clear, unobstructed view of
activity without sight blockage from lighting hoods, fixtures, or other
equipment.



      (5)   Cameras shall also be placed at each location where
weighing, packaging, transport, preparation, or tagging activities occur.



      (6)   At least one camera must be dedicated to record the
access points to the secured surveillance recording area.



   (G)   Location and maintenance of surveillance equipment.



      (1)   Surveillance recording equipment must be housed in a
designated locked and secured room or other enclosure with access limited to
authorized employees, agents of the Chief Executive Officer, state or local
law enforcement agencies for a purpose authorized by this chapter or for any
other state or local law enforcement purpose, and service personnel or
contractors.



      (2)   The licensee must keep a current list of all authorized
employees and service personnel who have access to the surveillance system
and/or room on the licensed premises. Licensed premises must keep a
surveillance equipment maintenance activity log on the licensed premises to
record all service activity, with the identity of the individual(s)
performing the service, the service date and time, and the reason for service
to the surveillance system.



      (3)   Off-site monitoring and video recording storage of the
licensed premises or by an independent third-party is authorized as long as
standards exercised at the remote location meet or exceed all standards for
on-site monitoring.



      (4)   Each licensed premises located in a shared building must
have a separate surveillance room/area that is dedicated to that specific
licensed premises. All minimum requirements for equipment and security
standards as set forth in the section apply to the review station.



   (H)   Video recording and retention requirements.



      (1)   All camera views of all recorded areas must be
continuously recorded 24 hours a day.



      (2)   All surveillance recordings must be kept for a minimum
of 90 days and be in a format that can be easily accessed for viewing on
premises. Video recordings must be archived in a format that ensures
authentication of the recording as legitimately-captured video and guarantees
that no alteration of the recorded image has taken place.



      (3)   The surveillance system or equipment must have the
capabilities to produce a color still photograph from any camera image, live
or recorded.



      (4)   The date and time must be embedded on all surveillance
recordings without significantly obscuring the picture.



      (5)   Time is to be measured in Pacific Standard Time in
accordance with the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology.



      (6)   After the 90-day surveillance video retention schedule
has lapsed, surveillance video recordings must be erased or destroyed prior
to being discarded or disposed of for any other purpose. Surveillance video
recordings may not be destroyed if the licensed premises knows or should have
known of a pending criminal, civil, or administrative investigation or any
other proceeding for which the recording may contain relevant information.



   (I)   Other records. All records applicable to the surveillance
system and cannabis tracking system shall be maintained on the licensed
premises. At a minimum, licensed premises shall maintain a map of the camera
locations, direction of coverage, camera numbers, surveillance equipment
maintenance activity log, user authorization list, and operating instructions
for the surveillance equipment.



   (J)   Suitability of security plan. The applicant's security plan
includes the presence of security personnel on premises or patrolling the
premises 24 hours per day.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.12  FEES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   Prior to operating in the city, the operator of each licensed
premises shall timely and fully pay all fees associated with the
establishment of that business. The fees shall be as set forth in the
schedule of fees and charges established by resolution of the City Council,
including, but not limited to, the following:



      (1)   Application fee for accepting a registration
application, due and payable in full at the time an application is submitted;



      (2)   Processing fee for the cost to the city of processing an
application and reviewing, investigating, and scoring each application in
accordance with any evaluation system to determine eligibility for issuance
of a permit, due and payable in full at the time a registration application
is submitted;



      (3)   Permit issuance fee for the cost to the city of
preparing a development agreement, City Council review and approval of the
development agreement and the permit, and preparation and issuance of the
permit as authorized by the City Council, due and payable in full at the time
the city issues a permit;



      (4)   Amended registration fee for the cost to the city of
reviewing amendments or changes to the registration form previously filed on
behalf of the licensed premises; due and payable in full at the time
amendments or changes to any permit form is submitted to the city;



      (5)   Permit renewal fee for the cost to the city of
processing an application to renew a permit; due and payable in full at the
time application is made to renew a permit;



      (6)   Any fees for inspection or investigation that are not
included within the other fees associated with registration, due and payable
in full upon request of the city; and



      (7)   Any fees set forth in the applicable development
agreement.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.13  LIMITATIONS ON CITY’S LIABILITY.



   (A)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city does not
assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any permit
pursuant to this chapter or the operation of any cannabis facility approved
under this chapter.



   (B)   As a condition of approval of a permit as provided in this
chapter, the applicant or its legal representative shall do the following:



      (1)   Execute an agreement indemnifying the city from any
claims, damages, injuries, or liabilities of any kind associated with the
registration or operation of the cannabis facility or the prosecution of the
cannabis facility or its owners, managers, directors, officers, employees, or
its qualified patients or primary caregivers or customers for violation of
federal or state laws;



      (2)   Maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that
are acceptable to the City Council or designee;



      (3)   Name the city as an additional insured on all
city-required insurance policies;



      (4)   Agree to defend, at its sole expense, any action against
the city, its agents, officers, and employees related to the approval of the
licensee's regulatory permit; and



      (5)   Agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and
attorney fees that the city may be required to pay as a result of any legal
challenge related to the city's approval of the licensee's regulatory permit.
The city may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the
defense of any such action, but such participation shall not relieve the
operator of its obligation hereunder.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.14  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   The Chief Executive Officer, law enforcement, or their
designees shall have the right to enter all licensed premises from time to
time unannounced during the facility's hours of operation for the purpose of
making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with this
chapter, to inspect and copy records required to be maintained under this
chapter, or to inspect, view, and copy recordings made by security cameras,
all without requirement for a search warrant, subpoena, or court order, and
subject to appropriate fees as specified in the development agreement.



   (B)   Operation of a licensed premises in noncompliance with any
conditions of approval or the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
violation of the code and shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of
this code.



   (C)   The Chief Executive Officer or designee may summarily suspend
or revoke a permit, or disqualify an applicant from the registration process,
or elect not to renew a regulatory permit if any of the following, singularly
or in combination, occurs:



      (1)   The Chief Executive Officer or designee determines that
the cannabis facility has failed to comply with any requirement of this
chapter or the approved development agreement or any condition of approval or
a circumstance or a situation has been created that would have permitted the
Chief Executive Officer or designee to deny, the regulatory permit under this
chapter or elect not to renew or revoke the permit under this chapter;



      (2)   The licensee or applicant has conducted itself or is
being conducted in a manner that creates or results in a public nuisance;



      (3)   The licensee premises ceased operations for more than 90
calendar days, including during change-of-ownership proceedings;



      (4)   Ownership is changed without the new owners applying for
and securing a new permit under this chapter;



      (5)   The licensee relocates to a different location or
premises; or



      (6)   The licensee fails to allow inspection or copying of the
security recordings or the activity logs or records required to be kept under
this chapter or denies entry to the premises to city officials authorized to
inspect the premises.



   (D)   Abatement. The city shall initiate abatement proceedings as
authorized by the code if necessary to correct any violation of this chapter
or code.



   (E)   Violation deemed misdemeanor; penalty. Any person-violating
any of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable rule in this chapter
or code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall
be punishable by the maximum penalties provided for in the Cal. Penal Code §
19.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.15  PUBLIC NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any
person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any parcel within the
city to create a public nuisance in the course of cultivating cannabis or any
part thereof in any location, indoor or outdoor. A public nuisance may be
deemed to exist if such activity produces one or more of the following:



   (A)   Odors which are disturbing to people of reasonable sensitivity
or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.



   (B)   Repeated responses to the premises by law enforcement
personnel.



   (C)   A repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or
vehicles in the neighborhood, excessive noise which is disturbing to people
of normal sensitivity on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the
public.



   (D)   Any other impacts on the neighborhood that are disruptive of
normal activity in the area including, but not limited to, grow lighting
visible outside the dwelling, excessive vehicular traffic or parking
occurring at or near dwelling, and excessive noise emanating from the
dwelling.



   (E)   Outdoor growing and cultivation of cannabis.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.16  APPEALS.



   Any decision regarding or pertaining to the permit process set forth in
this chapter, or any action taken by the Chief Executive Officer or designee
pursuant hereto, may be appealed to the City Council. Such appeal shall be
taken by filing with the City Clerk, within ten days after notice of the
action or decision complained of has been issued, a written statement setting
forth the grounds for the appeal. The City Clerk shall transmit the written
statement to the City Council, and at its next regular meeting, the Council
shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be mailed to the appellant. The decision of
the City Council on such appeal shall be final and binding on all parties
concerned.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.17  STATEWIDE REGULATION.



   This chapter, and the provisions herein, shall be read consistent with
any statewide regulation of cannabis now and in the future. This chapter
shall govern the conduct of a business allowed to operate a commercial
cannabis activity in the city.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



§ 127.18  INTERPRETATION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be read to be consistent with
state laws, this chapter, and this code. At no time shall a commercial
cannabis business in compliance with state law and this code be deemed to be
an unlawful business.



(Ord. 1400, passed 8-16-17; Am. Ord. 1403, passed 12-13-17; Am. Ord. 1408,
passed 4-4-18)



TITLE XIII:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Chapter



   130.   GENERAL OFFENSES



   131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



   132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY



CHAPTER 130:  GENERAL OFFENSES



Section



General Provisions



   130.01   Automatic communication devices



   130.02   Curfew hours for minors



   130.025   Daytime loitering by minors



   130.03   Discharge of firearm



   130.04   Permitted hours of construction



   130.05   Filing false statements regarding city officers or employees



   130.06   Interference with police dogs



   130.07   Prohibited acts



   130.08   Powers of law enforcement officers not limited



   130.09   Parental control



Invitation-at-Large Parties



   130.15   Definitions



   130.16   Invitation-at-large parties prohibited



   130.17   Termination of party



   130.18   Violations



Noise Control



   130.30   Policy declaration



   130.31   Definitions



   130.32   Sound level measurement



   130.33   Noise measurement procedures



   130.34   Ambient base noise levels



   130.35   Loud, unnecessary and unusual noise



   130.36   Violations; additional remedies; injunctions



   130.37   Special noise sources



   130.38   Vehicles



   130.39   Sound amplifying equipment; applicability



   130.40   Commercial activities



   130.41   Noncommercial activities



   130.42   Use of sound amplifying equipment; compliance with law



   130.43   Loud or unruly assemblages



   130.44   Sound amplification systems



Alcoholic Beverages



   130.45   Alcoholic beverage containers



   130.46   Posting signs



   130.47   Consumption of alcoholic beverages



Fortunetelling



   130.60   Definition



   130.61   Identification; certificate



   130.62   Display of certificate



Guns and Ammunition



   130.70   Reserved



   130.71   Reserved



   130.72   Reserved




   130.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Emergency response cost recovery when criminal act involved, see §§
38.30 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 130.01  AUTOMATIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES.



   (A)   No person, except a public utility engaged in the business of
providing communication services and facilities, shall use or operate,
attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange,
adjust, program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of
devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by
other automatic means, initiate an intrastate call and deliver a recorded
message to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber by a public
telephone company, without the prior written consent of the subscriber.



   (B)   The term TELEPHONE NUMBER includes any additional numbers
assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing
communication services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or
other system to connect with the subscriber to the primary number when the
primary telephone number is in use.



('83 Code, § 9.24.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.02  CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS.



   (A)    Definitions.



      (1)    CURFEW HOURS means 10:00 p.m. of any day until 6:00
a.m. the following day.



      (2)    EMERGENCY means an unforeseen combination of
circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action to
prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any
situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss
of life.



      (3)    ESTABLISHMENT means any privately owned place of
business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any
place of amusement, entertainment, or recreation.



      (4)    GUARDIAN means:



         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian
of the person of a minor;



         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by a court; or



         (c)   A person who is at least eighteen years of age and
authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.



      (5)    MINOR means any person under eighteen years of age.



      (6)    PARENT means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive
parent, or step-parent of a minor.



      (7)    PUBLIC PLACE means any place to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited
to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.



      (8)    SERIOUS BODILY INJURY means bodily injury that creates
a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily
member or organ.



   (B)   Offenses.



      (1)   A minor commits an offense by being present in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during
curfew hours.



      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense by
knowingly permitting, or by insufficient control allowing, the minor to be
present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours.



   (C)   Defenses.  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection
(B) that the minor was:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in a lawful employment activity, or going to or
returning home from a lawful employment activity, without detour or stop;



      (5)   Acting in response to an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or
abutting the residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, cultural, religious,
sports, amusement, entertainment, or other recreational activity supervised
by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning
directly home from, without detour or stop, an official school, cultural,
religious, sports, amusement, entertainment, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution as it pertains to minors, such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, but
subject to all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations; or



      (9)   Emancipated in accordance with applicable state law.



   (D)   Enforcement.  Before taking action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in
the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that,
based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in division (C) is
present or applicable.



('83 Code, § 9.28.010) (Am. Ord. 1126, passed 7-2-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.025  DAYTIME LOITERING BY MINORS.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions of § 130.02 and except as
provided in division (B) of this section, it is unlawful for any person under
the age of 18, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory
continuation education, to loiter, idle, wander or be in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds,
public places, public buildings, places of amusement and eating places,
vacant lots or any unsupervised place, during the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:30
p.m. or during other hours as designated by the respective school district on
days when school is in session.



   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply in the following
situations:



      (1)   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor;



      (2)   When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his
or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody
of the minor;



      (3)   When the minor is going directly to, or coming directly
from, his or her place of gainful employment or to and from a medical
appointment; or



      (4)   When the minor is going to, or coming directly from,
lunch or a school related activity, and the minor has permission to leave
campus for lunch or the school related activity and has in his or her
possession a valid, school issued, off-campus permit.



   (C)   Violation of this section shall constitute an offense for
which the minor may be cited into the Juvenile Traffic Court system.



(Ord. 1106, passed 8-16-95) Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.03  DISCHARGE OF FIREARM.



   No person shall shoot, fire or discharge, any pistol, rifle, gun or
other firearm, or any pistol, rifle or gun operated by compressed air, or a
spring device, including, but not limited to, BB or pellet guns, not
necessary in self-defense, or in performance of an official duty within the
city.



('83 Code, § 9.32.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Weapons, see Cal. Penal Code §§ 12000 et seq.



§ 130.04  PERMITTED HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person shall engage in any act of construction,
reconstruction or demolition as to any building or structure, including, but
not limited to grading operations, on any lot located in the city, except
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 9.33.010)  (Ord. 904, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.05  FILING FALSE STATEMENTS REGARDING CITY OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES.



   Every person who, having been advised of the provisions of this
section, signs a written statement declaring the contents thereof to be true,
and causes the statement to be filed with any department of the city, for the
purpose of causing an investigation to be made into the activities or conduct
of any city officer or employee, knowing the statement to be false or without
a reasonable belief in the truth thereof when the statement is in fact false,
is guilty of a misdemeanor.



('83 Code, § 9.04.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.06  INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DOGS.



   It is unlawful for any person to wilfully tease, taunt, torment,
strike, kick, mutilate, disable, distract, or otherwise injure, or kill, or
to interfere with the function of any dog while the animal is being utilized
by the Police Department, or any officer or employee thereof, in the
performance of any function or duty of the department, or of such officer or
employee.



('83 Code, § 9.04.020)  (Ord. 836, passed -  -82)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.07  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a
"criminal street gang" as that term is defined in Cal. Penal Code §
186.22(f) or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a
"criminal street gang" to loiter or idle in a "public place" as defined in
BPMC § 130.07(B) under any of the following circumstances:



      (2)   With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's
dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate non-members of the
gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area;



      (3)   With the intent to conceal on-going commerce in illegal
drugs or other unlawful activity.



   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means the
public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or
privately owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue,
highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or
public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house,
office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of
amusement, entertainment, or eating place.  Any "public place" also includes
the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business,
or apartment house.



(Ord. 1203, passed 5-28-03)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 130.08  POWERS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS NOT LIMITED.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the
power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation,
detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to
make in absence of this chapter.



(Ord. 1203, passed 5-28-03)



§ 130.09  PARENTAL CONTROL.



   Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized
by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who
knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. 1203, passed 5-28-03) Penalty, see § 130.99



INVITATION-AT-LARGE PARTIES



§ 130.15  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   HOST or HOLD.  The sponsoring of a party at any location within the
city.



   INDUSTRIAL ZONE.  Any area of the city within an industrial zone as
indicated on the city's official zone map.



   INVITATION-AT-LARGE PARTY.  Any party to which the public-at-large has
been invited as provided herein.



   INVITATION.  Any oral or written notice of the time, date and location
of a party.



   PARTY.  Any social gathering at which 12 or more people are in
attendance.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any location generally accessible to the public.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONE.  Any area of the city within a residential zone as
indicated on the city's official zone map.



   SOCIAL GATHERING.  Any gathering at which alcoholic beverages are
consumed and the predominant purpose of the gathering is social.



('83 Code, § 9.40.010)  (Ord. 1061, passed -  -93)



§ 130.16  INVITATION-AT-LARGE PARTIES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall host or hold an invitation-at-large party in
any residential or industrial zone within the city.



   (B)   The public at large will be deemed to have been invited in all
of the following situations:



      (1)   Invitations for the party are posted in a public place.



      (2)   Invitations are not addressed to specific individuals at
specific locations, or, although addressed to specific individuals at
specific locations, are circulated to other than the identified invitee.



      (3)   Invitations are worded in such a manner so as to convey
to a reasonable person that the invitation is intended for the public at
large.



      (4)   Invitations are generally circulated with the intent of
providing notice of the party to the public at large.



('83 Code, § 9.40.020)  (Ord. 1061, passed -  -93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.17  TERMINATION OF PARTY.



   Upon determining that a party in a residential or industrial zone is an
invitation-at-large party, the city Police Department or any officer thereof
shall have the authority to order the party terminated and disperse the
crowd.  Any person not complying with the disbursement order may be arrested
and charged with a violation of Cal. Penal Code § 416.



('83 Code, § 9.40.030)  (Ord. 1061, passed -  -93)



§ 130.18  VIOLATIONS.



   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to host or hold an
invitation-at-large party and shall be punishable pursuant to the provisions
of § 10.99.



('83 Code, § 9.40.040)  (Ord. 1061, passed -  -93)



NOISE CONTROL



§ 130.30  POLICY DECLARATION.



   It is declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit unnecessary,
excessive and annoying noises from all sources subject to its police power.
At certain levels, noises are detrimental to the health and welfare of the
citizenry and, in the public interest, such noise levels shall be
systematically proscribed.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)



§ 130.31  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMBIENT NOISE.  The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources near and
far. For the purpose of this chapter, AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL is the level
obtained when the noise level is averaged over a period of 15 minutes without
inclusion of noise from isolated identifiable sources, at the location and
time of day near that at which a comparison is to be made.



   A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  The sound pressure level as measured
with a sound meter using the "A"-weighting network. The standard notation is
dBA.



   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE.  Includes the use, operation or maintenance of any
sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or
any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of
the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage or customers to or
for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition or event, for the
purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment.



   COMMERCIAL ZONE.  An area designated as neighborhood commercial (C-1),
central business district (CBD), general commercial (C-2), or freeway
commercial (FC) on the city zoning map.



   CYCLICALLY VARYING NOISE.  Steady or non-steady noise which varies in
amplitude such that the same sound pressure level is obtained repetitively at
reasonably uniform intervals of time.  A beat is one class of noise.



   DAY.  The time period from 7:00 a.m. of one day to 10:00 p.m. of the
same day.



   DECIBEL (dB).  A unit for expressing the ratio between two quantities
of acoustical signal powers; the number of decibels corresponding to the
ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of
this ratio.



   EMERGENCY WORK.  Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or
property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public
utilities when restoring utility service.



   IMPULSIVE SOUND.  A short-duration sound (such as might be produced by
the impact of a drop hammer or a pile driver) with one second or less
duration.



   INDUSTRIAL ZONE.  An area designated as commercial manufacturing (CM),
office industrial (OI), industrial commercial (IC) or industrial (I) on the
city zoning map.



   MOTOR VEHICLES.  Includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, mini bikes and go-carts.



   NIGHT.  The time period from 10:00 p.m. of one day to 7:00 a.m. of the
following day.



   NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE.  The use, operation or maintenance of any sound
equipment for other than a commercial use.  NONCOMMERCIAL PURPOSE means and
includes, but is not limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic and
charitable purposes.



   PERSON.  A person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture,
corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature, excluding the city.



   PROPERTY BOUNDARY LINE.  An imaginary line at the ground surface,
which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by
another person and its vertical extension.  This includes multiple-family
dwelling units, with the property boundary being the wall separating the
adjoining dwelling units.



   PURE TONE.  A sound wave whose instantaneous sound pressure varies
essentially as a simple sinusoidal function of time.



   RESIDENTIAL ZONE.  An area designated as single family residential
zone (R-I), residential garden (RG), or high-density multiple-family
residential zone (R-3) on the city zoning map.



   SOUND.  The sensation perceived by the sense of hearing. For the
purpose of this chapter, the terms sound and noise shall be used synonymously.



   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT.  Any device or equipment which amplifies
the volume of any sound.



   SOUND LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL).  Expressed in decibels (dB) is the sound
measured with the "A"-weight scale and with slow response by a sound level
meter.



   SOUND LEVEL METER.  An instrument including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter, and "A" frequency weighting networks for the
measurement of sound levels, which satisfies the pertinent requirements in
American Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters SL4-1971 or the most
recent revision thereof.



   SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL.  Twenty times the logarithm to the base ten of
the ratio of the root-mean-square sound pressure to the reference pressure,
which is 20 micronewtons per square meter.



   SOUND TRUCK.  Any motor vehicle or any other vehicle, regardless of
motive power, whether in motion or stationary, which carries, is equipped
with or which has mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying
equipment for commercial, political or charitable purposes.



   STEADY NOISE.  Noise for which the sound pressure level remains
essentially constant during the period of observation.  It does not vary
more than six dBA when measured with the slow meter characteristic of a sound
level meter.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96; Am. Ord. 1388, passed 9-21-16)



§ 130.32  SOUND LEVEL MEASUREMENT.



   Any sound level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting
and response as indicated in § 130.31.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)



§ 130.33  NOISE MEASUREMENT PROCEDURES.



   The following procedures shall be utilized for measuring and evaluating
exterior noise in the city unless otherwise specified in this chapter:



   (A)   Noise measurements shall be conducted any time during the day
or night when the suspect noise source is in operation.



   (B)   The location selected for noise measurement shall be on the
noise receptor's property line at a point approximately ten feet from any
building, wall or obstruction (trees, bushes, etc.).



   (C)   No individual other than the operator shall be within ten feet
of the sound level meter during the measurement period.



   (D)   The sound level meter shall be calibrated in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions.



   (E)   With the noise source in operation, the operator shall record
the instantaneous response at 15-second intervals or less, for a period of 15
minutes or greater.  Or, for a noise source in operation for less than 15
minutes, the operator shall record the instantaneous response at 15-second
intervals or less for the time the noise source is in operation.



   (F)   The suspect noise source shall only be measured for a
violation of this subchapter when it is five dBA or greater than another
noise source within the measurement vicinity.



   (G)   The corrective factors set forth in § 130.34(B) shall be
applied to the noise standard established for the specific noise zone.



   (H)   The suspect noise level shall be compared with the standards
in § 130.34(A). If the noise level generated from the suspect noise source
exceeds the standard, the suspect noise source shall be considered to be in
violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.34  AMBIENT BASE NOISE LEVELS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person within the city to make, cause
or allow to be produced noise which is received on property occupied by
another person within the designated zone, in excess of the following levels,
except as expressly provided otherwise herein:



 


STANDARDS



Zone
 
Day
7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m.
 
Night
10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m.


R-I
 
55 dBA
 
45


RG and R-3
 
60 dBA
 
55


Commercial
 
65 dBA
 
60


Industrial
 
70 dBA
 
70



 



At the boundary line between a residential property and a commercial and
manufacturing property, the noise level of the quieter zone shall be used.



   (B)   Corrections to noise limits.  The numerical limits given in
division (A) of this section shall be adjusted by the following corrections,
where appropriate:



 

Noise Condition
 
Correction (in dB)


1.   Repetitive impulsive noise, pure tones and sound with cyclically
varying amplitude.
 
-5


2.   Steady whine, screech or hum
 
-5


3.   Noise occurring more than 5 but less than 15 minutes per hour.
 
+2


4.   Noise occurring more than 1 but less than 5 minutes per hour.
 
+5


5.   Noise occurring less than 1 minute per hour.
 
+7



 



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96; Am. Ord. 1388, passed 9-21-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.35  LOUD, UNNECESSARY AND UNUSUAL NOISE.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition
thereto, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully make or continue, or cause
to be made and continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which
disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, or which causes discomfort
or annoyance to residents of the area. The standards which shall be
considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this
section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following:.



   (A)   The level of the noise;



   (B)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;



   (C)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;



   (D)   The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the
noise emanates;



   (E)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;



   (F)   The duration of the noise;



   (G)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and



   (H)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.36  VIOLATIONS; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; INJUNCTIONS.



   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this
chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to
reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort,
repose, health, or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is
declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by
a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.37  SPECIAL NOISE SOURCES.



   (A)   Horns and signaling devices.  It is unlawful for any person
to sound any horn or signaling device on an automobile, motorcycle or other
vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger
warning; to create by means of any such signaling device any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound; to sound any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; to use any signaling device except one operated
by hand or electricity; to sound any horn, whistle or other device operated
by engine exhaust; and to use any such signaling device when traffic is for
any reason held up.



   (B)   Radios, television sets, and similar devices. It is unlawful
for any person within an residential zone of the city to us or operate any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound (between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m., of the following day) in such a
manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or
any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.



   (C)   Animals and fowl.  No person shall keep or maintain, or
permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by
such person any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any
sound, cry or behavior, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable
person of normal sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood.



   (D)   Exhausts.  It is unlawful for any person to cause emission
into the open air of the exhaust from any motorboat or motor vehicle except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.



   (E)   Construction of buildings and projects.  It is unlawful for
any person within a residential zone, or within a radius of 500 feet
therefrom, to operate equipment or perform any outside construction or repair
work on buildings, structures, or projects or to operate any piledriver,
power shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, power hoist, or any other
construction type device (between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00
a.m. of the next day) in such a manner that a reasonable person of normal
sensitiveness residing in the area is caused discomfort or annoyance unless
beforehand a permit therefor has been duly obtained from the Department of
Public Works. No permit shall be required to perform emergency work as
defined in § 130.31.



   (F)   Hawkers and peddlers.  It is unlawful for any person within
the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for
residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at
licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar
licensed public entertainment events.



   (G)   Drums.  It is unlawful for any person to use any drum or
other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting
attention by the creation of noise within the city. This section shall not
apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed
parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct.



   (H)   Schools, churches, libraries, hospitals and convalescent
homes.  It is unlawful for any person to create any noise on any city
street, sidewalk, or public place adjacent to any school, institution of
learning, church or library while the same is in use or adjacent to any
hospital or convalescent home, which noise unreasonably interferes with the
workings of such institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in
such medical facilities, provided conspicuous signs are placed in such
streets, sidewalks or public place indicating the presence of these
facilities.



   (I)   Machinery, equipment, fans and air conditioning. It is
unlawful for any person to operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air
conditioning apparatus, or similar mechanical device (between the hour of
10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day), use of which is
attended by loud or unusual noises.



   (J)   Exceptions.  There are exempted from this chapter the
following:



      (1)   Lawfully conducted parades;



      (2)   Emergency work as defined in § 130.31;



      (3)   Aircraft flight operations;



      (4)   Bells, chimes or carillons while being used in
conjunction with religious services;



      (5)   Commercial motor vehicle operations;



      (6)   Emergency energy release devices;



      (7)   Speed or endurance events authorized by the city,
involving motor or other vehicles;



      (8)   Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad, except
for horns and whistles operated within city limits;



      (9)   Systems used to warn community of attack or imminent
public danger such as flooding or explosion;



      (10)   Any noise or situation within the scope of Sections
23130 or 23109 of the Vehicle Code of the state.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96); Am. Ord. 1388, passed 9-21-16)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 130.38  VEHICLES.



   (A)   Vehicle repairs. It is unlawful for any person within any
residential area of the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle
(between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day) in
such a manner that a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in
the area is caused discomfort or annoyance.



   (B)   Motor-driven vehicles.  It is unlawful for any person to
operate any motor-driven vehicle within the city in such a manner that a
reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area is caused
discomfort or annoyance; provided, however, any such vehicle which is
operated upon any public highway, street, or right-of-way shall be excluded
from the provisions of this section.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  PPenalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.39  SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT; APPLICABILITY.



   No person shall use sound amplifying equipment within the city, except
in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.40  COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No person shall use any sound amplifying equipment for the
purpose of advertising the sale or lease of any goods, wares, merchandise or
services, except:



      (1)   Within an enclosed building in a manner permitted
pursuant to § 130.42; or



      (2)   If the sound amplifying equipment is affixed to, or
mounted in, a motor vehicle; and the goods, wares or merchandise being
advertised for sale are available in the vehicle; and the sound being
amplified is a sound, other then the human voice, which is customarily
utilized in conjunction with the sale, by vehicle, or such goods, wares and
merchandise; provided, that the activities may be conducted only between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.41  NONCOMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES.



   The use of sound amplification equipment for noncommercial activities
shall be permitted, subject to the following:



   (A)   That such use shall be permitted only when the sound
amplifying equipment is mounted in or affixed to, a motor vehicle.



   (B)   That such use shall be permitted only between the hours of
10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)



§ 130.42  USE OF SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT; COMPLIANCE WITH LAW.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be deemed to prohibit the
use of sound amplifying equipment, or other similar equipment, by any person
at his place of residence, if the use is in compliance with the provisions of
§ 130.40.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)



§ 130.43  FEES FOR USE OF POLICE PERSONNEL AT LOUD OR UNRULY ASSEMBLAGES.



   (A)   When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held, and the
city's police officers are required to respond to the scene in response to
citizen complaints and the first responding police officer at the scene
determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or
general welfare, police action may be taken, criminal penalties may be
imposed, and city costs collected as provided in this section.



   (B)   Upon the first responding police officer's determination that
the assemblage constitutes a threat to the public peace, health, safety or
general welfare, then that first responding police officer, or his or her
successor or designee, shall do the following:



      (1)   Notify the owner of the property and/or the person in
charge of the property where the assemblage exists, and/or the person
responsible for the assemblage, of the following:



         (a)   Of the circumstances of the assemblage that
constitute a threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare;



         (b)   That if such person or persons fail or are unable
to mitigate, and the Police Department is required to respond a second time,
the circumstances of the assemblage constituting a threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare such that the threat no longer
exists, the Police Department shall have the right to enter the property and
any structures or premise thereon and order all individuals participating in
the assemblage to exit the property and disperse from the area;



         (c)   That such person or persons, or in the case of a
minor, the parents and/or guardians of the minor, will be held personally
liable for all costs in providing additional police personnel on special
security assignment over and above the normal services provided by the Police
Department in response to the assemblage, including all costs required to
enter the property and disburse individuals participating in the assemblage;



      (2)   If, after a reasonable time following the second notice
given according to the provisions of division (B), the supervisor at the
scene determines that the circumstances of the assemblage that constitute a
threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare have not been
mitigated, or that additional circumstances have arisen which constitute an
additional threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare, that
supervisor may direct any subordinate police officer or officers to do the
following:



         (a)   To notify the owner of the property and/or the
person in charge of the property where the assemblage exists, and/or the
person responsible for the assemblage, that the assemblage will be terminated
for failure to mitigate the circumstances of the assemblage that constitute a
threat to public peace, health, safety or general welfare;



         (b)   To enter the property, and any and all structures
and premises thereon, on which the assemblage is occurring and order all
individuals participating in the assemblage to exit the property and disperse
from the area;



         (c)   To direct, supervise, assist, escort, and manage
individuals exiting the property such that their exit proceeds as quickly and
safely as is reasonably possible under the circumstances;



         (d)   To order all individuals participating in the
assemblage to disperse from the area following their exit from the property,
and to direct, supervise, assist, and manage said dispersal from the area
such that their dispersal proceeds as quickly and safely as is reasonably
possible under the circumstances;



      (3)   If any senior police officer at the scene determines
that the assemblage constitutes an imminent threat to the physical safety of
individuals or property, the senior police officer shall forgo the provisions
for giving notice provided in division (B)(1), and shall immediately take
action to prevent the threat pursuant to the provisions of division (B)(2).



   (C)   All police personnel necessarily utilized to control the
threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare pursuant to
division (B) shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and
above the normal services provided and the owner of the property where the
assemblage occurs, and/or the person responsible for the assemblage, shall be
personally responsible for the cost of the special security assignment
according to the following terms:



      (1)   Any cost of special security assignment levied pursuant
to this subdivision shall be determined upon a cost accounting basis by the
city, and shall include the cost damage to city property and/or injury to
city personnel, all costs relating to police personnel actions to disperse
individuals from the assemblage area pursuant to division (B)(2), and any
other costs incurred;



      (2)    All costs levied by this subdivision shall be due and
payable upon presentation, constitute a valid and subsisting debt in favor of
the city, and may be collected by the city by any legal means, including
filing a cause of action for collection in any court of competent
jurisdiction;



      (3)   Any party aggrieved by a levy of costs pursuant to this
section may appeal the matter to the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of § 30.04.



   (D)   Any individual who obstructs police actions taken pursuant to
division (B)(2) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of up to
$1,000, imprisonment for up to six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment.  This penalty shall be in addition to any other
administrative, civil, or criminal penalty which may exist in statute,
regulation, ordinance, or other provision of law.



   (E)   Any individual who fails or refuses to comply with a police
officer's order to exit property where the assemblage exists, or who fails or
refuses to comply with a police officer's order to disburse from an
assemblage area, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by fine of up to
$1,000, imprisonment for up to six months, or both such fine and
imprisonment.  This penalty shall be in addition to any other
administrative, civil, or criminal penalty which may exist in statute,
regulation, ordinance, or other provision of law.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96; Am. Ord. 1196, passed 11-6-02)



§ 130.44  SOUND AMPLIFICATION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   No person shall operate, or permit operation of, any sound
amplification system mounted or installed in any motor vehicle which can be
heard from 50 or more feet, from public or private property, unless that
system is being operated to request assistance or warn of a hazardous
situation.



   (B)   This section does not apply to authorized emergency vehicles
or vehicles operated by gas, electric, communications or water utilities. 
This section does not apply to the sound systems of vehicles used in parades
or other special events.



(Ord. 1114, passed 5-1-96)  Penalty, see § 10.99



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



§ 130.45  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS.



   (A)   No person having in his or her possession any bottle, can or
other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened
and/or has had its seal broken, and/or the contents have been partially
removed, shall enter, be or remain on the premises, including any immediately
adjacent parking area, of any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage
licensee licensed pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 23000 et seq. or
any public sidewalk immediately adjacent to the licensed and posted premises.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall only apply to locations
where the signs are posted pursuant to § 130.46.



('83 Code, § 9.09.010)  (Ord. 872, passed -  -84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.46  POSTING SIGNS.



   Every person owning or operating a retail package off-sale alcoholic
beverage establishment within the city licensed pursuant to Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code §§ 23000 et seq., shall post and maintain in good repair, in a
conspicuous place at each entrance to the licensed premises and to the
parking lot immediately adjacent thereto, a sign that gives notice
substantially as follows:



   Possession of Opened Alcoholic Beverage Container on These Premises and
the Adjacent Public Sidewalk is Prohibited.  BPMC § 130.45.



('83 Code, § 9.09.020)  (Ord. 872, passed -  -84)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.47  CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   (A)   Every person who consumes beer, wine or other intoxicating
beverage on any public street, sidewalk, alley, highway, or other public
place is guilty of a misdemeanor.  This section shall not be deemed to
proscribe any act which is positively permitted or prohibited by any law of
the state.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the premises
or adjacent parking area of any retail package off-sale alcoholic beverage
licensee in which event, the provisions of Section § 130.45 shall be
complied with.



   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any public
park in which event, the provisions of § 96.02(J) shall be complied with.



('83 Code, § 9.09.030)  (Ord. 899, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



FORTUNETELLING



§ 130.60  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FORTUNETELLING.  The business or art of astrology, phrenology, life
reading, fortunetelling, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing,
hypnotism, mediumship, mesmerism, oriental mysteries, palmistry, spirit
photography, spirit writing, spirit voices, spirit materialization,
etherialization, numerology, augury, divination, or other similar or related
art or business.



('83 Code, § 9.36.010)  (Ord. 917, passed -  -85)



§ 130.61  IDENTIFICATION; CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business or art
of fortunetelling without first filing an application for an identification
certificate from the Police Chief.  Upon receipt of an application for an
identification certificate and a filing and processing fee in an amount set
by the City Council, the Chief shall verify the information contained therein
and if the information is true and correct, he shall issue an identification
certificate.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 9.36.020)  (Ord. 917, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 130.62  DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE.



   (A)   Each person who is engaged in the business or art of
fortunetelling, shall display, on the premises where the business or
occupation is carried on, in a prominent location, the identification
certificate.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 9.36.030)  (Ord. 917, passed -  -85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



   GUNS AND AMMUNITION



§ 130.70 [RESERVED]



§ 130.71 [RESERVED]



§ 130.72  [RESERVED]



§ 130.99  PENALTY.



   Violation of §§ 130.07 or 130.09 shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.



(Ord. 1203, passed 5-28-03)



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Injuring public property



   131.02   Spray paint apparatus and/or other indelible marking device



   131.03   Sale and possession of aerosol spray paint cans by juveniles



   131.04   Sale of aerosol spray paint can and storage requirements



   131.05   Graffiti offender reward program



   131.06   Recovery for law enforcement costs



Statutory reference:



   Crimes against property, see Cal. Penal Code §§ 450 et seq.



§ 131.01  INJURING PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall injure, destroy or damage any ornament,
building or structure located in any public place owned by the city.



   (B)     Any act of willful misconduct of a minor which results in
the defacement of public property with paint or a similar substance shall be
imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for
all purposes of civil damages, including court costs, and attorney's fees, to
the prevailing party; and the parent or guardian having custody and control
shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages
resulting from the willful misconduct, not to exceed $25,000, or as amended
in accordance with state law, for each such act of the minor.



('83 Code, § 9.20.010) (Am. Ord. 1184, passed 2-20-02)  Penalty, see §
10.99



§ 131.02  SPRAY PAINT APPARATUS AND/OR OTHER INDELIBLE MARKING DEVICE.



   Within the limits of any park and public properties, it is unlawful for
any person to bring or have in his possession any spray paint can or any
other indelible marking apparatus designed or suitable for the application of
paint or indelible ink to any surface by spraying paint or marking with
indelible ink upon such surface.  The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply
to the following:



   (A)   Persons bearing a special written permit from park or city
authorities to have such cans or apparatus in their possession.



   (B)   Persons engaged or employed by the city for the purpose of
applying paint and other material to appropriate surfaces within the limits
of the public parks and other public properties.



('83 Code, § 9.20.020)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.03  SALE AND POSSESSION OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CANS BY JUVENILES.



   It is unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give or loan, or cause
or permit to be sold, exchanged, given, or loaned, any pressurized can or
other container commonly known as an aerosol spray paint can or container
which contains paint or dye to anyone under the age of 18 years.  It is
unlawful for anyone under the age of 18 years to purchase or otherwise obtain
any aerosol spray paint can or for a juvenile to possess an aerosol spray
paint can in a public place unless the juvenile is in the presence of his or
her parent or guardian.



('83 Code, § 9.20.030)  (Ord. 1048, passed -  -91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Cal. Penal Code § 594.1(a) through (f)



§ 131.04  SALE OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT CAN AND STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any business or establishment offering for sale to
the public any paint or dye which is packaged for sale in a pressurized
container commonly known as an aerosol spray paint can or container shall
provide, post and maintain a sign which reads as follows:



   Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property with paint
is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment, or both.



      (2)   The letters will be at least one-half inch in height. 
Such a sign shall be plainly visible to customers who may seek to purchase
aerosol spray paint cans.



   (B)   Any business or establishment offering for sale to the public
any paint or dye packaged in aerosol spray paint cans or containers shall
keep, store and maintain the aerosol spray paint cans or containers in a
place that is locked and secured, or otherwise inaccessible to the public.



('83 Code, § 9.20.040)  (Ord. 1048, passed -  -91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.05  GRAFFITI OFFENDER REWARD PROGRAM.



   (A)   The City Council is authorized to appropriate money from the
general fund of the city, or from moneys collected through asset seizures, to
offer a reward to any individual providing information to the city leading to
the arrest and conviction of anyone placing or applying graffiti or other
inscribed materials on or to any public or private property within the
city.  The City Council may appropriate such moneys for this purpose by
including the appropriation in its annual budget resolution, or by adopting a
resolution or resolutions from time to time as may be warranted in the
discretion of the City Council.



   (B)    GRAFFITI, or other inscribed materials, is defined in
accordance with Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.3, as the same may from time to time
be amended.



   (C)   Rewards may be offered to and paid to any person; provided,
however, that no peace officer, official, officer, employee, appointee or
agent of the state, or any county or city therein, or any political
subdivision thereof, shall be eligible to receive any reward offered under
this section.



   (D)   The maximum amount of any reward shall not exceed $2,000 per
incident.



   (E)   The City Manager and designees shall establish procedures for
public notification of this reward program, criteria for the offer and
payment of rewards, and procedures for the making of offers to, submission of
claims for, and the payment of, rewards under this section.  In the event of
any dispute concerning the offer of, a claim for, or payment of, any reward
under this section, the determination of the City Council shall be final and
conclusive.



   (F)   The city shall not be obligated to offer or pay any reward
under this section, but such offer and payment shall be at the sole
discretion of the city.



   (G)   No offer of reward shall be made or payment made in the event
that:



      (1)   The City Council has not authorized by resolution the
appropriation of funds as set forth in division (A) of this section; or



      (2)   The funds appropriated by the City Council in accordance
with division (A) of this section have been expended.



   (H)   For any graffiti incident for which the city has paid a reward
under this section, the offender convicted of that incident, and if the
convicted offender is an unemancipated minor the convicted offender's
parent(s) or guardian(s), shall be liable for the reward amount paid by city
pursuant to this section.



('83 Code, § 9.20.050)  (Ord. 1052, passed -  -91; Am. Ord. 1184, passed
2-20-02)



§ 131.06  RECOVERY FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT COSTS.



   In accordance with Cal. Penal Code § 594(c)(2)(A), a person convicted
for acts of vandalism, including defacing property with graffiti, may be
subject to additional punishment, imposed by the court at the request of the
Police Department, to pay for law enforcement costs in an amount not to
exceed $250.  Such costs are in addition to any other costs incurred or
recovered by the Police Department, and payment of these costs does not in
any way limit, preclude, or restrict any other right, remedy or action
otherwise available to the Police Department.



(Ord. 1184, passed 2-20-02)



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY



Section



General Provisions



   132.01   Reserved



   132.02   Reserved



   132.03   Gambling prohibited



   132.04   Public urination and defecation prohibited



Public Nudity



   132.15   Prohibited acts by waiters, waitresses and entertainers



   132.16   Employment or payment not necessary for offense



   132.17   Acts prohibited during public performance



   132.18   Counseling or assisting



   132.19   Exemption of theatrical establishments



Statutory reference:



   Crimes against the person and against public decency and good morals,
see Cal. Penal Code §§ 261 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 132.01 RESERVED.



§ 132.02  RESERVED.



§ 132.03  GAMBLING PROHIBITED.



   It is unlawful for any person to deal, play, carry on, open or conduct
any game or contest played with cards, dice, or any other device, for money,
checks, credit or thing of value.  Nor shall any person bet at any of the
prohibited games.  This section shall not be deemed or construed as
prohibiting any act made unlawful by any section of the Penal Code of the
state, including, but not limited to, Cal. Penal Code §§ 320, 330, and 337a.



('83 Code § 9.08.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.04  PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION PROHIBITED.



   No person shall urinate or defecate upon his or her private property in
an area exposed to public view or upon any other private property or public
property, including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or
other public places except into a fixture designed for the purpose and
located within a restroom.  A violation of this section shall be an
infraction.



(Ord. 1129, passed 2-4-98)  Penalty, see § 10.99



PUBLIC NUDITY



§ 132.15  PROHIBITED ACTS BY WAITERS, WAITRESSES AND ENTERTAINERS.



   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while acting as a waiter,
waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or
food and beverages, including, but not limited to, alcohol beverages for
consumption on the premises of such establishments:



   (A)   Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;



   (B)   Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



   (C)   Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.



('83 Code § 9.12.010)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.16  EMPLOYMENT OR PAYMENT NOT NECESSARY FOR OFFENSE.



   A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if the
person acts in that capacity without regard to whether such person is paid
any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity
is performed.



('83 Code § 9.12.020)



§ 132.17  ACTS PROHIBITED DURING PUBLIC PERFORMANCE.



   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any
live act, demonstration of exhibition in any public place, place open to the
public or place open to public view:



   (A)   Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal
cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;



   (B)   Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the
appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft,
perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or



   (C)   Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the
areola thereof.



('83 Code § 9.12.030)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.18  COUNSELING OR ASSISTING.



   Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures,
counsels or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited
by this subchapter.



('83 Code § 9.12.040)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.19  EXEMPTION OF THEATRICAL ESTABLISHMENTS.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to a theater, concert
hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical
performances.



('83 Code § 9.12.050)



TITLE XV:  LAND USAGE



Chapter



   150.   BUILDING CODES



   151.   SWIMMING POOLS



   152.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   153.   ZONING CODE



   154.   DEVELOPMENT FEES



   155.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



   156.   SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS



CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES



Section



General Provisions



Part 1.  Administrative Provisions



   150.001   Title



   150.002   Purpose



   150.003   Scope



   150.004   Authority



   150.005   Applicability and compliance with code provisions required



   150.006   Administration



   150.007   Creation of Division of Building and Safety



   150.008   Deputies



   150.009   Powers and duties of the Building Official



   150.010   Applicability



   150.011   Board of Appeals



   150.012   Partial invalidity



Part 2.  Definitions



   150.020   Definitions



Part 3.  Organization and Enforcement



   150.030   Abatement orders



   150.031   Abatement procedures



   150.032   Cost of abatement or compliance



   150.033   Notice of non-compliance



   150.034   Public nuisance



   150.035   Actions, violations and penalties



Part 4.  Existing Buildings and Building Service Equipment



   150.040   Application of technical provisions to existing buildings
and building service equipment



   150.041   General



   150.042   Additions, alterations or repairs



   150.043   Additions, alterations or repairs: unsafe conditions



   150.044   Additions, alterations or repairs: height, number of
stories and area



   150.045   Additions, alterations or repairs: compliance with code
requirements



   150.046   Additions, alterations or repairs: use of same materials



   150.047   Existing building service equipment installations



   150.048   Existing occupancy



   150.049   Maintenance



   150.050   Moved buildings



   150.051   Temporary structures



   150.052   Historic buildings



Part 5.  Permits



   150.060   Permits required



   150.061   Work exempt from permit



   150.062   Building permit exemptions



   150.063   Plumbing permit exemptions



   150.064   Mechanical permit exemptions



   150.065   Electrical permit exemptions



Part 6.  Application Requirements



   150.071   Application for permit



   150.072   Submittal documents



   150.073   Information on plans and specifications



   150.074   Architect or engineer of record



   150.075   Deferred submittals



   150.076   Inspection and observation program



   150.077   Expiration of application for permit



Part 7.  Permit Issuance



   150.080   Permit issuance



   150.081   Permits for partial construction



   150.082   Retention of plans



   150.083   Validity of permit



   150.084   Permit expiration



   150.085   Permit time extensions



   150.086   Permit renewals



   150.087   Permit suspension or revocation



   150.088   Permit denial



Part 8.  Fees



   150.100   Fees established by City Council resolution



   150.101   Plan review fees



   150.102   Investigation fees for work without a permit



   150.103   Fee refunds



   150.104   Fee exceptions



Part 9.  Inspections



   150.110   General provisions



   150.111   Inspection record card



   150.112   Inspection requests



   150.113   Approval required



   150.114   Preliminary inspection



   150.115   Required building inspections



   150.116   Required building service equipment inspections



   150.117   Other inspections



   150.118   Re-inspections



   150.119   Special inspections



   150.120   Contractor’s responsibility



   150.121   Structural observation



   150.122   Connection to utilities



Part 10.  Certificate of Occupancy



   150.130   Use or occupancy



   150.131   Change in use



   150.132   Issuance of certificate of occupancy



   150.133   Temporary certificate of occupancy



   150.134   Posting



   150.135   Revocation



Part 11.  Adoption and Amendment of the 2016 California Building Code



   150.140   Adoption



   150.141   Local amendments



   150.142   Safety assessment placards



   150.143   Appendix J:  Grading



Part 12.  Adoption and Amendments of the California Electrical Code



   150.150   Adoption



   150.151   Special events



   150.152   Temporary wiring



   150.153   Conditional electrical service connection



Part 13.  Adoption of the California Mechanical Code



   150.160   Adoption



Part 14.  Adoption of the California Plumbing Code



   150.170   Adoption



Part 15.  Adoption of the California Energy Code



   150.180   Adoption



Part 16.  Adoption of the California Elevator Safety Construction Code



   150.190   Adoption of technical provisions of California Elevator
Safety Construction Code



Part 17.  Adoption of the California Historical Building Code



   150.200   Adoption



Part 18.  Adoption and Amendment of the California Existing Building Code



   150.210   Adoption



Part 19.  Adoption of the California Referenced Standards Code



   150.220   Adoption



House Moving



   150.230   Definitions



   150.231   Permits



   150.232   Investigation of application



   150.233   Appeal to Council



   150.234   Exception



   150.235   Insurance required



   150.236   Conditions of approval



   150.237   Building relocation



   150.238   Exception



Vacant and Abandoned Property Registration



   150.250   Purpose; scope



   150.251   Definitions



   150.252   Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment
of rents



   150.253   Registration



   150.254   Inspection and registration of previously abandoned
properties



   150.255   Maintenance requirements



   150.256   Security requirements



   150.257   Additional authority



   150.258   Enforcement



   150.259   Violation; penalty



   150.260   Fees



   150.261   Appeals



Cross-reference:



   Swimming pools, see Ch. 151



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 97



GENERAL PROVISIONS



Part 1.  ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS



§ 150.001  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the Baldwin Park Building Code, may be
cited as such and hereinafter referred to herein as “this code.”



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this code is to establish minimum standards to safeguard
the public health, safety and general welfare by regulating and controlling
the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy and
location of all buildings and structures within the city and certain
equipment specifically regulated herein.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.003  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this code shall serve as the administrative,
organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for the technical codes
which regulate site preparation and construction, alteration, moving,
demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building
service equipment within the city.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.004  AUTHORITY.



   This code is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 7 of
Article XI of the California State Constitution to a county or city to make
and enforce within its limits all such local, police, sanitary and other
ordinances and regulations as are not in conflict with general laws. It is
further adopted in conformity with the provisions of §§ 50022.1 thru
50022.10, inclusive, of the Cal. Gov’t Code relating to adoption of codes
by reference.(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am.
Ord. 1361, passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.005  APPLICABILITY AND COMPLIANCE WITH CODE PROVISIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   The provision of this code shall apply to the construction,
alteration, moving, demolition, repair, maintenance and use of buildings and
structures located within the incorporated areas of the City of Baldwin Park.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use,
occupy or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause or permit
or suffer the same to be done, in violation of this chapter or in violation
of any of the provisions of the codes adopted hereunder.



   (C)   Exception. Public projects located in the public way and not
subject to the city land use regulations; public utility towers and poles;
mechanical equipment not specifically regulated by this code; floor control
structures; buildings and structures owned and constructed by a Federal,
state or other agency which authority pre-empts that of city government.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.006  ADMINISTRATION.



   The provisions of this chapter contain cross-references to the
provisions of the 2016 CBC-Amended Administrative, promulgated by the
International Code Council in order to facilitate reference and comparison to
those provisions.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.007  CREATION OF DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SAFETY.



   There is hereby contained with the city government structure the
Division of Building and Safety which shall be under the administrative
jurisdiction of the Building Official as designated by the appointing
authority.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.008  DEPUTIES.



   In accordance with prescribed procedures and with the approval of the
appointing authority, the Building Official may appoint deputies and other
related technical officers and inspectors and other employees as may be
authorized by the City Council from time to time.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.009  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Code and the Technical
Codes, excepting that the provisions of Chapter 9 of Building Code shall be
enforced jointly with the Fire Marshal of the Los Angeles County Fire
Protection District. For such purposes, the Building Official and the Fire
Marshal, respectively, and their respective authorized representatives, shall
each have the powers of a law enforcement officer. The Building Official
shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and
enforce rules supplemental to this code as may be deemed necessary in order
to clarify the applications and the provisions of this code. Such
interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent
and purpose of this code.



   (B)   Interpretations and policies. The Building Official shall have
the power and authority to render interpretations of this chapter and the
Technical Codes and to adopt and enforce rules, policies, procedures and
supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its
provisions. Such interpretations, policies, procedures, rules and regulations
shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of this chapter.



   (C)   Right-of-entry.



      (1)   The Building Official may enter the building or premises
at all reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this
chapter:



         (a)   When necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this chapter and the technical codes; or



         (b)   When the Building Official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon a premises a condition
which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building
or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous.



      (2)   The Building Official shall adhere to the following
procedures in making an entry:



         (a)   If such building or premises be occupied, the
Building Official shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry.



         (b)   If such building or premises be unoccupied, the
Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and
request entry.



         (c)   Should entry be refused, the Building Official
shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Building Official has reasonable cause
to believe that there exists an unsafe, substandard or dangerous condition
within the building or premises as to require immediate inspection to
safeguard the public health or safety, the Building Official shall have the
right to immediately enter and inspect such property and may use any
reasonable means required to secure such entry and make such inspection.



   (D)   Stop work orders. When work is being done contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the technical codes, or other pertinent laws or
ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this chapter, the Building
Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on persons
engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and such persons shall
forthwith stop the work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed
with the work.



   (E)   Occupancy violations. When a building or structure or building
service equipment therein regulated by this chapter and the technical codes
is being used contrary to the provisions of such codes, the Building Official
may order such use discontinued by written notice served on any person
causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use
within the time prescribed by the Building Official after receipt of such
notice to make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the
requirements of such codes.



   (F)   Authority to disconnect utilities. The Building Official or
the Building Official's authorized representative shall have the authority to
disconnect a utility service or energy supplied to the building, structure or
building service equipment therein regulated by this chapter or the technical
codes in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard
to life or property. The Building Official shall whenever possible notify the
serving utility, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or
building service equipment of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such
action, and shall notify such serving utility, owner and occupant of the
building, structure or building service equipment, in writing, of such
disconnection immediately thereafter.



   (G)   Authority to condemn building service equipment.



      (1)   When the Building Official ascertains that building
service equipment regulated in the technical codes has become hazardous to
life, health or property, or has become unsanitary, the Building Official
shall order, in writing, that such equipment either be removed or restored to
a safe or sanitary condition, as appropriate.



      (2)   The written notice itself shall fix a time limit for
compliance with such order. Defective building service equipment shall not be
maintained after receiving such notice.



      (3)   When such equipment or installation is to be
disconnected, a written notice of such disconnection and causes therefore
shall be given within 24 hours to the serving utility, the owner and occupant
of such building, structure or premises.



      (4)   When any building service equipment is maintained in
violation of the technical codes and in violation of a notice issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter, the Building Official shall institute
appropriate action to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation.



   (H)   Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make or
suffer the connection from an energy, fuel or power supply nor supply energy
or fuel to building service equipment which has been disconnected or ordered
to be disconnected by the Building Official or the use of which has been
ordered to be discontinued by the Building Official until the Building
Official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment.



   (I)   Custodian of records. The Building Official shall be the
custodian of records for the Division of Building and Safety and as such, is
charged with the responsibility to keep and maintain a permanent record of
all building permits issued by the division as well as plans and other
pertinent documents and transactions. Such records and documents may be
maintained in electronic image, electronic file, paper, or other approved
archival method.



   (J)   Liability. It is the intent of this code to establish minimum
standards for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public.
This code shall not be construed to establish standards of performance,
strength or durability other than those specified. This code, nor any of the
services rendered in connection with its terms by city officers, inspectors,
agents or employees is intended, nor shall be construed as the basis, for any
expressed or implied warranties or guarantees to any person relative to, or
concerning any structure or part, portion of appurtenances thereto or thereof
constructed, erected, altered, enlarged, repaired, moved, replaced or removed
pursuant to this code or any permits granted hereunder. No cause of action
shall arise in favor of any person against the city, or any of its officers,
inspectors, agents, or employees because any structure or portion thereof,
erected, altered, enlarged, repaired, moved, replaced, or removed or any
appurtenance, system, wiring, plumbing, mechanical equipment, devices, or
appliances installed, maintained, repaired or replaced hereunder do not meet
the standards prescribed herein. The Building Official, deputies, inspectors,
technical officers and employees, charged with the enforcement of this code
and the technical codes, acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of their duties shall thereby, not be rendered personally liable
for damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or
omission in the discharge of the assigned duties. A suit brought against the
Building Official, deputy, technical officer, inspector or employee because
of such an act or omission performed by the Building Official, deputy,
technical officer, inspector or employee in the enforcement of the provisions
of such codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the
enforcement of this code or enforced by the code enforcement agency shall be
defended by this jurisdiction until final termination of such proceedings,
and any judgment resulting therefrom, shall be assumed by the jurisdiction.



   (K)   Conflicting provisions.



      (1)   When conflicting provisions or requirements occur
between this chapter, the technical codes and other codes or laws, the most
restrictive shall govern.



      (2)   When conflicts occur between the technical codes, those
provisions providing the greater safety to life shall govern. Where
sanitation, life safety, or fire safety are not involved, the most
restrictive provisions shall govern.



      (3)   Where in a specific case different sections of the
technical codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other
requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. When there is a conflict
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.



   (L)   Alternate materials - design and methods of construction.



      (1)   The provisions of the technical codes are not intended
to prevent the use of any material, method of design or method of
construction not specifically prescribed by the technical codes, provided an
alternate has been approved and its use authorized by the Building Official.



      (2)   The Building Official may approve an alternate, provided
the Building Official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the provisions of the technical codes and that the material,
method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent
of that prescribed in the technical codes in suitability, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation.



      (3)   The Building Official shall require that sufficient
evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate claims that may be made
regarding its use.



      (4)   The details of an action granting approval of an
alternate shall be recorded and entered in the records.



      (5)   The Building Official may require the applicant to
arrange for the proposed alternate materials, methods of design and methods
of construction be reviewed and evaluated by an outside agency designated by
the Building Official at the applicant's expense.



   (M)   Modifications.



      (1)   Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of the technical codes, the Building Official may
grant modifications for individual cases.



      (2)   The Building Official shall first find that:



         (a)   A special individual reason makes the strict
letter of the technical code impractical;



         (b)   The modification is in conformity with the intent
and purpose of the technical code, and



         (c)   Such modification does not lessen health, life
safety and fire safety requirements or any degree of structural integrity.



      (3)   The details of actions granting modifications shall be
recorded and entered in the records.



      (4)   The Building Official may require the applicant to
arrange for the proposed modification to be reviewed by an outside agency
designated by the Building Official at the applicant's expense.



   (N)   Tests and research reports.



      (1)   Whenever there is insufficient evidence for determining
compliance with the provisions of the technical codes or evidence that
materials or construction do not conform to the requirements of the technical
codes, the Building Official may require tests as evidence of compliance to
be made at the applicant's expense.



      (2)   Test methods shall be as specified by the technical
codes or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and
accepted test methods, the Building Official shall determine test procedures.



      (3)   Tests shall be made by an approved agency.



      (4)   Reports of such tests shall be entered in the records.



      (5)   The Building Official may require the applicant to
arrange for the test procedures, methodology, results, reports, etc. to be
reviewed and evaluated by an outside agency designated by the Building
Official at the applicant's expense.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.010  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this code shall not be construed to conflict with the
provisions of the state housing law, nor any other provisions of state or
Federal laws. Any requirements of this code or the codes adopted hereby,
which are more restrictive shall apply.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.011  BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Board established. In order to hear and decide appeals of
orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to
the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby
created a Board of Appeals consisting of members who are qualified by
experience and training and who are not employees of the jurisdiction, to
pass upon matters pertaining to the application or installation of building,
electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems, components and equipment. The
Building Official or his designee shall be an ex officio member and shall act
as Secretary to said Board but shall have no vote upon any matter before the
Board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall
hold office at its pleasure. The Board shall adopt rules of procedure for
conducting its business and shall render all decisions and findings in
writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official. The
Board of Appeals shall have no authority relative to interpretations of the
administrative provisions of this code. The Board shall have no authority to
waive requirements of this code.



   (B)   Appeal.



      (1)   An applicant for or holder of a permit whose proposed
solution for meeting the requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations is not approved or authorized by the Building Official may file
an appeal with the Board of Appeals.



      (2)   An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that
the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply,
or and equally good or better form of construction is proposed.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.012  PARTIAL INVALIDITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code or
the application thereof to any person or circumstance is for any reason held
to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not effect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code or the application of such
provision to other persons or circumstances.



(Ord. 1361, passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 2.  DEFINITIONS



§ 150.020  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions set forth in this section shall govern the application
and interpretation of this chapter.



   ALTER or ALTERATION.ALTER or ALTERATION means a change or modification
in construction or building service equipment.



   ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY. The Building Official or a regularly
authorized deputy.



   APPROVED. Approved, as to materials, types of construction, equipment
and systems, refers to approval by the Building Official as the result of
investigation and tests conducted by the Building Official, or by reason of
accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical or
scientific organizations.



   APPROVED AGENCY. An established and recognized agency regularly engaged
in conducting tests or furnishing inspection services, when the agency has
been approved by the Building Official.



   BUILDING CODE. The Baldwin Park Building Code.



   BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT. Refers to the plumbing, mechanical,
electrical and elevator equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures and
other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation,
cooling, refrigeration, fire-fighting and transportation facilities essential
to the occupancy of the building or structure for its designated use.



   CBC. The California Building Code as adopted by the State of California.



   CODE, OR THIS CODE. Chapter 150 of the Baldwin Park Municipal Code,
unless otherwise noted.



   CONDOMINIUMS. Any building or portion thereof that contains three or
more dwelling units that does not meet the definition of townhouse as set
forth below; for purposes of this code, condominiums shall be classified as
R-2 occupancy.



   ELECTRICAL CODE. The Baldwin Park Electrical Code.



   EXISTING BUILDING. A building legally erected prior to effective date
of this chapter.



   FIRE CODE. The International Fire Code (IFC), 2012 edition, promulgated
by the International Code Council, including the Appendix thereto, together
with those omissions, amendments, exceptions and additions there to as
amended in the California Code of Regulations, and Title 24 of the California
Code of Regulations.



   JURISDICTION. The City of Baldwin Park.



   LISTED and LISTING.LISTED and  LISTING are terms referring to
equipment and materials which are shown in a list published by an approved
testing agency, qualified and equipped for experimental testing and
maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of current productions and which
listing states that the material or equipment complies with accepted national
standards which are approved, or standards which have been evaluated for
conformity with approved standards.



   MECHANICAL CODE. Baldwin Park Mechanical Code.



   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used
or intended to be used.



   PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the Building
Official authorizing performance of a specified building, plumbing,
mechanical, or electrical activity or any combination of such permits issued
jointly by the Building Official.



   PLUMBING CODE. The Baldwin Park Plumbing Code.



   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing
building, structure or building service equipment for the purpose of its
maintenance.



   SHALL. As used in this code is mandatory.



   STRUCTURE. That which is build or constructed, an edifice or building
of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts
joined together in some definite manner.



   TECHNICAL CODES. Refer to those codes adopted by this chapter
containing the provisions for design, construction, alteration, addition,
repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance of
buildings and structures and building service equipment.



   TOWNHOUSE. A single family dwelling in a row of at least three such
units, not more that three stories above grade, in which each unit shall be
located on a separate parcel, having its own access to the outside, no unit
located over another unit, and each unit shall be separated by a property
line from any other unit. For the purpose of this chapter, all town houses
shall be classified as R-3 occupancy.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 3.  ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 150.030  ABATEMENT ORDERS.



   When any structure or site is being used or constructed in violation of
this code, or any of the codes adopted by reference herein, the Building
Official may order such use or construction discontinued and the structure or
portions thereof vacated by a written notice served on any person or persons
causing such use. Such person or persons shall discontinue such use within
the specified time as indicated on the notice. After receipt of such notice,
such person or persons shall abate the violations or cause the building or
structure to be demolished or removed.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.031  ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The Building Official shall inspect or cause to be inspected a
building, structure where reasonable suspicion exists that said building or
structure may be substandard, unsafe or used in violation of this code, state
health and safety code, state housing regulations, or any of the codes
adopted by reference herein. If after inspecting the building or structure,
the Building Official determines that said building or structure is unsafe,
substandard or being used in violation of this code, state health and safety
code, state housing law, or any of the codes adopted by reference herein, the
Building Official shall give a written notice and order to the owner, tenant
or user of the building or property pursuant to the provisions of the state
health and safety code, state housing law and this code. If the Building
Official finds that certain electrical, plumbing, mechanical, excavation or
structural systems pose an immediate hazard to life and property, the
Building Official may order such systems disconnected, removed or abated
immediately.



   (B)   If a notice and order must be served upon the owner, tenant or
user of the building or structure, the Building Official shall assess the
owner, tenant or user of the building or structure all applicable fees
required to cover expenses incurred by the city in the processing of the
notice and order to abate. Such processing fees shall be calculated at the
rate indicated in the schedule of service charges adopted by the City Council.



   (C)   Buildings damaged by fire or by natural disasters where the
extent of damage to the building exceeds 75% of the valuation of the building
prior to the disaster, or when determined by the Building Official that a
structure is unsafe for occupancy due to damage the building shall be
considered a total loss and be demolished pursuant to this section, and if
necessary the safety of the damaged structure will be determined by an
engineering study paid by the owner of the property.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.032  COST OF ABATEMENT OR COMPLIANCE.



   (A)   Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or
otherwise, who maintains any premises in violation of the provisions of this
code, any of the codes adopted by reference herein, or the state housing law
shall be liable for, and obligated to pay to the city all costs incurred by
the city in obtaining abatement or compliance which is attributable to, or
associated with, the enforcement or abatement action, whether such action is
administrative, injunctive or legal and for all damages suffered by the city
its officers, agents, and employees as a result of such violation or efforts
to abate the violation.



   (B)   If the owner of the property involved in such abatement or
compliance action fails to pay for the costs of such abatement or compliance
action upon demand by the city, the City Council by resolution may order the
cost of the abatement to be specially assessed to the property or parcel.
Such assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
ordinary county taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure be applied at the time of sale or in case of
delinquency as are provided for ordinary county taxes.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.033  NOTICE OF NON-COMPLIANCE.



   Whenever the Building Official determines that work has been done
without the required permits, or has not been completed in accordance with
the requirements of this code, the state housing law or any code adopted
herein, the Building Official may cause a notice of non-compliance to be
recorded with the County Recorder and shall notify the owner of such property
of such action. The notice of non-compliance shall describe the property,
shall set forth the non-complying conditions and shall state that the owner
of such property has been duly notified. The Building Official shall record a
notice of release of the notice of non-compliance with the County Recorder
when it has been determined by the Building Official that the non-complying
conditions have been corrected.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.034  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Buildings or structures or portions thereof which are regulated by this
code, and which are determined by the Building Official to be unsafe or not
provided with adequate egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or which are
determined substandard under the provisions of the California Health and
Safety Code, the state housing law, any other applicable law or ordinance, or
which are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which constitute a hazard to
health safety or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance,
dilapidation, damage obsolescence or abandonment as specified in this code or
any other law or ordinance, shall be declared unsafe buildings and shall be
declared a public nuisance and shall be ordered abated by repair,
rehabilitation, removal or demolition pursuant to the provision of this code.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.035  ACTIONS, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association
to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert
or demolish equipment, use, occupy, or maintain any building, structure or
building service equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be
done in violation of this code or any codes hereby adopted by reference,
state housing law or other applicable state or local law. The penalty shall
be as set forth in § 10.99 of the Baldwin Park Municipal Code. Each such
person, firm, corporation or association shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and everyday or portion thereof during which any violation
of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued, or allowed and
upon conviction of such violation such person, firm, corporation or
association shall be punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both as provided
by law and the Baldwin Park Municipal Code. The issuance of a permit or the
approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to authorize any
violation of the provisions of this code or any codes hereby adopted by
reference, state housing law or other applicable state or local law. The
issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plan and specification shall
not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of
errors in said plans and specifications or from suspending construction
operations when such plans, specification or construction are in violation of
this code or any codes hereby adopted by reference, state housing law or
other applicable state or local law.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 4.  EXISTING BUILDINGS AND BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT



§ 150.040  APPLICATION OF TECHNICAL PROVISIONS TO EXISTING BUILDINGS AND
BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT.



   The provisions of this part govern the application of the technical
codes to existing buildings and building service equipment.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.041  GENERAL.



   The buildings, structures and their building service equipment to which
additions, alterations or repairs are made shall comply with all the
requirements of the technical codes for new facilities, except as
specifically provided in this chapter.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.042  ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS.



   Additions, alterations or repairs may be made to a building or its
building service equipment without requiring the existing building or its
building service equipment to comply with all the requirements of the
technical codes, provided the addition, alteration or repair conforms to that
required for a new building or building service equipment.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.043  ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS:  UNSAFE CONDITIONS.



   (A)   Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing
building or building service equipment which will cause the existing building
or building service equipment to be in violation of the provisions of the
technical codes nor shall such additions or alterations cause the existing
building or building service equipment to become unsafe.



   (B)   An unsafe condition shall be deemed to have been created if an
addition or alteration may cause the existing building or building service
equipment to become structurally unsafe or overloaded; may not provide
adequate egress in compliance with the provisions of the building code or may
obstruct existing exits; may create a fire hazard; may reduce required fire
resistance; may cause building service equipment to become overloaded or
exceed their rated capacities; may create a health hazard or may otherwise
create conditions dangerous to human life.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.044  ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS: HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES AND
AREA.



   (A)   A building altered pursuant to a repair or alteration permit,
which involves a change in use or occupancy, shall not exceed the height,
number of stories and area permitted by the building code for new buildings.



   (B)   A building plus new additions shall not exceed the height,
number of stories and area specified by the building code for new buildings.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.045  ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR REPAIRS: COMPLIANCE WITH CODE
REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing
building or structure when the existing building or structure is not in full
compliance with the provisions of the building code, except when the addition
or alteration will result in the existing building or structure being no more
hazardous, based on life safety, fire safety and sanitation, than before such
additions or alterations are undertaken.



   (B)   Exception. Alterations of existing structural elements, or
additions of new structural elements which are initiated only for the purpose
of increasing the lateral-force-resisting strength or stiffness of an
existing structure need not be designed for forces conforming to these
regulations provided that an engineering analysis is submitted to show that:



      (1)   The capacity of existing structural elements required to
resist forces is not reduced;



      (2)   The lateral loading to required existing structural
elements is not increased beyond their capacity;



      (3)   New structural elements are detailed and connected to
the existing structural elements as required by these regulations;



      (4)   New or relocated nonstructural elements are detailed and
connected to existing or new structural elements as required by these
regulations; and



      (5)   An unsafe condition is not created.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.046  ADDITIONS, ALTERATIONS OR  REPAIRS: USE OF SAME MATERIALS.



   Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which are
nonstructural and do not adversely affect a structural member or a part of
the building or structure having required fire resistance may be made with
the same materials of which the building or structure is constructed, subject
to approval by the Building Official. Installation or replacement of glass
shall be as required for new installations.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.047  EXISTING BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT INSTALLATIONS.



   Building service equipment lawfully in existence prior to the effective
date of this chapter, may have their use, maintenance or repair continued if
the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and
a hazard to life, health or property has not been created by such building
service equipment.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.048  EXISTING OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Buildings in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter may have their existing use or occupancy continued if the use or
occupancy was legal prior to the effective date of this chapter, and provided
continued use is not dangerous to life, health and safety.



   (B)   A change in the use or occupancy of any existing building or
structure shall comply with the provisions of this code.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.049  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Buildings, structures and building service equipment, existing
and new, and parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition.



   (B)   Devices or safeguards which are required by the technical
codes shall be maintained in conformance with the technical code under which
installed.



   (C)   The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible
for the maintenance of buildings, structures and their building service
equipment.



   (D)   The Building Official may cause a structure to be reinspected
to determine compliance with this division.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.050  MOVED BUILDINGS.



   Buildings, structures and their building service equipment moved into
or within the city shall comply with the provisions of the technical codes
for new buildings or structures and their building service equipment.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.051  TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   Temporary structures such as reviewing stands and other
miscellaneous structures, sheds, canopies or fences used for the protection
of the public around and in conjunction with construction work may be erected
by a permit issued pursuant to CBC § 3103.



   (B)   Temporary buildings or structures shall be completely removed
upon the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.052  HISTORIC BUILDINGS.



   Repairs, alterations and additions necessary for the preservation,
restoration, rehabilitation or continued use of a building, structure, or its
building service equipment may be made provided:



   (A)   The building or structure has been designated by official
action of the legally constituted authority of the city as having special
historical or architectural significance.



   (B)   Unsafe conditions as described in this chapter are corrected.



   (C)   The restored building or structure and its building service
equipment will be no more hazardous based on life safety, fire safety and
sanitation than the existing building.



   (D)   The structure meets the requirement of 2016 California
Historical Building Code, Part 8 of Title 24.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 5.  PERMITS



§ 150.060  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   Except as specified in this part, no building, structure or building
service equipment regulated by this chapter and the technical codes shall be
erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed,
converted or demolished unless a separate, appropriate permit for each
building, structure or building service equipment has first been obtained
from the Building Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.061  WORK EXEMPT FROM PERMIT.



   (A)   A permit shall not be required for the types of work in each
of the separate classes of permit as set forth in this part.



   (B)   Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall
not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of
the provisions of the technical codes or any other laws or city ordinances.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.062  BUILDING PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   A building permit shall not be required for the following:



      (1)   One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet (11 m2), the building is 14 feet or less in height,
and does not contain electrical, mechanical or plumbing work.



      (2)   Fences not over seven (2,134 mm) high.



      (3)   Oil derricks.



      (4)   Non-fixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters
and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) high.



      (5)   Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm)
in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.



      (6)   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the
capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 liters) and the ratio of
height to diameter or width does not exceed two to one.



      (7)   Platforms, sidewalks and driveways not more than 30
inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story
below, and are not part of an accessible route.



      (8)   Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter
tops and similar finish work.



      (9)   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage
sets and scenery.



      (10)   Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or
agricultural purposes, not including service systems.



      (11)   Swings and other playground equipment accessory to
detached one-and two-family dwellings.



      (12)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of
detached one- and two-family dwellings, and Group U Occupancies when
projecting not more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) and do not require additional
support.



      (13)   Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a detached
one- and two-family dwellings. Occupancy in which the pool walls are entirely
above the adjacent grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons
(18,925 liters), and less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep.



      (14)   Replacement, repair or overlay of less than 10% of an
existing roof within any 12 month period.



      (15)   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters
and partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height.



   (B)   Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, separate plumbing,
electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted
items.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.063  PLUMBING PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   A plumbing permit shall not be required for the following:



   (A)   The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe,
provided, however, that should any concealed trap, drainpipe, soil, waste or
vent pipe become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the
same with new material, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit
shall be procured and inspection made as provided in this chapter.



   (B)   The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes,
valves or fixtures, including the removal and reinstallation of water
closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or
rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.064  MECHANICAL PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   A mechanical permit shall not be required for the following:



   (A)   A portable heating appliance;



   (B)   Portable ventilating equipment;



   (C)   A portable cooling unit;



   (D)   A portable evaporative cooler;



   (E)   A closed system of steam, hot or chilled water piping within
heating or cooling equipment regulated by the mechanical code;



   (F)   Replacement of any component part of assembly of an appliance
which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable
requirements of the technical codes;



   (G)   Refrigerating equipment which is part of the equipment for
which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements of the technical
codes; and



   (H)   A unit refrigerating system as defined in the mechanical code.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.065  ELECTRICAL PERMIT EXEMPTIONS.



   An electrical permit shall not be required for the following:



   (A)   Portable motors or other portable appliances energized by
means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug end to be connected to an
approved receptacle when that cord or cable is permitted by the electrical
code.



   (B)   Repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed
approved appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.



   (C)   Temporary decorative lighting.



   (D)   Repair or replacement of current-carrying parts of any switch,
conductor or control device.



   (E)   Reinstallation of attachment plug receptacles, but not the
outlets therefore.



   (F)   Replacement of any over current device of the required
capacity in the same location, except service equipment.



   (G)   Repair or replacement of electrodes or transformers of the
same size and capacity for signs or gas tube systems.



   (H)   Taping joints.



   (I)   Removal of electrical wiring.



   (J)   Temporary wiring for experimental purposes in suitable
experimental laboratories.



   (K)   The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television
stage sets.



   (L)   Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment
operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50
watts of energy, except in hazardous (classified) locations.



   (M)   Low-energy power, control and signal circuits of Class II and
Class III as defined in the electrical code.



   (N)   A permit shall not be required for the installation,
alteration or repair of electrical wiring, apparatus or equipment or the
generation, transmission, distribution or metering of electrical energy or in
the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence by a public or
private utility in the exercise of its function as a serving utility.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 6.  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS



§ 150.071  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   To obtain a permit an applicant shall file a completed
application, in writing, on a form furnished by the Building Official for
that purpose.



   (B)   Every such application shall:



      (1)   Identify and describe the work to be covered by the
permit for which application is made.



      (2)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be
done by legal description, street address or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.



      (3)   Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed
work is intended.



      (4)   Be accompanied by plans, diagrams, computations and
specifications and other data as required in CBC § 107.



      (5)   State the valuation of any new building or structure or
any addition, remodeling or alteration to an existing building.



      (6)   Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's
authorized agent.



      (7)   Give such other data and information as may be required
by the Building Official.



   (C)   The work to be covered by the permit for which application is
made, shall comply with the code, standards, and laws in effect at the time
such application is filed with the Building Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.072  SUBMITTAL DOCUMENTS.



   (A)   Plans, specifications, engineering calculations, diagrams,
soil investigation reports, special inspection and structural observation
programs and other data shall constitute the submittal documents and shall be
submitted in one or more sets with each application for a permit.



   (B)   When such plans are not prepared by an architect or engineer,
the Building Official may require the applicant submitting such plans or
other data to demonstrate that state law does not require that the plans be
prepared by a licensed architect or engineer.



   (C)   The Building Official may require plans, computations and
specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect
licensed by the state to practice as such even if not required by state law.



   (D)   Exception. The Building Official may waive the submission of
plans, calculations, construction inspection requirements and other data if
it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of
plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.073  INFORMATION ON PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale on
substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the
location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it
will conform to the provisions of this chapter and all relevant laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations.



   (B)   Plans for buildings of other than detached one- and two-family
dwellings and Group U Occupancies shall indicate how required structural and
fire-resistive integrity will be maintained when a penetration will be made
for electrical, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and
similar systems.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.074  ARCHITECT OR ENGINEER OF RECORD.



   (A)   When it is required that documents be prepared by an architect
or engineer, the Building Official may require the owner to engage and
designate on the building permit application an architect or engineer who
shall act as the architect or engineer of record.



   (B)   If the circumstances require, the owner may designate a
substitute architect or engineer of record who shall perform all of the
duties required of the original architect or engineer of record.



   (C)   The Building Official shall be notified, in writing, by the
owner if the architect or engineer of record is changed or is unable to
continue to perform the duties.



   (D)   The architect or engineer of record shall be responsible for
reviewing and coordinating all submittal documents prepared by others,
including



deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.075  DEFERRED SUBMITTALS.



   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, deferred submittals are
defined as those portions of the design which are not submitted at the time
of the application and which are to be submitted to the Building Official
within a specified period.



   (B)   Deferral of any submittal items shall have prior approval of
the Building Official. The architect or engineer of record shall list the
deferred submittals on the plans and shall submit the deferred submittal
documents. Additional plan review fee shall be paid by the applicant for
deferred submittals for review by the Building Official prior to their
installation.



   (C)   Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be
submitted to the registered design architect or engineer of record who shall
review them and forward them to the Building Official with a notation
indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that
they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the
building.



   (D)   The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until
their design and submittal documents have been approved by the Building
Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.076  INSPECTION AND OBSERVATION PROGRAM.



   (A)   When special inspection is required by CBC Chapter 17, the
architect or engineer of record shall prepare an inspection program which
shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval prior to issuance of
the permit.



   (B)   The inspection program shall designate the portions of the
work to have special inspection, the name or names of the individuals or
firms who are to perform the special inspections and indicate the duties of
the special inspectors.



   (C)   The special inspector shall be employed by the owner, the
engineer or architect of record, or an agent of the owner, but not the
contractor or any other person responsible for the work.



   (D)   When structural observation is required by CBC Chapter 17, the
observation program shall name the individuals or firms who are to perform
structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which
structural observation is to occur.



   (E)   The inspection program shall include samples of inspection
reports and provide time limits for submission of reports.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.077  EXPIRATION OF APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   Except as provided below, a permit application shall expire if
no permit is issued within one year after the date the permit application is
filed. A permit application filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, shall expire if no permit is issued within one year after the date
the permit application is filed. The Building Official may issue a permit for
work shown on an expired application for a permit without requiring the
re-submittal of plans and payment of a plan review fee provided:



      (1)   No changes have been made or will be made to the
original plans and specifications except as required by the original plan
review;



      (2)   No pertinent laws or ordinances have been amended
subsequent to the date the original application was filed;



      (3)   The time allowed to obtain the permit does not exceed
one year and one month from the date the original application was filed; and



      (4)   Circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have
prevented action from being taken.



   (B)   Except as provided in this section, no action may be taken on
an application after expiration. Plans and other data submitted for review
may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building
Official. To obtain a permit, applicants shall submit a new application,
documents and pay a new plan review fee. All applicable codes, standards, and
laws in affect at the time of the new application shall then apply to the
project.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 7.  PERMIT ISSUANCE



§ 150.080  PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   (A)   The application, plans, specifications, computations and other
data filed by an applicant for permit shall be reviewed by the Building
Official as deemed appropriate. Such plans may be reviewed by other city
departments to verify compliance with other applicable laws.



   (B)   If the Building Official finds that the work described in an
application for a permit and the plans, specifications and other data filed
therewith conform to the requirements of this chapter and the technical codes
and other pertinent laws and ordinances, and that the required fees have been
paid, the Building Official shall issue a permit therefore to the applicant.



   (C)   The Building Official shall endorse, in writing or stamp, the
required plans and specifications.



   (D)   Approved plans and specifications shall not be changed,
modified or altered without authorizations from the Building Official, and
all work regulated by this chapter shall be done in accordance with the
approved plans.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.081  PERMITS FOR PARTIAL CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction
of part of a building, structure or building service equipment before the
entire plans and specifications for the whole building, structure or building
service equipment have been submitted or approved, provided adequate
information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all
pertinent requirements of the technical codes.



   (B)   The holder of a permit for partial construction shall proceed
without assurance that the permit for the entire building, structure or
building service will be granted.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.082  RETENTION OF PLANS.



   (A)   One set of approved plans, specifications and computations
shall be retained by the Building Official for a period of not less than 180
days from the date of completion of the work covered therein or as required
by the state or local laws.



   (B)   One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned
to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all
times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.083  VALIDITY OF PERMIT.



   (A)   The issuance of a permit or approval of plans, specifications
and computations shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of
any violation of, any of the provisions of this chapter or the technical
codes, or of any other law or ordinance.



   (B)   Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this chapter or of other city ordinances shall not be valid.



   (C)   The issuance of a permit based on plans, specifications and
other data shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring
the correction of errors in the plans, specifications and other data, or from
preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when there is a
violation of this chapter or of any other city ordinances.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.084  PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   (A)   Every permit issued by the Building Official under the
provisions of the technical codes shall expire by limitation and become null
and void when any of the following circumstances is applicable:



      (1)   Failure to start construction. If the building or work
authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of
such permit is issued;



      (2)   Cessation of work. If the building or work authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced
for a period of 180 days or more;



      (3)   Time to complete. In addition to divisions (1) and (2)
above, every permit issued under the provisions of this chapter expires by
limitation and becomes null and void when the time allowed to complete all
work authorized by the permit exceeds the following time periods based on
valuation:



 

Valuation
 
Time Allowed


Under $300,000
 
12 months


$300,001 to $1,000,000
 
24 months


$1,000,001 to § 20,000,000
 
36 months


Over $20,000,000
 
48 months



 



   (B)   Before work terminated pursuant to division (A) above can be
recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the permittee shall
pay new full permit fees.



   (C)   The fee therefore shall be pursuant to the last adopted fees
provided no changes have been made to the original plans or specifications
for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has
not exceeded one year.



   (D)   If the suspension or abandonment of the project has exceeded
one year, a new permit shall be obtained and the permit fees be paid in full.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.085  PERMIT TIME EXTENSIONS.



   (A)   Every permit issued by the Building Official under the
provisions of the technical codes shall expire by limitation and become null
and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced
within 180 days from the date of such permit, if the building or work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the
work is commenced for a period of 180 days, or if the project is not
completed within the stated periods in § 150.084.



   (B)   All permits shall expire by limitation of time and become null
and void unless a written request for an extension of time has been submitted
to the Building Official prior to permit expiration. The written request must
demonstrate that:



      (1)   Due to circumstances beyond the owner’s or
permittee’s control, construction could not be commenced, continued or
completed in the authorized time period;



      (2)   If construction has started, substantial progress has
been made;



      (3)   The condition of the property presents no health or
safety hazard; and



      (4)   The continued delay will not create any unreasonable
aesthetic impact to the neighborhood or substantial economic detriment to
neighboring property owners.



   (C)   The time periods set forth to start construction within 180
days or resume construction after cessation of work for 180 days may each be
extended no more than once, and the time period set forth to complete
construction may be extended no more than three times. Each extension of time
shall not exceed 180 days.



   (D)   The decision of the Building Official may be appealed to the
Director of Community Development, who shall conduct a de novo review. Any
such appeal shall be filed in writing within seven days of the decision of
the Building Official. The decision of the Director of Community Development
shall be final.



   (E)   Before work terminated pursuant to division (B) above can be
recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained, and the permittee shall
pay new full permit fees.



   (F)   The fee therefore shall be pursuant to the last adopted fees
provided no changes have been made to the original plans or specifications
for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has
not exceeded one year.



   (G)   If the suspension or abandonment of the project has exceeded
one year, a new permit shall be obtained and the permit fees be paid in full.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.086  PERMIT RENEWALS.



   An expired building permit may be renewed provided it has not been
expired for more than one year, no changes have been made to the plans or
specifications previously approved by the expired permit and appropriate
permit renewal fees are paid. In instances where work has been initiated
prior to the expiration of the permit, permit renewal fees shall be assessed
pursuant to the degree of progress made on the work authorized by the permit.
Permit renewal fees shall be assessed by the Building Official pursuant to
latest adopted fees.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.087  PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit
issued under the provisions of this code when the permit is issued in error
or on the basis of incorrect inaccurate, incomplete, or fraudulent
information provided by the applicant, or when such permit is in violation of
an ordinance, regulation, state law or the provisions of this code. All
suspension or revocation of permits must be in writing showing the cause and
the time period for such action.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



§ 150.088  PERMIT DENIAL.



   Except where special building designs or other mitigation measures have
been approved by the Building Official and co-operating officials of other
city and county agencies, a building permit may be denied where physical
features of a building site are such that denial of the building permit is
deemed necessary to safeguard life, limb, health, property or public welfare.
Physical features which justify denial of a permit shall include but shall
not be limited to the following:



   (A)   Precipitous cliffs or other adjacent vertical landmasses of
unknown stability.



   (B)   Unstable soils or geologic conditions.



   (C)   Terrain, which is subject to flooding or severe soil erosion.



   (D)   Terrain, which is deemed contaminated by products of
hydrocarbon or other hazardous material.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1428, passed 7-18-18)



Part 8.  FEES



§ 150.100  FEES ESTABLISHED BY CITY COUNCIL RESOLUTION.



   All fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be paid in the amount
established set forth in the schedule of service charges established by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-9-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.101  PLAN REVIEW FEES.



   (A)   When a plan or other data is required to be submitted with an
application for permit, pursuant to this chapter, a plan review fee shall be
paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for reviewing. The
plan review fee is separate and in addition to the building permit fee.



   (B)   The plan review fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of
service charges established by resolution of the City Council, plus a
surcharge as set forth in the schedule of service charges if additional plan
review is required for the accessibility for the disabled and/or energy
conservation standards as set forth in Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations.



   (C)   When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to
require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred
submittal items as defined in this chapter an additional plan review fee
shall be charged at the rate established in the schedule of service charges.



   (D)   Whenever a permit is requested for the construction of a
single-family or duplex structure as part of a subdivision previously
plan-checked and approved, a fee as set forth in the schedule of service
charges established by the City Council for each such structure shall be paid
at the time of application for each such building permit.



   (E)   The amount of initial plan review fee for submittal of a model
plan as defined herein shall be the full plan review fee as specified above.
The plan review fee for subsequent submittal of a plan which qualifies as a
model plan shall be one-half (1/2) the plan review fee. A “model plan” is
hereby defined as a prototype plan for a building or structure which is to be
utilized on more than one site, and which incorporates the same structural
features, dimensions, and calculations as the original approved plan.



   (F)   Upon request to review plans on file, a fee as set forth in
the schedule of service charges shall be paid, if the plans for such building
or structure must be obtained from the city storage vault.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.102  INVESTIGATION FEES FOR WORK WITHOUT A PERMIT.



   (A)   Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this
chapter has been commenced without first obtaining the proper permits, a
special investigation shall be made before any permit may be issued for such
work.



   (B)   The investigation fee in an amount set forth in the schedule
of service charges, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether
or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall
be less than 50% of the permit fee as determined by the Building Official.



   (C)   The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any
person from compliance with all other provisions of this chapter nor from any
penalty prescribed by law.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.103  FEE REFUNDS.



   (A)   The Building Official may authorize partial refunding of any
fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.



   (B)   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more
than 80% of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit
issued in accordance with this chapter. A processing fee of $100 shall be
deducted from the refund amount. Permit fee under $100 is non-refundable.



   (C)   The Building Official may authorize the refunding of not more
than 80% of the plan review fee paid when an application is withdrawn or
canceled before any plan reviewing has been started, and the refund amount is
not less than or equal to one hour of plan review service fee. A processing
fee of $100 shall be deducted from the refund amount. Plan review fee under
$200 is non-refundable.



   (D)   The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any
fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not
later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.104  FEE EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Fees shall not be required for buildings erected for and owned
by the United States of America, the State of California, or any of its
political subdivisions, or by any school district or hospitals, where the
Building Official has no jurisdiction for issuance of permits.



   (B)   However, if an applicant requests a plan review or permit for
any of the aforementioned projects, full fees shall be charged.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 9.  INSPECTIONS



§ 150.110  GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be
subject to inspection by the Building Official and the construction or work
shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by
the Building Official. In addition, certain types of construction shall have
special inspection and structural observation as specified in Chapter 17 of
the CBC.



   (B)   Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed
to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of
other city ordinances. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or
cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other city ordinances shall not
be valid.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work
to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the
Building Official nor the city shall be liable for expense entailed in the
removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.



   (D)   A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Official
to verify that the structure is located in accordance with the approved plans.



   (E)   All inspections specified herein shall be at the discretion of
the Building Official and nothing in the CBC or in this chapter shall be
construed as requiring the city to conduct such inspection nor shall any
actual inspection made imply a duty to conduct any other inspection.
Furthermore, neither the CBC nor this section shall be construed to hold the
city or any officer, employee or representative of the city, responsible for
any damage to persons or property by reason of making inadequate or negligent
inspection or by reason of any failure to make an inspection or re-inspection.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.111  INSPECTION RECORD CARD.



   (A)   Work requiring a permit shall not be commenced until the
permit holder or the agent of the permit holder shall have posted or
otherwise made available an inspection record card such as to allow the
Building Official to conveniently make the required entries thereon regarding
inspection of the work.



   (B)   The inspection record card shall be maintained and made
readily available by the permit holder until final approval has been granted
by the Building Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361, passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396,
passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.112  INSPECTION REQUESTS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized
by a permit to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for
inspection.



   (B)   The Building Official may require that every request for
inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is
desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the
Building Official.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspections
required either by this chapter or the technical codes to provide access to
and means for inspection of the work.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.113  APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each
successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Building
Official.



   (B)   Reinforcing steel or structural framework of a part of a
building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first
obtaining the approval of the Building Official.



   (C)   The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the
requested inspections and shall either indicate that portion of the
construction is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder
or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this
chapter.



   (D)   Any portions of work which do not comply shall be corrected
and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the
Building Official.



   (E)   There shall be a final inspection and approval of all
buildings and structures when completed and ready for occupancy and use.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.114  PRELIMINARY INSPECTION.



   Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine
or cause to be examined, buildings, structures and sites for which an
application has been filed.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.115  REQUIRED BUILDING INSPECTIONS.



   The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the following
inspections:



   (A)   Foundation inspection. To be made after excavations for
footings are complete and required reinforcing steel is in place. For
concrete foundations, required forms shall be in place prior to inspection.
All materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except when concrete is
ready-mixed in accordance with approved nationally recognized standards ASTM
C94, the concrete need not be on the job. When the foundation is to be
constructed of approved treated wood, additional inspections may be required
by the Building Official. Building pad grade certification and compaction
report is required prior to Foundation Inspection on the form provided by the
jurisdiction as approved by the Building Official.



   (B)   Concrete slab or under-floor inspection. To be made after
in-slab or under-floor building service equipment, conduit, piping
accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place but before any
concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the sub-floor.



   (C)   Protection of joints and penetrations in fire resistive
assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.



   (D)   Framing inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire
blocking and bracing are in place and all pipes, chimneys and vents are
complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, and heating wires, pipes, and
ducts are approved.



   (E)   Lath and/or wall board inspection. To be made after lathing
and wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place but before plaster is
applied or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished.



   (F)   Fire-resistant penetrations. (CBC Chapter 1, § 110.3.6)
Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies,
smoke barriers and smoke partitions shall not be concealed from view until
inspected and approved.



   (G)   Energy efficiency inspections. (CBC Chapter 1, § 110.3.7)
Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with Chapter 13 and shall
include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U
values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HAVC and water-heating
equipment efficiency.



   (H)   Final inspection. To be made after finish grading and the
building is completed and ready for occupancy or use.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.116  REQUIRED BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   General. Building service equipment for which a permit is
required by this chapter shall be inspected by the Building Official.
Building service equipment intended to be concealed by a permanent portion of
the building shall not be concealed until inspected and approved. When the
installation of building service equipment is complete, an additional and
final inspection shall be made. Building service equipment regulated by the
technical codes shall not be connected to the water, fuel or power supply or
sewer system until authorized by the Building Official.



   (B)   Operation of building service equipment. The requirements of
this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of building
service equipment installed to replace existing building service equipment
serving an occupied portion of the building in the event a request for
inspection of such building service equipment has been filed with the
Building Official not more than 48 hours after the replacement work is
completed, and before any portion of such building service equipment is
concealed by permanent portions of the building.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.117  OTHER INSPECTIONS.



   In addition to the called inspections specified above, the Building
Official may make or require other inspections of construction work to
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter or technical codes
and other applicable laws and ordinances of this city.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.118  RE-INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   A re-inspection fee may be assessed for each inspection or
when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete or
when corrections called for are not made.



   (B)   This section is not to be interpreted as requiring fees the
first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of
the technical



codes, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspections before the
job is ready for such inspection or re-inspection.



   (C)   Fees may be assessed when the inspection record card is not
posted or otherwise available on the work site, the approved plans are not
readily available to the inspector, for failure to provide access on the date
for which inspection is requested, or for deviating from plans requiring the
approval of the Building Official.



   (D)   To obtain a re-inspection, the applicant shall file an
application therefore in writing upon a form furnished for that purpose, and
pay the fee in accordance with the schedule of fees.



   (E)   In instances where fees have been assessed, additional
inspection of the work will not be performed until the required fees have
been paid.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.119  SPECIAL INSPECTIONS.



   Special inspection shall be provided in accordance with § 1704 of the
CBC. Additional special inspections may be required when deemed necessary by
the Building Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.120  CONTRACTOR’S RESPONSIBILITY.



   Pursuant to the requirements of CBC § 1704, each contractor
responsible for the construction of a main wind-or seismic-force-resisting
system, designated seismic system or a wind - or seismic resisting component
listed in the statement of special inspections shall submit a written
statement of responsibility to the Building Official and the owner prior to
the commencement of work on the system or component. The contractor's
statement of responsibility shall contain acknowledgement of awareness of the
special requirements contained in the statement of special inspection.



(Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361, passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396,
passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.121  STRUCTURAL OBSERVATION.



   Structural observation shall be provided in accordance with § 1704 of
the CBC. Additional structural observation may be required when deemed
necessary by the Building Official. Structural observation does not include
or waive any inspection required by this code.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.122  CONNECTION TO UTILITIES.



   (A)   Energy connections. Persons shall not make connections from a
source of energy, fuel or power to building service equipment which is
regulated by the technical codes and for which a permit is required by this
chapter, until approved by the Building Official.



   (B)   Temporary connections. The Building Official may authorize the
temporary connection of the building service equipment to the source of
energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service equipment,
or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. This temporary
connection will be allowed for a specific purpose and for a specific period
of time. The temporary connection must be removed or detached when the
permitted time period is over.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 10. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY



§ 150.130  USE OR OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   Buildings or structures shall not be used or occupied nor
shall a change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or
structure or portion thereof be made until the Building Official has issued a
certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein.



   (B)   Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed
as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other
city ordinances.



   (C)   Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel
the provisions of this chapter or of other city ordinances shall not be valid.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.131  CHANGE IN USE.



   Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except
as specified in the Building Code.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.132  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   After the Building Official inspects the building or structure and
finds no violations of the provisions of this chapter or other laws, the
Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain
the following:



   (A)   The building permit number.



   (B)   The address of the building.



   (C)   The name and address of the owner.



   (D)   A description of that portion of the building for which the
certificate is issued.



   (E)   A statement that the described portion of the building has
been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter for the
group and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy
is classified.



   (F)   The name of the Building Official.



   (G)   The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.



   (H)   The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 3 of the CBC.



   (I)   The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the CBC.



   (J)   The design occupant load.



   (K)   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the
sprinkler system is required.



   (L)   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.133  TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.



   (A)   If the Building Official finds that substantial hazard will
not result from occupancy of a building or portion thereof before the same is
completed, a temporary certificate of occupancy for the use of a portion or
portions of a building or structure may be issued prior to the completion of
the entire building or structure.



   (B)   Applicant shall pay required fees prior to issuance of
temporary certificate of occupancy.



   (C)   The Building Official will develop policies and procedures to
administer issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.134  POSTING.



   The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises and shall not be removed except by the Building Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.135  REVOCATION.



   The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate
of occupancy issued under the provisions of this chapter when the certificate
is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information, or when it is
determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation
of an ordinance, regulation or the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 11.  ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF THE 2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE



§ 150.140  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The International Building Code, 2012 edition, including the
appendices thereto, together with those omissions, amendments, exceptions and
additions thereto as amended in Part 2 of Title 24 of the California Code of
Regulations are adopted and enacted, as the primary building code of the City
of Baldwin Park and made part of this code by reference with the same force
and effect as if fully set forth herein and shall be known as the Baldwin
Park Building Code.



   (B)   The International Residential Code, 2012 edition, including
the appendices thereto, together with those omissions, amendments, exceptions
and additions thereto as amended in Part 2.5 of Title 24 of the California
Code of Regulations are adopted and enacted, as the Residential Building Code
of the City of Baldwin Park and made part of this code by reference with the
same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and shall be known as the
Baldwin Park Residential Building Code.



   (C)   The California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 edition,
including the appendices thereto, together with those omissions, amendments,
exceptions and additions thereto as amended in Part 11 of Title 24 of the
California Code of Regulations are adopted and enacted, as the Green Building
Code of the City of Baldwin Park and made part of this code by reference with
the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and shall be known as
the Baldwin Park Green Building Code.



   (D)   The following portions of the California Green Building
Standard Codes are amended as follows:



      Section 304.1 Purpose. Voluntary tires are intended to further
encourage building practices that improve public health, safety and general
welfare by promoting the use of building concepts which minimizes the
building's impact on the environmental and promote a more sustainable design.



      Section 304.1.1 Tiers. The provisions of Division A4.6 Tier 1 for
Residential are adopted and enacted, as the mandatory tiers. The verification
of requirement of these provisions shall be made by the jurisdiction.



   Additional requirement for residential:



   Every new single family home shall install a prewired 40 AMP circuit
dedicated for future Electric car charging device.



   Every multifamily dwelling apartment building shall install a
sufficient number of Level III charging stations for eclectic cars. The
number of charging devices shall be 5 percent of total required parking
spaces, but not less than one The charging stations shall be designated for
charging only.



      Section 304.4.1.2 Tiers. The provisions of Divisions A5.6 Tier 1
for non-residential are adopted and enacted, as the mandatory tiers. The
verification of requirements of these provisions shall be made by the
jurisdiction.



   Additional requirement for non-residential



   Every new non-residential project shall install a sufficient number
level III electric car charging stations as determine during planning stage.
The number of charging stations shall be equal to 5 percent of required
parking spaces, but not less than one. Charging stations shall be designated
for charging only. This requirement is in addition to parking requirement for
low emission vehicles.



   (E)   One copy of the adopted codes has been filed for use and
examination of the public in the Office of the City Clerk of the City of
Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.141  LOCAL AMENDMENTS.



   The following provisions shall constitute local amendments to the
cross-referenced provisions of the CBC and shall be deemed to replace the
cross-referenced section of the CBC with the respective provisions set forth
in this chapter.



   (A)   Section 1505, Fire Classification, is hereby amended as
follows: §§ 1505.1, 1505.1.3 and Table 1505.1 are deleted:



   Sections 1505.1 through 1505.3 are amended to read as follows: The
entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 25% of the
total roof area is replaced within any one year period; the entire roof
covering of every new structure and any roof covering applied in any
alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure
shall be a fire retardant roof covering that is at least Class B fire rating.
No wood shakes or wood shingles, treated or untreated shall be permitted.



   EXCEPTION: Repairs and additions to existing wood roofs, under
twenty-five (25%) percent of the total existing roof area, shall be allowed
to match the existing wood roof if the new materials are fire retardant and
meet the specifications of a Class B roof. Only one such repair shall be
allowed within a 12-month period.



   (B)   Section 1510, Re-roofing, is hereby amended as to read as
follows:



   SECTION 1510.1 GENERAL. All re-roofing shall conform to the applicable
provisions of Chapter 15 of the CBC and as otherwise required in this
section. Repairs to existing roofs shall be limited to 25% of the total roof
area within any one-year period. Repairs exceeding 25% of the total roof area
shall be considered complete re-roofs and subject to the provisions of this
code.



   All re-roofing work which requires complete removal of existing roof
coverings shall be considered as new work, and shall be reviewed and
inspected under Chapter 15 of this code. Sheathing placed on top of existing
spaced sheathing to create a flat surface shall be installed per the roofing
manufacturer's specifications and applicable ICC reports.



   Sheathing placed directly over roof rafters shall meet span and index
ratings in accordance with Table 2304.7.(3) of the CBC. Sheathing shall be a
minimum of one half inch in thickness and its edges shall bear on a roof
rafter or similar support. Sheathing shall be fastened with minimum 8d common
nails spaced six inches on center on the edge and 12 inches on center in the
field. Lightweight roofs not exceeding six pounds per square foot, which are
replaced with heavier roofs, shall comply with the provision of Chapter 16 of
the CBC and subject to plan check. Sheathing over existing space sheathing
shall be a minimum of 3/8 inches in thickness.



   SECTION 1510.3.3. REROOFING OVERLAYS ALLOWED



   Not more than one overlay of composition shingles shall be allowed.



   (C)   Section 1613.6, Suspended Ceilings is hereby added to the Code
to read as follows:



   Minimum design and installation standards for suspended ceilings shall
be determined in accordance with the requirements of CBC § 2506.2.1 of this
Code and this subsection.



      1613.6.1  Scope. This part contains special requirements for
suspended ceilings and lighting systems. Provisions of Section 13.5.6 of ASCE
7 shall apply except as modified herein.



      1613.6.2  General. The suspended ceilings and lighting systems
shall be limited to 6 feet (1,828 mm) below the structural deck unless the
lateral bracing is designed by a licensed engineer or architect.



      1613.6.3  Design and Installation Requirements.



      1613.6.3.1  Bracing at Discontinuity. Positive bracing to the
structure shall be provided at changes in the ceiling plane elevation or at
discontinuities in the ceiling grid system.



      1613.6.3.2  Support for Appendages. Cable trays, electrical
conduits and piping shall be independently supported and independently braced
from the structure.



      1613.6.3.3  Sprinkler Heads. All sprinkler heads (drops) except
fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies, shall be
designed to allow for free movement of the sprinkler pipes with oversize
rings, sleeves or adaptors through the ceiling tile, in accordance with
Section 13.5.6.2.2 (e) of ASCE 7.



      Sprinkler heads penetrating fire-resistance-rated floor/ceiling
or roof/ceiling assemblies shall comply with Section 714 of this Code.



      1613.6.3.4  Perimeter Members. A minimum wall angle size of at
least a two inch (51 mm) horizontal leg shall be used at perimeter walls and
interior full height partitions. The first ceiling tile shall maintain 3/4
inch (19 mm) clear from the finish wall surface. An equivalent alternative
detail that will provide sufficient movement due to anticipated lateral
building displacement may be used in lieu of the long leg angle subject to
the approval of the Superintendent of Building.



      1613.6.4  Special Requirements for Means of Egress. Suspended
ceiling assemblies located along means of egress serving an occupant load of
30 or more shall comply with the following provisions.



      1613.6.4.1  General. Ceiling suspension systems shall be
connected and braced with vertical hangers attached directly to the
structural deck along the means of egress serving an occupant load of 30 or
more and at lobby's accessory to Group A Occupancies. Spacing of vertical
hangers



      shall not exceed 2 feet (610 mm) on center along the entire
length of the suspended ceiling assembly located along the means of egress or
at the lobby.



      1613.6.4.2  Assembly Device. All lay-in panels shall be secured
to the suspension ceiling assembly with two hold-down clips minimum for each
tile within a 4-foot (1,219 mm) radius of the exit lights and exit signs.



      1613.6.4.3  Emergency Systems. Independent supports and braces
shall be provided for light fixtures required for exit illumination. Power
supply for exit illumination shall comply with the requirements of Section
1006.3 of this Code.



      1613.6.4.4  Supports for Appendage. Separate support from the
structural deck shall be provided for all appendages such as light fixtures,
air diffusers, exit signs, and similar elements.



   (D)   Section 1615, Seismic Design Requirements, is hereby added to
the Code to read as follows:



   SECTION 1615 SEISMIC DESIGN REQUIREMENTS



   1615.1  General. The text of ASCE 7 is hereby amended to read as
follows: 1615.1.6 ASCE 7, 12.11.2.2.3,



      12.11.2.2.3  Wood Diaphragms. In wood diaphragms, the continuous
ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. Anchorage shall not be
accomplished by use of toe nails or nails subject to withdrawal nor shall
wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain bending or cross-grain
tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered effective as
providing ties or struts required by this section.



      For wood diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls, wood
diaphragms shall comply with the following:



      1.   The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet.
Added chords of diaphragms may be used to form sub-diaphragms to transmit the
anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.



      2.   The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth
of the sub-diaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.



   1615.1.8 ASCE 7, 12.12.4.



      12.12.4 Deformation Compatibility for Seismic Design Category D
through F. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F,
every structural component not included in the seismic force-resisting system
in the direction under consideration shall be designed to be adequate for the
gravity load effects and the seismic forces resulting from displacement to
the design story drift (A) as determined in accordance with § 12.8.6 (see
also § 12.12.1).



      EXCEPTION: Reinforced concrete frame members not designed as part
of the seismic force-resisting system shall comply with Section 21.9 of ACI
318.



      Where determining the moments and shears induced in components
that are not included in the seismic force-resisting system in the direction
under consideration, the stiffening effects of adjoining rigid structural and
nonstructural elements shall be considered and a rational value of member and
restraint stiffness shall be used.



      When designing the diaphragm to comply with the requirements
stated above, the return walls and fins/canopies at entrances shall be
considered. Seismic compatibility with the diaphragm shall be provided by
either seismically isolating the element or by attaching the element and
integrating its load into the diaphragm.



   SECTION 1808.6.1 FOUNDATIONS



   When buildings are located on expansive soil having an expansion index
greater than 20 ASTMD 4829, gutters, downspouts, piping, and/or other
non-erosive devices shall be provided to collect and convey rainwater to a
street, storm drain, or other approved watercourses or disposal area.



   Foundations in expansive soil shall be designed to comply with the
following table:



 

Numbers of floors supported by foundation
 
Thickness of foundation wall (inches)
 
Width of footing

(Inches)
 
Thickness of footing (inches)
 
Depth of footing (inches)


Concrete
 
Masonry


   1
 
6
 
6
 
12
 
6
 
24



 



   EXCEPTION: for residential monolithically places concrete foundation
located in non-hillside terrain, two #4 reinforcing bars shall be placed
within 3 inches of the of footing and two reinforcing bars shall be placed 3
to 5 inches from the bottom of the footing. Concrete floor reinforcement
shall consist of number 3 reinforcement bars at 24 inches on center each way.
Number 3 bars shall be embedded into footing a depth of 18 inches.



   Minimum slab reinforcement for any building shall be #3 bars at 18-in
on center each way.



   (E)   SECTION 3109.2  DEFINITION. The following definition is
hereby added to this section of the code.



      BARRIER HEIGHT. The distance measured from finish grade to the
top of the barrier. The face of the barrier used shall be the face that is
outside the pool or spa area. Finish grade shall be the lowest adjacent grade
within two (2) feet of the outer surface of the barrier along the entire
length.



   (F)   Section 3109.4.1 is amended to read as follows:



   SECTION 3109.4.1 BARRIER HEIGHT AND CLEARANCES.



      The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches above grade
measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool.
The maximum vertical clearances between grade and the bottom of the barrier
shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from
the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the
barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on the top of the pool
structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool
structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches.



   EXCEPTION: Upon showing of good cause and in individual cases, the
Building Official may allow modifications to the barrier requirements.



   (G)   Section 3109.4.1.4 is amended to read as follows:



      3109.4.1.4  Widely spaced horizontal members. Barriers shall not
have a design configuration that provides a ladder-like effect. When the
barrier has horizontal members spaced less than 45 inches apart, such member
shall be placed on the poolside of the barrier. Any decorative design work
attached to the outer side of the barrier that forms a ladder like design
work effect is prohibited.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.142  SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS.



   This following section is hereby added to the Code:



   SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS



   (A)   Intent. This section establishes standard placards to be used
to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The section
further authorizes the Building Official and his or her authorized
representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a
building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.



   (B)   Application of provisions. The provisions of this chapter are
applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by
the City of Baldwin Park. The City Council may extend the provisions as
necessary.



   (C)   Definitions.SAFETY ASSESSMENT is a visual, non-destructive
examination of a building or structure for purpose of determining the
condition for continued occupancy.



   (D)   Placards.



      (1)   The following are verbal descriptions of the official
placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of
buildings or structures.



         (a)   INSPECTED - lawful occupancy permitted is to be
posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has
been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to
the building or structure.



         (b)   RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or
structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form
of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this
placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will
clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.



         (c)   UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on
each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued
occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with
this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized
in writing by the Building Official, or his or her authorized representative.
Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any
time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The
individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of
damage encountered.



      (2)   This municipal code section number, the name of the
city, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each
placard.



      (3)   Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a
placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an
authorized representative of the Building Official. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard
unless authorized pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.143  APPENDIX J: GRADING.



   (A)   APPENDIX J, GRADING, SECTION J103 is amended to read as
follows:



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official for APPENDIX J, GRADING shall
be the Director of Public Works (except grading around building foundation
and swimming pool).



   (B)   APPENDIX J GRADING. SECTION J106 EXCAVATIONS. This section is
amended by the addition of the following:



   EXCAVATION AT OR ADJACENT TO SLOPES. A geotechnical report addressing
slope stability shall be submitted for plan review when an excavation or
construction of a swimming pool, spa, or similar structure encroaches into
the projected plane of a 3:1 or steeper slope.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 12.  ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS OF THE CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE



§ 150.150  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The National Electrical Code (NEC), 2011 Edition, promulgated
by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, (P.O. Box
9146), Quincy, MA 02269-9959, together with the 2016 California Amendments
adopted by the California Building Standards Commission as Title 24, Part 3
of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and enacted as the
primary electrical code of the city and made part of this code by reference
with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein subject to the
following amendments and shall be known as the Baldwin Park Electrical Code.



   (B)   One copy of the codes adopted by reference has been filed for
use and examination of the public in the Office of the City Clerk of the city.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.151  SPECIAL EVENTS.



   A permit shall be required for the installation of portable wiring for
equipment for carnivals, circuses, exhibits, amusement rides, traveling
attractions, film shoots and similar functions including wiring in, or on,
all structures.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.152  TEMPORARY WIRING.



   For the purpose of this section temporary wiring shall be defined as
temporary electrical power and lighting installations permitted during the
period of construction, remodeling, maintenance, repair, or demolition of
buildings, structures, equipment, or similar activities. Temporary wiring
shall be removed immediately upon completion of construction or purpose for
which the wiring was installed. The main service of a building or space shall
not be energized to provide temporary lighting during construction.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



§ 150.153  CONDITIONAL ELECTRICAL SERVICE CONNECTION.



   A conditional electrical service connection may be authorized by the
Building Official when in the opinion of the Building Official the need for
such connection exists and such connection cannot be achieved following the
standard adopted policy or process. Conditional electrical service may be
terminated at the completion of a specific purpose for which the electrical
connection was granted or at the discretion of the Building Official.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 13.  ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE



§ 150.160  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The uniform mechanical code, 2012 edition, promulgated by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5001 East
Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA, 91761-2816, together with the 2016
California amendments adopted by the California Building Standards Commission
as Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted
and enacted as the primary mechanical code of the city, and made part of this
code by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein
and shall be known as the Baldwin Park Mechanical Code.



   (B)   One copy of each of the codes adopted by reference has been
filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the City Clerk
of the City of Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 14.  ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE



§ 150.170  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The Uniform Plumbing Code, 2012 edition promulgated by the
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 5001 East
Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA, 91761-2816, together with the 2016
California Amendments adopted by the California Building Standards Commission
as Title 24, Part 5 of the California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted
and enacted as the primary plumbing code of the city, and made part of this
code by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein
and shall be known as the Baldwin Park Plumbing Code.



   (B)   One copy of each of the codes adopted by reference has been
filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the City Clerk
of the City of Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 15. ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE



§ 150.180  ADOPTION.



   (A)   Building Energy Efficiency Standards - standards for
residential and nonresidential buildings which incorporates Title 24, Part 6
of the California Code of Regulations as published by the California Energy
Commission and the California Building Standards Commission, and is hereby
adopted and enacted as the primary Energy Code of the City of Baldwin Park,
and made part of this Code by reference with the same force and effect as if
fully set forth herein and shall be known as the 2016 California Energy Code.



   (B)   One copy of the 2016 California Energy Code has been filed for
use and examination of the public in the Office of the City Clerk of the City
of Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 16.  ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA ELEVATOR SAFETY CONSTRUCTION CODE



§ 150.190  ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL PROVISIONS OF CALIFORNIA ELEVATOR SAFETY
CONSTRUCTION CODE.



   (A)   The California Elevator Safety Construction Code, as adopted
by the California Building Standards Commission as Title 24, Part 7 of the
California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary
elevator safety construction code of the city and made part of this code by
reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and
shall be known as the 2016 California Elevator Safety Construction Code.



   (B)   One copy of the 2016 California Elevator Safety Construction
Code has been filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of
the City Clerk of the city.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 17. ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE



§ 150.200  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The California Historical Building Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission as Title 24, Part 8 of the
California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary
historic building code of the city, and made part of this code by reference
with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and shall be
known as the 2016 California Historic Building Code.



   (B)   One copy of the 2016 California Historical Building Code has
been filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the City
Clerk of the City of Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 18. ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF THE CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE



§ 150.210  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The International Existing Building Code, 2012 edition,
including the appendices thereto, together with those omissions, amendments,
exceptions and additions thereto as amended in Title 24, Part 10 of the
California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary
Existing Building Code of the city, and made part of this code by reference
with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and shall be
known as the 2016 California Existing Building Code.



   (B)   One copy of the 2016 California Existing Building Code has
been filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the City
Clerk of the City of Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



Part 19. ADOPTION OF THE CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE



§ 150.220  ADOPTION.



   (A)   The California Referenced Standards Code, as adopted by the
California Building Standards Commission as Title 24, Part 12 of the
California Code of Regulations, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary
referenced standards code of the city, and made part of this code by
reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein and
shall be known as the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code.



   (B)   One copy of the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code has
been filed for use and examination of the public in the Office of the City
Clerk of the City of Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1308, passed 12-19-07; Am. Ord. 1338, passed 11-17-10; Am. Ord. 1361,
passed 12-18-13; Am. Ord. 1396, passed 2-1-17)



HOUSE MOVING



§ 150.230  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls, and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattels or property of any kind.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.



   HOUSE MOVING PERMIT.  A permit issued upon an application to allow the
movement of a building or structure in, over, or upon any public street or
public property within the city.



   PERMIT.  A permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
allowing a person to have a building or structure in and along any public or
private street in the city.



   RELOCATE or RELOCATION.  The temporary or permanent relocation of any
building or structure upon any property located within the city.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected requiring a fixed location
on the ground or is attached to some object having a fixed location on the
ground.



('83 Code, §15.24.010)  (Ord. 966, passed - -88)



§ 150.231  PERMITS.



   (A)   Required.  No person shall move any building or structure in
or along any public or private street within the city, without first
obtaining a permit in the manner set forth in this subchapter.



('83 Code, § 15.24.020)



   (B)   Application; information required.  To obtain a permit, the
applicant shall first file an appli- cation therefor in writing on a form
furnished for that purpose by the Director. Every such application shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The present location of the building or structure to be
moved.



      (2)   The address and legal description of the land to which
the building or structure is to be moved.



('83 Code, § 15.24.030)



   (C)   Filing fee.  Prior to or at the time of filing an application
for a permit, the filing and processing fee as prescribed by City Council
resolution shall be paid by the applicant to cover the reasonable cost of
investigations and other services required by the city pursuant to this
chapter.



('83 Code, § 15.24.040)



(Ord. 966, passed - -88)  Penalty, see § 150.99



§ 150.232  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.



   The Director, upon receipt of application for a permit shall make all
necessary investigations to determine whether the building or structure may
be moved safely in and along the proposed route.  The application shall also
be examined and reviewed by other departments of the city to ensure that the
proposed route is safe.



('83 Code, §15.24.050)  (Ord. 966, passed - -88)



§ 150.233  APPEAL TO COUNCIL.



   Any person dissatisfied with the determination of the Director with
reference to a permit shall have the right of appeal to the City Council,
taken in the time and manner set forth in § 30.04 of this code.



('83 Code, § 15.24.060)  (Ord. 966, passed - -88)



§ 150.234  EXCEPTION.



   A permit shall not be required pursuant to this subchapter for the
transportation into or the use within the city, of any temporary building
and/or structure if such transport and use is expressly permitted or required
by other applicable laws or regulations, such as for construction offices,
portable sanitation facilities, bleacher seats, construction barricades and
the like and for use, and if used only in connection with a construction
project or other temporary activity which can lawfully be conducted within
the city.



('83 Code, § 15.24.070)  (Ord. 966, passed - -88)



§ 150.235  INSURANCE REQUIRED.



   The person named in the application as the person who will move the
building or structure to be moved shall furnish evidence of public liability
and property damage insurance in an amount to be approved by the Director. 
The city shall be named as co-insured in this policy.



('83 Code, §1 5.24.080)  (Ord. 966, passed - -88)



§ 150.236  CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.



   Upon such an application being made and the fee being paid, the
Director shall issue a permit if he finds that compliance with this chapter
shall be had, and that the route is feasible and will not pose a threat to
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.  The Director may, where circumstances
warrant, condition permit approval, so as to ensure compliance with the pro-
visions of this subchapter, including, but not limited to, a good and
sufficient surety or a cash deposit in an amount to be determined by the
Director to protect the city against damage to public property.  The permit
shall describe the streets along and over which the building shall be moved
and the days and hours for such moving.



('83 Code, § 15.24.090)  (Ord. 966, passed - -88)



§ 150.237  BUILDING RELOCATION.



   (A)   Prohibition.  No person shall relocate a building or
structure, or cause or permit the relocation of a building or structure, from
any location without the city's boundaries to a location within the city's
boundaries.



   (B)   Structures which may be relocated.  No person shall relocate
a building or structure, or cause or permit the relocation of a building or
structure, from any location within the city's boundaries to any other
location within the city's boundaries unless all of the following
requirements are met.



      (1)   The structure is a detached single family residential
structure (which may include its associated accessory structures);



      (2)   The structure is currently existing and located within
the city.



      (3)   The structural integrity of the structure has not been
compromised and has been certified by a City Inspector.



      (4)   The applicant has demonstrated that there exists an
involuntary and external hardship that necessitates the move of the
structure. Economic hardship and financial speculation do not constitute
hardship for this purpose.



      (5)   The applicant has demonstrated there is an imminent
threat of demolition of the structure.



      (6)   The relocation of the structure will not cause a
non-conforming situation.



      (7)   The relocation of the structure will not require any
deviations from applicable development standards.



   (C)   Process for approval.  A structure proposed for relocation
shall be treated as a new structure and all approvals required for new
construction shall first be obtained and all applicable fees paid before a
house moving permit may be issued.



   (D)   Fees.  Fees to obtain approval to relocate a building within
the city shall be as established by resolution of the City Council.



('83 Code, § 15.24.120)



(Ord. 966, passed - -88; Am. Ord. 1311, passed 12-5-07)



§ 150.238  EXCEPTION.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to new modular or
prefabricated buildings or structures.



(Ord. 1311, passed 12-5-07)



VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION



§ 150.250  PURPOSE; SCOPE.



   It is the purpose and intent of the City Council, through the adoption
of this subchapter, to establish an abandoned or vacant property registration
program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods and commercial areas from
becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of
abandoned and vacated properties.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.251  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, certain words and phrases used in
this subchapter are defined as follows:



   ABANDONED.  A property that is:



      (1)   Vacant;



      (2)   Under a current notice of default;



      (3)   Pending a tax assessor’s lien sale;



      (4)   Under a notice of trustee’s sale;



      (5)   Has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the
title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the
foreclosure; or



      (6)   Has been transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure.



   ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY.  A property that is accessible through a
compromised/breached window, gate, fence, wall, etc.



   ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE.  A structure/ building that is unsecured or
breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.



   AGREEMENT.  Any agreement or written instrument which provides that
title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner
to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange.



   ASSIGNMENT OF RENTS.  An instrument that transfers the beneficial
interest under a deed of trust from one lender/entity to another.



   BENEFICIARY.  A lender or holder of a note secured by a deed of trust.



   BENEFICIARY/TRUSTEE.  Both the beneficiary and the trustee. When any
act is required of the beneficiary/trustee by this subchapter, both are
responsible for performing such act and may be charged with a violation of
this code for failure to act. However, it is sufficient if it is accomplished
by either one.  If information is required to be provided, they both must
provide such information.



   BUYER.  Any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or
fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for
property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section.



   DAYS.  Consecutive calendar days.



   DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE/SALE.  A recorded document that transfers
ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust
upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.



   DEED OF TRUST.  An instrument by which title to real estate is
transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan and
often used in California instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to
any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust
deed, etc.



   DEFAULT.  The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.



   DISTRESSED.  A property that is under a current notice of default or
notice of trustee’s sale and/or pending tax assessor’s lien sale or has
been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the
beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.



   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY.  Any condition that on its own or combined with
other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant and not occupied by authorized persons. Such conditions
include, but are not limited to, overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation
of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail, past due utility notices and/or
disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of
window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of
furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, or
statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees the
property is vacant.



   FORECLOSURE.  The process by which a property, placed as security for
a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor
(borrower) defaults.



   LOCAL.  Within 40-road/driving miles distance of the subject property.



   NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARD.  Those conditions that are present on a simple
majority of properties within a 300-foot radius of an individual property. 
A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, or any
other abandoned property within the 300-foot radius, shall not be counted
toward the simple majority.



   NOTICE OF DEFAULT.  A recorded notice that a default has occurred
under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a
trustee’s sale.



   OUT OF AREA.  In excess of 40-road/driving miles distance of the
subject property.



   OWNER.  Any person, co-partnership, association, corporation or
fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real
property.



   OWNER OF RECORD.  The person having recorded title to the property at
any given point in time the record is provided by the Los Angeles County
Recorder’s Office.



   PROPERTY.  Any unimproved or improved real property, or portion
thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures
located on the property regardless of condition.



   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING.  Any improved real property, or portion thereof,
situated in the city, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real
property.  This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade,
transfer, or exchange as “residential” whether or not it is legally
permitted and/or zoned for such use.



   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  Any person, partnership, association,
corporation, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title to or any interest
in any real property and includes trustees and beneficiaries of a deed of
trust on the property and any other lien holder on the property.



   SECURING.  Such measures as may be directed by the Planning Manager or
his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences
and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door,
window and/or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the
current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or
required.



   TRUSTEE.  The person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a
property.



   TRUSTOR.  A borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a
trustee as security for the payment of a debt.



   VACANT.  A building/structure that is not legally occupied.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09; Am. Ord. 1367, passed 1-7-15)



§ 150.252  RECORDATION OF TRANSFER OF LOAN/DEED OF TRUST/ASSIGNMENT OF
RENTS.



   Within ten days after the purchase or transfer of a loan/deed of trust
secured by residential property the new beneficiary/trustee shall record,
with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office, an assignment of rents, or
similar document, that lists the name of the corporation, and/or individual,
the mailing address and contact phone number of the new beneficiary/ trustee
responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan/deed of trust.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.253  REGISTRATION.



   Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust secured by a property
located within the city which is abandoned shall, within ten days, register
the property with the Planning Manager, or his/her designee, on forms
provided by the city.



   (A)   If the property is occupied but remains in default, then it
shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or an agent/designee of the



beneficiary/ trustee and shall be deemed abandoned, and the
beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten days register the property with the
Planning Manager, or his/her designee, on forms provided by the city.



   (B)   The beneficiary/trustee shall also register any property which
becomes vacant after a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to
the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any
property which becomes vacant after being transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale.



   (C)   Such registration shall contain the following information for
both the beneficiary and the trustee: name (corporation or individual); the
street/office address (not a P.O. box) and if different, the mailing address;
a direct contact name and phone number for the person handling the deed of
trust and/or foreclosure; and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area
beneficiary or trustee, the local property manager responsible for the
security, marketing and maintenance of the property.



   (D)   The annual registration fee established by City Council
resolution, shall accompany the registration form.  The fee and registration
shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar
year, in which the registration was initially required.  Subsequent
registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be received no
later than January 31 of the year due.



   (E)   Persons required to register properties pursuant to this
subchapter shall keep such properties registered and all required information
updated, comply with the annual registration requirement and all of the
security and maintenance requirements of this subchapter for the entire time
such properties remain vacant. When such properties become occupied or title
is transferred, the beneficiary/trustee or prior responsible person shall
notify the Planning Manager, or her or his designee in writing.



   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation required to register a
property pursuant to this subchapter must report any change of information
contained in the registration within ten days after the change.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09; Am. Ord. 1367, passed 1-7-15)



§ 150.254  INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF PREVIOUSLY ABANDONED PROPERTIES.



   Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located
within the city, which property, on or before May 15, 2009 is: under a
current notice of default; under a current notice of trustee's sale; pending
a tax assessor's lien sale; has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where
the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the
foreclosure; or has been transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure/sale, shall, on or before July 14, 2009, perform an inspection of
the property that is the security for the deed of trust.  If the property is
found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, then it is, by this
subchapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within ten
days after the inspection, register, on forms provided by the city, the
property with the Planner Manager or her or his designee.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.255  MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   Responsible persons, including beneficiaries/ trustees, shall maintain
properties subject to inspection or registration pursuant to this subchapter,
and any other applicable provisions of federal, state or local law, and shall
keep such properties free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk,
debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law,
discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing,
large and small appliances, or printed material and shall take any other
action necessary to prevent giving the appearance the property is abandoned,
including but not limited to the following:



   (A)   The property shall be kept free of graffiti, tagging or
similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint
that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.



   (B)   Front and side yards visible from the public rights-of-way or
neighboring private or public property shall be landscaped and maintained in
accordance with city requirements and the neighborhood standard applicable at
the time registration was required.



   (C)   Permitted landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass,
ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock
or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation.



   (D)   Permitted landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken
concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, indoor-outdoor
carpet or any similar material.



   (E)   Required maintenance includes but is not limited to regular
watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and
removal of all trimmings.



   (F)   Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water
remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In
either case properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum
security fencing requirements of the State of California. 



   (G)   Adherence to this section does not relieve the
beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any
covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules
and regulations which may apply to the property.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.256  SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.



   Responsible persons, including beneficiaries/ trustees, shall secure
properties subject to inspection and/or registration pursuant to this
subchapter, in a manner to prevent access by unauthorized persons, including
but not limited to the following: the closure and locking of windows, doors
(walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size
that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and or
structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means the re-glazing or
boarding of the window. Responsible persons shall do the following:



   (A)   If the responsible person is a corporation and/or out-of-area
beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property manager shall be hired to perform
weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this subchapter, and
any other applicable laws, are being met.



   (B)   The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact
phone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than
18 inches by 24 inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance
of 45 feet and shall contain, along with the name and 24-hour contact number,
the words "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY", "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL
(name and phone number)" and "IF NO RESPONSE WITHIN 48 HOURS, CONTACT CODE
ENFORCEMENT AT (626) 813-5238."  The posting shall be placed on the interior
of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible
from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/ structure facing
the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or,
if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting
in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property
but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed
of and printed with weather-resistant materials.



   (C)   The responsible person or local property manager shall inspect
the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance
with the requirements of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.257  ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.



   In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters 10, 15
and 95 of this Code, the Planner Manager, her or his designee, shall have the
authority to require the responsible person of any property affected by this
section to implement additional maintenance and security measures, including,
but not limited to, securing each door, window or other opening, installing
additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency,
employment of an on-site security guard, disconnecting utilities and removing
the meter boxes, or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest
the decline of the property and prevent unauthorized entry.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.258  ENFORCEMENT.



   Violations of this subchapter may be enforced as allowed in Chapters
10, 15 and 95 of this Code or any combination thereof.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.259  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   Violations of this subchapter shall be treated as a strict liability
offense regardless of intent.  Any person, firm or corporation that violates
any portion of this subchapter shall be subject to prosecution and
administrative enforcement as provided in Chapters 10 and 15 of this Code and
subject to the penalties set forth therein. It shall constitute a new and
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a
violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of this
subchapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any person, and such
person shall be punished accordingly.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.260  FEES.



   The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set
by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



§ 150.261  APPEALS.



   Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this subchapter may
appeal insofar as such appeal is allowed in Chapter 15 or 95 of this Code.



(Ord. 1325, passed 4-15-09)



CHAPTER 151:  SWIMMING POOLS



Section



Uniform Swimming Pool Code



   151.01   Adoption of the Uniform Swimming Pool Code, 1997 Edition.



   151.02   Omissions, amendments and additions to the Uniform Swimming
Pool Code



Fence Requirements



   151.15   Fence, wall or other structure required



   151.16   Wood fences



   151.17   Wire fences



   151.18   Masonry fences



   151.19   Approved alternate



   151.20   Supervision



   151.21   Gates



UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL CODE



§ 151.01  ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL CODE, 1997 EDITION.



   Subject to certain changes, deletions and amendments as hereinafter set
forth, the “Uniform Swimming Pool Code, 1997 Edition” (hereafter the
“Code”), which Code consists of a published compilation of rules and
standards for the construction and repair of swimming pools, is hereby
adopted as the swimming pool regulations for the city. The Uniform Swimming
Pool Code is made a part of this chapter as if set forth in full in this
chapter.



('83 Code, § 15.40.010 (part))  (Ord. 1051, passed -  -91; Am. Ord. 1108,
passed 12-6-95; Am. Ord. 1135, passed 11-4-98)  Penalty, see § 150.999



§ 151.02  OMISSIONS, AMENDMENTS AND ADDITIONS TO THE UNIFORM SWIMMING POOL
CODE.



   Sections of the Uniform Swimming Pool code, as adopted in § 151.01,
are amended as set out in this section. 



('83 Code, § 15.40.020)



   (A)   Administrative authority.  Section 1.0 of the Uniform
Swimming Pool Code is amended to read as follows:



      Whenever the term ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY is used in this code
it shall be construed to mean the Building Official or his authorized
representative.



('83 Code, § 15.40.030)



   (B)   Department.  Section 1.1 of the Uniform Swimming Pool Code is
amended to read as follows.



      Unless otherwise provided for by law the office of the
Administrative Authority shall be part of the Public Works Department.



('83 Code, § 15.40.040)



   (C)   Section 1.11 of the Uniform Swimming Pool Code shall be
changed by adding the words "Three-hundred," "County" and "Three" in the
spaces provided.



('83 Code, § 15.40.050)



   (D)   Notwithstanding the adoption of the code, Section 1.8 thereof
is deleted.  Permit fees with reference to the code shall be required in the
time and manner as set forth in the Uniform Building Code adopted in §
150.001. 



('83 Code, § 15.40.010 (part))  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)  Penalty, see §
150.999



FENCE REQUIREMENTS



§ 151.15  FENCE, WALL OR OTHER STRUCTURE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every person who owns or is in possession of any premises on
which there is situated a swimming pool, fish pool, wading pool, or any other
outside body of water created by artificial means, designed or used for
swimming or other immersion purposes, by men, women, or children, any portion
of which is two or more feet in depth, shall maintain, on the lot or premises
upon which the swimming pool, fish pond, wading pool or other artificial body
of water is located, completely surrounding such body of water, lot, or
premises, a fence, wall, or other structure not less than six feet in height
with no openings therein, except door or gates constructed in accordance with
that which is set out in this subchapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 15.40.060)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.16  WOOD FENCES.



   Wood fences shall have posts not less than three inches by three
inches, spaced not over ten feet on centers, and imbedded at least 18 inches
into the ground.  Posts, other than redwood, shall be treated with a
preservative.  Fencing shall be at least one-half inch in thickness and
fastened securely to at least two rails not less than two inches by three
inches cross-section.



('83 Code, § 15.40.070)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.17  WIRE FENCES.



   Wire fences shall be constructed of mesh not less than 11 gauge
galvanized steel wire supported on one and one quarter inch diameter
galvanized pipe spaced not over ten inches on centers.  Posts shall be
imbedded at least 12 inches into concrete fill-in holes not less than six
inches in diameter and 18 inches in depth.  The aggregate of individual
openings in the fence shall not scale more than two and one-half inches when
measured in any direction.  Gates and doors excepted.



('83 Code, § 15.40.080)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 151.18  MASONRY FENCES.



   Masonry fences shall be constructed in accordance with the city's
building regulations.



('83 Code, § 15.40.090)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Building code adopted, see § 150.001



§ 151.19  APPROVED ALTERNATE.



   If the Director of Public Works finds that any other type of
construction has resulted in, or will result in, a fence in all respects the
equivalent in strength and durability to a fence constructed as provided in
this subchapter, such type of construction may be authorized by him.



('83 Code, § 15.40.100)  (Ord. 845, passed - -82)



§ 151.20  SUPERVISION.



   In lieu of maintaining a fence, the owner of the premises may provide a
competent person who shall keep the pool under observation at all time while
water is kept in the pool.



('83 Code, § 15.40.110)



§ 151.21  GATES.



   (A)   All gates or doors opening through the fence or structure
protecting a swimming pool as required by this chapter, shall be equipped
with self-closing and self-latching devices not less than four feet above
grade capable of keeping such gate or door securely closed at all times not
in actual use.



   (B)   All doors or gates shall be of such size as to completely fill
any opening in the fence or wall.  The owner or person in possession of the
premises on which the swimming pool exists shall keep such doors and gates
closed and securely latched at all times when the swimming pool is not in use.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a violation
of this section shall be deemed to be an infraction.



('83 Code, § 15.40.120)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 152:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   152.01   Title



   152.02   Purpose



   152.03   Definitions



   152.04   Application



   152.05   Fees



   152.06   Responsibilities



   152.07   Improvements and design



   152.08   Tentative parcel maps and tract maps



   152.09   Form and content of tentative maps



   152.10   Requirements for final tract maps and Parcel maps



   152.11   Reversion to acreage



   152.12   Dedications



   152.13   Lot line adjustments



   152.14   Vesting tentative maps



   152.15   Mergers



   152.16   Unmerger



   152.17   Request for determination of merger



   152.18   Commercial condominiums



   152.19   Residential condominium conversions



   152.20   Subdivision design standards



§ 152.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be referred to as “the city’s subdivision
regulations”.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.02  PURPOSE.



   The provisions of this chapter are intended to supplement and implement
the Subdivision Map Act, as defined in § 152.04 of this chapter, for the
purpose of regulating the design and improvement of divisions of land within
the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADVISORY AGENCY.  The city staff member or city policy-making or
decision-making body given the authority to act upon an application, as set
forth in § 152.10 of this chapter.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE; CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.  A
document issued by the city and recorded by the County Recorder certifying
that a specified real property complies with the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.  A CONDITIONAL CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLIANCE includes any conditions that the city may impose upon the granting
of such certificate requiring that specified terms be complied with prior to
the subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for
development of the property.



   DEDICATION.  The conveyance of a street, alley, easement, or similar
right-of-way to the city for public use or other purposes, and/or for
maintenance. As used here, DEDICATION shall include a conveyance or waiver of
direct access rights to future or proposed public or private streets.



   ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS.  An analysis conducted pursuant to the
provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of the Cal. Pub. Res.
Code §§ 21000 et seq.



   FINAL TRACT MAP.  A map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act and in a manner to be filed in the office of the County
Recorder.



   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT.  The adjustment or relocation of any property
line between two contiguous existing, legally created lots.  No LOT LINE
ADJUSTMENT shall be permitted where the effect is to create additional lots
or delete a lot.



   PARCEL MAP.  A map prepared for the purpose of dividing a legal parcel
into four or fewer parcels and prepared in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and in a manner to be recorded in
the office of the County Recorder.



   PARKWAY.  That portion of a public right-of-way between the outermost
curb-lane driving lane and the farthest edge of the right-of-way.



   SUBDIVIDER.  A person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association
that proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for that person/entity or others, except that employees and
consultants of such person/entity, acting in such capacity, are not
SUBDIVIDERS.



   SUBDIVISION MAP ACT.  Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq., as it may
be amended.



   TENTATIVE MAP.  A map showing the design and improvements of a
proposed division of land and the existing conditions in and around it.



   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.  A tentative map for any subdivision, which
shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative
Map” at the time it is filed and which meets all of the requirements for a
vesting tentative map as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and this
chapter 152.



   ZONING CODE.  The zoning code of the city set forth in chapter 153 of
the Baldwin Park Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.04  APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall divide any real property for the purpose of
sale, lease or financing except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and/or the Subdivision Map Act.



   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all divisions of land, except
those exempted by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66412.5
of the Act.  In the event of divisions of land which are not subject to this
chapter and/or the Subdivision Map Act, a certificate of compliance shall be
issued for such on a form prescribed by the Community Development Director.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.05  FEES.



   The City Council, by resolution, shall set reasonable fees in
connection with this chapter, including but not limited to fees for
processing tentative, final and parcel maps; fees for giving notice of public
hearings; fees for copying and distributing written reports on tentative
maps; and fees for processing mergers and reversions to acreage.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.06  RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Advisory agency.



      (1)   The designated advisory agencies set forth in this
section shall have the duty of making investigations and reports on the
design and improvement of proposed applications for the division of real
property and imposing requirements and conditions thereon, and shall have the
authority act on upon such applications as set forth below.  The City
Planner and City Engineer shall have the authority to refer an application to
the Planning Commission for action, and the Planning Commission shall have
the authority to refer an application to the City Council for action, as
indicated in this section.




TABLE 152.10




 




Designated Approving Authorities

 

R
F
A

 

Recommending Authority
Final Action Authority
Appeal Authority




Type of Map or Action

 

Approving Authority




City Engineer

 

City Planner

 

Planning Commission

 

City Council(1)



Lot Line Adjustment
 


 

F

 

A

 

A



Parcel Map
 


 

R

 

F

 

A



Tentative Map
 


 

R

 

F

 

A



Vesting Tentative Map
 


 

R

 

A

 

A



Final Map
 

F

 


 

A

 

A




   Process and Review

 


 

R

 


 




Reversion to Acreage Map
 

F

 


 

A

 

A




   Process and Review

 


 

R

 


 




Amended Map
 

F

 


 

A

 

A




   Process and Review

 


 

R

 


 




Certificates of Compliance
 

F

 


 

A

 

A




   Process and Review

 


 

R

 


 




Subdivision Improvement Plan
 

F

 


 

A

 

A



Lot Merger
 

F

 


 

A

 

A



Extension of Time - Tentative  Map
 

F

 


 

A

 

A



Commercial Condominium Conversion
 


 

R

 

F

 

A



Residential Condominium Conversion
 


 

R

 

F

 

A





 



      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, any
application pursuant to this chapter that has an associated application made
pursuant to the provisions of the Zoning Code and is subject to action by the
Planning Commission or City Council, such application shall be subject to
those same review and hearing requirements required for the Zoning Code
application.



   (B)   Appeal Board. The Planning Commission shall be the appeal
board for any decision of the City Engineer or City Planner.  The City
Council shall be the appeal board for any decision of the Planning
Commission. 



   (C)   City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for the
following:



      (1)   Establishing subdivision and public improvement design
and construction details, standards and specifications.



      (2)   Determining whether proposed subdivision improvements
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.



      (3)   Certifying final maps, reversion to acreage maps and
amended maps, based on direction provided by the City Planner, for
substantial compliance with approved tentative maps.



      (4)   Certifying certificates of compliance based on direction
provided by the City Planner.



      (5)   Processing and approving subdivision improvement plans.



      (6)   Inspecting and approving of subdivision improvements.



      (7)   Approving final parcel maps involving no offers of
dedication or improvements, with the authority to refer such to the City
Council for action.



      (8)   Providing assistance to the City Planner on the review
of lot line adjustments.



      (9)   Processing and acting to approve, approve with
conditions or deny lot mergers.



      (10)   Reviewing and acting upon time extension requests for
approved tentative and vesting tentative maps.



   (D)   City Planner. The City Planner shall be responsible for the
following:



      (1)   Accepting tentative map, parcel map, lot line
adjustment, certificate of compliance, reversion to acreage, commercial and
residential condominium conversions and similar applications for processing;
and distributing such application materials to appropriate agencies and city
divisions for review. 



      (2)   Processing and reviewing final maps, reversion to
acreage maps, certificates of compliance and amended maps, and making
recommendations thereon prior to certification by the City Engineer.



      (3)   Processing and acting to approve, approve with
conditions or deny lot line adjustments.



      (4)   Investigating parcel map, tentative map, vesting
tentative map, and condominium conversion applications for conformity to the
general plan, applicable specific plans and the zoning code, and in
consultation with other city departments, recommending action to the Planning
Commission.



      (5)   Conducting environmental analyses related to proposed
applications pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act set forth
in Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.



   (E)   Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be
responsible for the following:



      (1)   Taking action to approve, approve with conditions or
deny tentative map and parcel map applications.



      (2)   Hearing appeals of decisions of the City Engineer and
City Planner.



      (3)   Reviewing and taking action to approve, approve with
conditions or deny commercial condominium and residential condominium
conversion applications.



   (F)   City Council. The City Council shall be responsible for the
following:



      (1)   Accepting offers of dedication and improvements for
divisions of land resulting in five or more parcels.



      (2)   Taking action to approve, approve with conditions or
deny any application referred by another advisory agency or by appeal, or any
land division application with an associated application filed pursuant to
the requirements of the Zoning Code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.07  IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIGN.



   (A)   Minimum improvements required for approval. No subdivision
shall be approved unless those on-site and off-site improvements which are
found by the City Engineer to be reasonably necessary to service the lots
being created, are constructed or guaranteed to be constructed by the
subdivider, which include, but not limited to, the following improvements:



      (1)   An adequate domestic water distribution system designed
and constructed to service each lot proposed to be created.



      (2)   An adequate sewage system designed and constructed to
serve each lot proposed to be created.



      (3)   An adequate storm water drainage system designed and
constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created.



      (4)   An adequate public and/or private street and/or alley
system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created.



      (5)   Adequate systems designed, and constructed to provide
all necessary utilities to each lot proposed to be created, including, but
not limited to, facilities for water, natural gas, electricity, cable
television and telecommunications telephone services.



      (6)   An adequate traffic regulatory system, including
necessary traffic signals, signs, pavement markings and stripings.



      (7)   The undergrounding of utilities pursuant to chapter 97,
part 2 (Underground Utility Districts) of the Municipal Code.



      (8)   Any and all other improvements found necessary by the
advisory agency and/or the appeal board to provide all services to each lot
proposed to be created.



   (B)   Design requirements. The design of the subdivision shall
conform to the requirements of this chapter, any and all design requirements
set forth in the General Plan, the design and development standards
established for the associated zoning district per the Zoning Code, the
applicable design guidelines set forth in the Design Guidelines Manual,
generally accepted engineering standards, and to such standards required by
the advisory agency and/or the appeal board, including, but not limited to,
plans for grading and erosion control.



   (C)   Reimbursement for supplemental improvements. The city may
require that improvements installed by a subdivider for the benefit of the
subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for benefit
of property not within the subdivision, and that the improvements be
dedicated to the public.  If improvements containing supplemental size,
capacity or number are required to be installed, the city shall enter into an
agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of
the cost of the improvements equal to the difference between the amount it
would have cost the subdivider to install the improvements to serve the
subdivision only and the actual cost of the improvements.  Any such
reimbursement agreement shall be funded, exclusively, in the manner described
and contemplated in the Subdivision Map Act.



   (D)   Time for construction of improvements on subdivisions of fewer
than five parcels and designated remainder parcels. The time of fulfillment
of construction requirements for improvements for subdivisions of fewer than
five parcels and on designated remainder parcels as defined in Cal.  Gov’t
Code § 66424.6 may be established by agreement between the city and the
subdivider.  In the absence of such an agreement, fulfillment of the
construction requirements shall not be required until such time as a permit
or other grant of approval for development is issued by the city, or within a
reasonable time following approval of the final parcel map or tract map and
prior to the issuance of a permit and other grant of approval for development
upon a finding by the city that fulfillment of the construction requirements
is necessary for the public health and safety or is a necessary prerequisite
to the orderly development of the surrounding area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.08  TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS AND TRACT MAPS.



   (A)   When required. A tentative map shall be submitted for
subdivisions for which a parcel map or tract map is required by the
Subdivision Map Act.  The requirements set forth in this section shall apply
to all applications for tentative parcel and tract maps.



   (B)   Application and filing fees required.



      (1)   An application shall be filed on forms provided by the
City Planner.  Such application shall be accepted for filing by the City
Planner only upon payment by the applicant of a filing and processing fee in
a sum set by resolution of the City Council.  An applicant may, in writing,
withdraw the application at any time during the processing of the same. 
However, in accordance with adopted city policy, any refund of any of the
filing and processing fees paid in connection with the application may occur
on a pro-rated basis.



      (2)   Within 30 days of receiving an application and the
application filing fee, the City Planner shall inform the applicant in
writing whether the application is deemed complete for the purpose of Cal.
Gov’t Code Title 7, Div. 2, Ch. 4.5 (commencing with § 66498.1).



   (C)   Submission of tentative maps.



      (1)   Submission of a tentative map shall not constitute
filing with the city until all attachments and required statements,
instructions, environmental forms and clearances, and a completed application
form with appropriate fees are deposited with the City Planner and a written
receipt is provided to the applicant.  Included with the application shall
be a signed statement indicating whether the project site is located on a
site included on any of the local lists prepared by the California Integrated
Waste Management Board pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65962.5(d) and (f).



      (2)   For tentative maps proposing the subdivision of real
property for the purposes of residential development for five or more
dwelling units, the applicant shall also provide architectural renderings of
the units, as specified on applicable application forms.



      (3)   The subdivider shall file with the City Planner the
number of tentative maps the City Planner shall deem necessary, together with
evidence as to the ownership of the land proposed to be divided.



      (4)   Failure to submit all materials and statements required
by this chapter shall constitute grounds for rejection of the application.



      (5)   Upon accepting a complete tentative map application, the
City Planner immediately shall forward copies of the application to all
affected agencies and city divisions for review and comment.



   (D)   Environmental review. The City Planner, upon receipt of each
tentative map application, shall conduct an environmental analysis pursuant
to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (Cal. Pub.
Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.).  If a draft environmental impact report is
required, the application for tentative map approval shall not be considered
completed until an environmental impact report is ready for presentation to
the advisory agency.



   (E)   Planning Commission action specific to tentative maps and
parcel maps.



      (1)   The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally
approve or deny a parcel map or tentative map application within 60 days from
the date of adoption by the lead agency of a negative declaration or
determination that the project is exempt from the California Environmental
Quality Act, or if an environmental impact report is required, within 180
days after certification of the final environmental impact report, as defined
by the California Environmental Quality Act. 



      (2)   The Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public
hearing on a parcel map and a tentative map; notice of such public hearings
shall be given in the manner required by the Subdivision Map Act.  In the
absence of a timely filed written appeal, the decision of the Planning
Commission shall be final and conclusive.



   (F)   Appeals.



      (1)   Any person dissatisfied with an interpretation or action
of the Planning Commission may appeal such action to the designated City
Council. Appeals shall be filed within ten days following the date of
determination or action for which an appeal is made and shall be accompanied
by a filing and processing fee, as determined by resolution of the City
Council.  All appeals shall be in writing, identifying the action being
appealed and specifically stating the basis or grounds of the appeal. 



      (2)   Prior to an action of the Planning Commission becoming
final, the City Council may elect to review, de novo, the decision.  The
determination by the City Council shall be deemed an appeal from such
decision.



      (3)   Upon the filing of an appeal or City Council action to
review the decision, a noticed public hearing shall be held expeditiously. 
Notices of the public hearing shall be given as required by the Subdivision
Map Act.  Following the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall
expeditiously render its decision affirming, modifying or disapproving the
determination of the Planning Commission.



   (G)   Extension of processing time limits. The time limits for
acting on maps and associated appeals, as specified in this chapter and by
the Subdivision Map Act, may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant
and the city.  A waiver of time limits may be required as a condition of
accepting an application for, or processing of, maps for the purpose of
permitting concurrent processing of related approvals and/or an environmental
analysis.



   (H)   Time extensions for approved tentative maps.



      (1)   Requests for time extensions for the filing of final
maps relating to approved tentative maps, as permitted by the Subdivision Map
Act, shall be submitted to the City Engineer not less than 30 days before the
map is due to expire.  The City Engineer shall review the request and act to
either approve or deny the extension.  The aggregate period of time for all
extensions shall not exceed the limits established by the Subdivision Map
Act.  If the City Engineer denies an application for a time extension, the
subdivider may appeal to the Planning Commission within ten days after the
effective date of the denial of the extension.



      (2)   If a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of
competent jurisdiction affecting the validity of the approval or conditional
approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may apply to the city within ten
days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city for a
stay of the time in which a map will expire.  Within 40 days after receiving
the request, the City Engineer shall stay the map’s expiration date until
final conclusion of the action, if the action affects the validity of the
tentative map approval.



   (I)   Amendments to approved tentative maps.



      (1)   Minor changes to an approved tentative map or to an
approved parcel map may be approved by the City Planner upon written
application by the subdivider, provided that:



         (a)   No lots are added, deleted or substantially
altered;



         (b)   No proposed building locations are substantially
altered;



         (c)   Such changes are consistent with the intent and
spirit of the original tentative map approval; and



         (d)   There are no resulting violations of this chapter,
the Subdivision Map Act or other applicable laws.



      (2)   Minor changes are defined to be such revisions as
adjusting lot line locations or moving planned driveway locations, provided
such revisions are consistent with the provisions of subparagraph 1 of this
section.



      (3)   Changes other than minor changes to tentative maps or
approved parcel maps shall be processed in the same manner as the application
for the original approval.  An approved amendment shall not effect the
expiration date of the tentative map approval, nor extend any right pursuant
to a vesting tentative map.



      (4)   All amendments shall be indicated on the approved map
and certified by the City Planner and City Engineer.



   (J)   Waiver of parcel: when permitted and requirements.



      (1)   Pursuant to § 66428(b) of the Subdivision Map Act, the
City Planner may waive the requirement for a parcel map if the City Planner
finds that the proposed division of land complies with the requirements of
this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and in particular, that the proposed
division of land meets the minimum requirements imposed on land divisions
with regard to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control,
appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply
availability, environmental protection and other requirements imposed by this
chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.  The City Planner shall prepare written
findings to document the parcel map waiver.



      (2)   Such waiver may in particular apply to the construction
of a commercial or industrial condominium project on a single parcel,
provided that such division of land and meets the minimum requirements of
this chapter (specifically § 152.18 of this chapter) and the Subdivision Map
Act.



      (3)   A parcel map waiver may be conditioned to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



      (4)   In any case where the requirement for a parcel map is
waived by the City Planner, a tentative map, at the discretion of the City
Planner, may be required.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.09  FORM AND CONTENT OF TENTATIVE MAPS.



   (A)   Tentative maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of
a registered civil engineer or a licensed surveyor.



   (B)   The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one
sheet.  Whenever practicable, map sheets should be no less than 18 by 26
inches.  In no case shall the scale be less than one inch to 80 feet.  All
lettering shall be one-eighth-inch minimum.  The map shall contain, at a
minimum, all of the following, as well as any additional information that may
be specified in required application forms:



      (1)   A title, which shall contain the subdivision number,
subdivision name and type of subdivision.



      (2)   Name and address of the legal owner, the subdivider and
person preparing the map, including registration or license number.



      (3)   A sufficient legal description to define the boundary of
the proposed subdivision.



      (4)   Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval and source
and date of existing contours.



      (5)   Existing and proposed land use.



      (6)   A vicinity map showing data sufficient to locate the
proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community.



      (7)   Existing topography of the proposed site and at least
100 feet beyond its boundary, including, but not limited, to the following.



         (a)   Existing contours at one foot intervals.



         (b)   The approximate location of all trees standing
within the boundaries of the division of land and indication as to which
trees are to be removed.  The location of all trees with a diameter greater
than six inches, measured three feet above grade, shall be indicated, and a
statement on the existing ground cover shall also be submitted.



         (c)   The approximate location and outline of existing
structures identified by type.  Structures to be removed shall be so marked.



         (d)   The approximate location of all areas subject to
inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width and direction of
flow of each water course.



         (e)   The location, pavement and right-of-way width,
grade and name of existing streets or highways.



         (f)   The widths, location and identity of all existing
easements.



         (g)   The location and size of existing sanitary sewers,
water mains and storm drains, and the approximate slope of existing sewers
and storm drains shall be indicated.  The location of existing overhead and
underground utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated.



   (C)   Proposed improvements required to be shown shall include, but
not be limited to, the following:



      (1)   The location, grade, centerline and curb return radii
and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all
proposed and existing adjacent streets.



      (2)   Typical sections of all existing and proposed streets.



      (3)   The location, width and nature of all easements.



      (4)   The approximate lot layout and the approximate
dimensions of each lot and of each building.  The data shall show the
approximate finished grade of each lot.



      (5)   Location and nature of all proposed recreation
facilities.



      (6)   Location and nature of all proposed common areas and
areas to be dedicated for public open space or reserved for common private
open space.



      (7)   The location, elevation and size of existing and
proposed sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains.



      (8)   Location and nature of all proposed slopes.



      (9)   Dimensions of setbacks for proposed structures.



      (10)   Phasing lines for proposed developments.



   (D)   The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose
services were utilized in the preparation of the design of the tentative map.



   (E)   The tentative map shall be accompanied, at a minimum, by the
following data or reports, as well as any additional data and reports that
may be required by the City Planner to facilitate review of the tentative map:



      (1)   Title report.  A preliminary title report dated no
older than within four months of the filing date of the tentative map.



      (2)   Owner’s affidavit. The subdivider shall submit written
verification that the fee owner or owners of the realty have consented to the
filing of the tentative map.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.10  REQUIREMENTS FOR FINAL TRACT MAPS AND PARCEL MAPS.



   (A)   Form and content. The form and content of final tract maps and
parcel maps shall be as required by the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter.



   (B)   Authorized preparers. A final tract map or parcel map shall be
prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor.  Such maps shall be based upon a field survey made
in conformity with the Professional Land Surveyors Act and as required by
this chapter.



   (C)   Certificates and acknowledgments. Prior to filing, the
certificates and acknowledgments required by the Subdivision Map Act and this
chapter shall appear on the final map and may be combined where
appropriate.  Such certificates and acknowledgments shall appear on the face
of the map unless the City Engineer advises the subdivider that the
certificates and acknowledgments are to be made by separate instrument.  If
a certificate or acknowledgment is made by separate instrument, the final map
shall include a reference to the separately recorded documents.



   (D)   Monuments. The number, type and location of monuments shall be
as set forth in the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter, and shall conform
to standards prescribed in the Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 8771.



   (E)   Documentation required for city review and approval. The
subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the City Planner for
checking, who shall distribute the final map to other city departments and
agencies for review.  The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by plans,
reports and documents in a form as approved by the city Planner, including,
but not limited, to the following:



      (1)   Improvement plans.  Improvement construction plans as
required by the City Engineer.



      (2)   Soils report.



         (a)   A preliminary soils report, based upon test
borings and prepared in conformance with the requirements of California
Building Code, as it may be amended and as referenced in § 150.001 of the
Municipal Code, shall be required for all tract maps and for those parcel
maps which involve commercial or industrial development. The soils report
shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered in the State of California.
The requirement of a preliminary soils report may be waived or reduced in
scope by the City Engineer if, in his/her opinion, the soil characteristics
in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision have been established by previous
analyses.



         (b)   Parcel maps which propose the construction of
single-family dwellings shall require the preparation of a report which
includes the subsurface soil classification, as well as the results of an
expansive index test.



      (3)   Title report. A title report prepared by a title
insurer, with the title report required to be dated no older than within four
months of the final map.



      (4)   Improvement cost estimate.  An improvement cost
estimate, which shall include all improvements within public rights-of-way,
easements, common areas, on-site and off-site drainage improvements and
utility trench backfill as provided by the developer, except for those
utility facilities to be installed by a utility company under the
jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission.



      (5)   Deeds for easements and rights-of-way. Deeds for
easements or rights-of-way required which are not proposed to be dedicated on
the final map.  The subdivider shall provide written evidence acceptable to
the city in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private
property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform
necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of facilities, if
required.



      (6)   Traverse closures.  Traverse closure calculations for
the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines.



      (7)   Hydrology and hydraulic calculations. Complete hydrology
and hydraulic calculations.



      (8)   Organization documents.  Any proposed declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions and all other organization documents
for the subdivision in a form as prescribed by the Cal. Civ. Code § 1355. 
All such documents shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of
Community Development and the City Attorney.



      (9)   Letter of certification from water agencies. The
subdivider shall submit written certification from the affected water
provider that adequate domestic water facilities are or will be available to
serve the proposed project and that all necessary financial arrangements have
been made to ensure construction of such facilities.  Where a water supply
assessment is required pursuant to the California Water Code, such shall be
provided.



      (10)   Other reports. Any additional data, calculations
reports, or information as required by the City Planner.



   (F)   Approval of final map required by City Council.



      (1)   Each final map filed for approval, together with any
improvement agreements, shall be subject to approval by the City Council. 
Action by the City Council shall only occur after all required certificates
on such map have been signed and, where necessary, acknowledged.  The
planned action by the City Council shall appear on a City Council agenda as a
consent calendar item.



      (2)   The City Council shall, at the meeting at which the
final map is scheduled for consideration, shall act to approve the final map
if it conforms to all the applicable requirements of the Subdivision Map Act
and this chapter. Such action shall include a statement regarding the
acceptance, acceptance subject to improvement or rejection, on behalf of the
public, of any real property offered for dedication to the public in
conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication.  If the final map does
not so conform, the City Council shall not approve such map.



      (3)    In the circumstance whereby a final map does not
include any offers for dedication or improvement, the City Engineer shall
review final maps and shall approve each such map if the map conforms to the
applicable requirements of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act.  If the
final map does not so conform, the city council shall not approve such map.



   (G)   Findings required for action not to approve a final map or
parcel map. If a final tract map or parcel map is not approved due to its
failure to meet any of the requirements imposed by the Subdivision Map Act or
this chapter, such disapproval shall be accompanied by findings identifying
the requirements which have not been met or performed.  Approval of a final
tract or parcel map shall not be withheld when the failure of the map to
comply is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the
determination of the City Council or, in the case of a parcel map not
involving any offers of dedication or improvement, in the determination of
the City Engineer, does not materially affect the validity of the map.



   (H)   Recording of final maps and parcel maps. After a final tract
map or parcel map has been approved as provided in this chapter, the map
shall be transmitted to the County Recorder for recordation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.11  REVERSION TO ACREAGE.



   Subdivided real property may revert to acreage by the filing of a
parcel map in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the
Subdivision Map Act, specifically, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66499 to 66499.20
¾ as they relate to reversion to acreage, as they may be amended. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a public hearing before
the City Council shall be required for any proposed reversion to acreage
application.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.12  DEDICATIONS.



   (A)   Authority to require dedications. The city shall have the
authority to impose conditions of approval on a final tract map or parcel map
requiring the subdivider to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of
dedication of real property for streets and alleys, including, but not
limited, access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility
easements and other public easements.



   (B)   Acceptance or rejection of offer of dedication. At the time
the City Council approves a final tract map or a parcel map involving offers
of dedication, it may accept, accept subject to conditions or reject
dedications or offers of dedication.  The City Clerk shall certify on the
map the action of the City Council.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.13  LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS.



   (A)   Conditions for permitting lot line adjustments. Lot line
adjustments shall be permitted, provided that the following provisions are
complied with:



      (1)   Application  requirements.  Any person desiring to
obtain approval of a lot line adjustment shall file a plat map with the City
Planner, together with a filing and processing fee in an amount as may be
required by resolution of the City Council.  The map shall contain at a
minimum the following information:



         (a)   Name and address of owner(s) whose properties are
shown on the map;



         (b)   North arrow;



         (c)   Scale of map;



         (d)   Date of preparation;



         (e)   The name, location, and width of all streets and
alleys abutting the property;



         (f)   Tract and lot identification, lot lines, bearings
and dimensions of each of the two lots;



         (g)   Approximate location of existing improvements,
buildings and permanent structures;



         (h)   Location and width of all easements upon or
abutting the properties;



         (i)   The location of the proposed lot boundary line
adjustment, together with all applicable dimensions and bearings;



         (j)   The signatures of all owners of lots involved in
such boundary line adjustment, with a owner affidavit provided for each
affected property; and



         (k)   Any other information required by the City
Engineer.



      (2)   Survey may be required.  The City Engineer may, at his
or her discretion, require a survey of the properties involved, if he/she
finds the same necessary in order to provide an adequate description of the
subject properties.



   (B)   Processing of lot line adjustment application; findings
required for approval.



      (1)   The City Planner, based on recommendations from the City
Engineer, shall approve a lot line adjustment map if the following findings
can be made:



         (a)   No street or alley dedication or improvements are
necessary to properly service the properties involved in the proposed
boundary adjustment.



         (b)   The lots, as proposed by the boundary line
adjustment, will conform, in all respects, to the provisions of this chapter
and the Zoning Code.



         (c)   The new lot line is located in such a manner so as
not to substantially alter the size and shape of the existing lots, with
substantially alter defined to be not reducing the lot size by more than 10
percent.



         (d)   That all record owners, trust deed holders and
lien holders consent in writing to the lot line adjustment.



         (e)   A title report prepared by a title insurer, with
the title report required to be dated no older than within four months of the
filing date of the lot line adjustment application, is submitted.



      (2)   Where the City Planner finds all of the above facts to
be present, the City Planner shall approve the lot line adjustment.
Thereafter, the owner or owners of the lots involved shall record a map, in a
form approved by the City Engineer.



      (3)   If the City Planner finds any of the foregoing facts not
present, the lot line adjustment shall be denied and the applicant shall be
advised thereof.  In case of denial, the applicant shall have the option of
appealing the decision to the Planning Commission or filing a parcel or tract
map.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.14  VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS.



   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish
procedures necessary for the implementation of the provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act relating to vesting tentative maps.



   (B)   Application filing.



      (1)   Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act or this
chapter requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a
vesting tentative map may instead be filed.



      (2)   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form
and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be
processed in the same manner as is required of tentative maps pursuant to
this chapter, except as hereinafter expressly otherwise provided.



      (3)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall
have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”



      (4)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a
subdivider shall also supply the following information:



         (a)   Height, size and location of buildings;



         (b)   Sewer, water, storm drain and road details;



         (c)   Information on the uses for the proposed buildings;



         (d)   Detailed grading plans;



         (e)   Soils report;



         (f)   Flood control information; and



         (g)   Any other studies or data required by the City
Engineer.



   (C)   Expiration. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting
tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be
subject to the same extensions, established by the Subdivision Map Act and/or
this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a
tentative map.



   (D)   Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map. The approval or
conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right
to proceed with development in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66474.2
of the Subdivision Map Act.  However, if Cal. Gov’t Code § 66474.2 is
repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map
shall be deemed to have conferred a vested right to proceed with development
in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in
effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally
approved.



   (E)   Expiration of vested rights. The vested rights referred to in
this chapter shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the
expiration of the vesting tentative map, as provided in the Subdivision Map
Act.  If the final map is approved, the vested rights shall last for the
following periods of time:



      (1)   An initial time period of one year.



      (2)   A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension within
30 days prior to expiration as set forth in division (E)(1) of this
section.  The City Planner shall have the authority to approve or deny the
extension pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. If the
extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the Planning
Commission within 15 days after the denial.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.15  MERGERS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section is provided pursuant to Article 1.5 -
Merger of Parcels of the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with §§ 66451.10
et seq.) for the purpose of establishing the authority of the city to require
the merger of two or more parcels or units of land held by the same owner.



   (B)   Where these provision do not apply. This section shall not
apply to the sale, lease or financing of one or more contiguous parcels or
units of land which have been created under the provisions of city ordinances
regulating the division of real property and the Subdivision Map Act,
applicable at the time of their creation, or to parcels which were not
subject to such provisions at the time of their creation, even though the
contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner.  However, if any one
of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to
standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development pursuant to
the Zoning Code and the standards established by paragraph C of this section,
then those parcels or units shall be merged.



   (C)   Unmerged parcels prior to January 1, 1984. Any parcels or
units which were deemed unmerged, prior to January 1, 1984, under the
Subdivision Map Act and which have not been merged subsequently shall be
considered separate parcels for purposes of this section.



   (D)   Merger of nonconforming contiguous parcels under single
ownership. Contiguous parcels or units of land held by the same owner on the
date that notice of intention to determine status is filed shall be merged if
one of the parcels or units does not conform to the minimum parcel size to
permit use or development set forth in the Zoning Code and if all of the
following requirements are satisfied:



      (1)   At least one of the affected parcels has any structure
for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not
required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory
structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure,
other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous parcel or unit.



      (2)   With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the
following conditions exists:



         (a)   Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at
the time of the determination of merger.



         (b)   Was not created in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.



         (c)   Does not meet current standards for sewage
disposal and domestic water supply.



         (d)   Does not meet slope stability standards.



         (e)   Has no legal access which is adequate for
vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.



         (f)   Its development would create health or safety
hazards.



         (g)   Is consistent with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.



      (3)   Division (D)(2) of this section shall not apply if any
of the conditions stated in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.11(A), (B), (C), (D)
or (E) of the Subdivision Map Act exist.



   (E)   Proceedings for notice of intention to determine status.



      (1)   Whenever the City Engineer has knowledge that real
property has merged pursuant to this section, the City Engineer shall mail by
certified mail to the current record owner of the property a notice of
intention to determine status.  The notice of intention shall state that the
affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this section; that the owner may
request, within 30 days from the date the notice of intention was recorded, a
hearing before the Planning Commission to present evidence that the property
does not meet the standards for merger; and that the notice of intention was
recorded with the County Recorder on the date the notice of intention was
mailed.  Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the City Engineer shall
set the hearing for a date not less than 30 days but not more than 60 days
from the date of receipt of the request.  The property owner shall be
notified of the hearing by certified mail.  After the hearing, the city
shall determine whether the affected property has merged pursuant to this
section.  A determination of non-merger may be made whether or not the
affected property meets the standards for merger specified in division (D)(1)
of this section.  The decision shall be made and notification of the
decision shall be mailed to the property owner within five working days of
the date of the hearing. 



      (2)   If the parcels have merged, the City Engineer shall file
a notice of merger with the County Recorder within 30 days from the date of
the hearing, unless the decision has been appealed as provided in division
(E)(3) of this section.  The notice of merger shall specify the name or
names of the record owner or owners, and shall particularly describe the real
property.  If the parcels have not merged, the City Engineer shall record a
release of the notice of intention within 30 days from the date of the
decision, and shall mail a copy of the release to the owner.  If no hearing
is requested, the decision shall be made not later than 90 days after the
mailing of the notice of the opportunity for a hearing.



      (3)   If the owner requested a hearing, the decision of the
Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council within 10 calendar
days of the date of mailing the notice of decision by filing a written appeal
with the City Clerk.  A fee established by City Council resolution shall be
paid at the time of filing the appeal.  Upon receipt of an appeal and
payment of the fee, the City Clerk shall place the matter on the Council
agenda not less than 30 but not more than 60 days from the date of the
appeal.  If after a hearing the Council grants the appeal, the City Clerk
shall record within 30 days with the County Recorder a release of the notice
of intention.  If the appeal is denied, the City Clerk shall within 30 days
record a notice of merger with the County Recorder.  A copy of either the
release or the notice of merger shall be sent to the owners.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.16  UNMERGER.



   Any parcel or unit of land which merged pursuant to the provisions of
any law prior to January 1, 1984, but for which a notice of merger was not
recorded on or before that date are deemed unmerged if on January 1, 1984,
all of the criteria established by Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.30(a) of the
Subdivision Map Act are met and if none of the conditions of Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66451.30(b) of the Subdivision Map Act exist.  Upon request of an
owner, the City Engineer shall file a certificate of compliance whenever the
City Engineer determines that a parcel is unmerged pursuant to this section.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.17  REQUEST FOR DETERMINATION OF MERGER.



   (A)   A property owner may request that the City Engineer determine
whether property has merged under § 152.15, or is deemed unmerged under §
152.16 of this chapter.  A request for determination shall be made in
writing and shall be accompanied by a fee established by City Council
resolution.



   (B)   Upon determination that property has merged, the City Engineer
shall issue to the owner and record with the County Recorder a notice of
merger.



   (C)   Upon determination that property is deemed unmerged, the City
Engineer shall issue to the owner and record with the County Recorder a
certificate of compliance showing each parcel as a separate parcel.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.18  COMMERCIAL CONDOMINIUMS.



   (A)   Purpose. This section sets forth requirements for commercial
condominium subdivisions, including the establishment of development
standards for commercial condominium subdivisions intended to safeguard the
health and safety of the community and the purchaser.



   (B)   Application. In addition to the materials and fees required
for a tentative map by this chapter, the subdivider shall provide:



      (1)   A development plan of the project, including location,
orientation and sizes of structures; exterior architectural elevations;
parking layout and access to buildings; loading areas; and driveway locations
and other access improvements;



      (2)   A preliminary landscaping plan of the project indicating
types and sizes of landscaping materials and permanent irrigation facilities,
prepared by a person licensed to prepare such plans by the State of
California;



      (3)   A preliminary exterior lighting plan of the project
indicating location and nature of lighting and lighting fixtures in common
exterior areas;



      (4)   The proposed condominium documents, including those
portions of the covenants, conditions and restrictions that apply to the
conveyance of units; the prohibition of the assignment of parking and a
proposed mechanism for resolving parking issues; and the management and
maintenance of common areas and improvements; and



      (5)   Such other information which the City Planner determines
is necessary to evaluate the proposed project.



   (C)   Standards. The following criteria shall be evaluated when
approving or denying a commercial condominium:



      (1)   Architectural and site design. Architectural evaluation
shall include, but not be limited, to the following: an air space plan; the
general appearance of the proposed development; the design of all exterior
surfaces of the buildings; and general architectural and site considerations;
including site layout, topography, open space, location of buildings, access,
circulation, colors, building materials, screening, lighting, signing and
similar elements, that have been designed to provide an attractive and
internally cohesive environment, and to avoid impact on surrounding uses and
properties.



      (2)   Landscaping. All setback areas fronting on or visible
from an adjacent public street and all open space areas shall be landscaped
in an attractive manner consistent with the zoning requirements for the
zoning district in which the project is located. The Advisory Agency may
require additional landscaping improvements as may be appropriate to achieve
high-quality design.



      (3)   Lighting. The subdivider shall install an on-site
lighting system on all vehicular access ways and along major walkways subject
to the approval of the Advisory Agency.



      (4)   Lot coverage. Lot coverage shall conform to requirements
of the zoning district in which the commercial condominium is proposed.



      (5)   Open space - common. Functional common open space areas
shall be designed and located within the project to afford use by all owners
of the project.



      (6)   Trash and recycling collection area. Trash and recycling
collection areas shall be provided as required by Zoning Code, and sized
appropriately to accommodate trash and recycling.  Screening walls or other
structures shall be provided as required by the Zoning Code.



      (7)   Signage. The property owner(s) shall comply with all
applicable sign provisions contained in the Zoning Code.



      (8)   Streets. The width of public rights-of-way and streets
abutting the property shall conform to the minimum standard of the
circulation element of the General Plan.



      (9)   Structural and electrical. A commercial condominium
project is to be subject to the structural requirements contained in the
Municipal Code.  Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all
electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. The panel shall be
accessible to the tenant without leaving the unit.



      (10)   Covenant, condition, and restrictions (CC&Rs). CC&Rs
must be prepared in a form and with content acceptable to the City Attorney,
and at a minimum shall include provisions for the formation of a condominium
association, common area maintenance, clear designation of parking and
signage rights and a method for resolving differences.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.19  RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS .



   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes regulations for the
conversion of residential apartments into condominiums. These regulations
work to provide for the housing needs for all economic segments of the
community while also protecting the rights of tenant; protecting the health,
safety and welfare of the public and potential purchasers; promoting home
ownership; and increasing owner-occupied units that are affordable to all
economic segments of the community.



   (B)   Application, fees and deposits required. In conjunction with
the application required for tentative maps, the following additional items
shall be submitted:



      (1)   A condominium conversion application;



      (2)   Tenant and rental information which shall consist of the
name and address of each present tenant of the project and the identification
of the vacant units;



      (3)   Schedule of proposed improvements which shall be made to
the project prior to sale of individual units; such list shall not prohibit
the applicant from making additional improvements; and



      (4)   A site plan of the project, including the location and
sizes of structures, parking layout, a plan for open space areas and
configurations and vehicular and pedestrian access areas.



   (C)   Building conditions/inspections.



      (1)   As part of the application review process, the premises
shall be inspected by the Building Official, as defined in § 150.007, to
evaluate the condition of the structure(s). All inspection costs shall be
incurred by the subdivider.



      (2)   The Building Official shall inspect all structures and
premises for needed repairs to bring the project into compliance with city
building code requirements, housing code requirements and State requirements
for residential condominiums applicable at the time of building permit and/or
other permit issuance.



      (3)   The responsible fire agency shall inspect all structures
and premises to determine the sufficiency of fire protection systems serving
such structures and premises, report on any deficiencies and indicate which
deficiencies are required to be corrected by law.



      (4)   The City Planner shall inspect all structures,
improvements, and premises for compliance with the Zoning Code requirements
applicable to the project.



   (D)   Noticing and tenants rights.  Noticing shall be required as
provided in the Subdivision Map Act and shall include, but is not limited to,
the following:



      (1)   At least 60 days prior to submittal of the tentative
tract map and application to the city for processing, the owner or subdivider
shall send a notice to each and every tenant in the building(s) to be
converted.  Such notice shall contain information as specified by the city
and shall be delivered in a manner that provides for proof of delivery;



      (2)   A least 60 days prior to submittal of the tentative
tract map, the owner or subdivider shall give written notice of the intent to
convert to each person applying for rental of a unit in the subject property
immediately prior to acceptance of any rent or deposit from the prospective
tenant;



      (3)   The city shall provide each tenant with written
notification of planned public hearings for the application for conversion;



      (4)   Within ten days of submittal of an application for a
subdivision public report to the California Department of Real Estate, the
owner or subdivider shall give written notice of such to each tenant, and
each tenant shall be advised that upon issuance of such report, it will be
made available to any tenant upon request, free of charge;



      (5)   At least 180 days prior to termination of tenancy due to
the conversion or proposed conversion, the owner or subdivider shall provide
each tenant with 180 days written notice of the intention to convert;



      (6)   Each tenant shall be given an exclusive right to
contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms
and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public
or on terms more favorable to the tenant, and such exclusive right shall run
for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of issuance of the
subdivision public report by the California Department of Real Estate; and



      (7)   No units may be sold in the building proposed for
conversion unless the conversion is approved by the city and until after the
final tract map is recorded and a subdivision public report has been issued
by the California Department of Real Estate.  Unless tenants of the building
proposed to be converted were given written notice of the intention to
convert by the owner or owner’s agent at the time the tenants signed rental
or lease agreements, the subdivider shall compensate the tenants for their
reasonable relocation expenses.



   (E)   Development regulations and required upgrades. Deficiencies
found during the building inspection and further, identified by the City
Planner, must be corrected at the subdivider’s expense to the satisfaction
of the Building Official.  Deficiencies found during the fire protection
system inspection and deficiencies found by the City Planner during the
zoning compliance inspection must be corrected as required. In addition, the
subdivider shall be required to upgrade the following:



      (1)   Electrical. Electrical system and equipment grounding
must be provided.



      (2)   Windows and doors.  All windows and doors must meet
applicable window and door emergency escape/rescue requirements.



      (3)   Building components and systems. Components and system
with a remaining life of five years or less shall be replaced.



      (4)   Parking. All parking must be provided in accordance with
chapter the Zoning Code, including any requirement for covered and guest
parking.



      (5)   Landscaping and irrigation systems. Street trees, all
yard landscaping, and all irrigation systems required by the Zoning Code
shall be provided.



      (6)   Pest control. The subdivider shall repair or replace any
damaged or infested areas in need of repair or replacement, as shown in the
structural pest control report, which shall be prepared by a licensed
structural pest control operator, and shall be dated and filed at least 30
days prior to the submittal of the final map.



      (7)   Street improvements. The subdivider shall improve or
post a cash bond with the city guaranteeing the installation of required
public right-of-way improvements to city standards. These improvements may
include, but shall not be limited to, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, ramps,
driveways, drainage devices, trees and tree wells and streetlights.



      (8)   Sewer. If the apartment proposed for condominium
conversion has not been levied a sanitary sewer line charge or other charges
or fees required for ownership units, the subdivider shall pay any charges
required by the responsible sewering authority and shall provide to the city
proof of such payment.



      (9)   Sound attenuation. All floor-to-ceiling assemblies
between separate units shall meet the standards for the sound transmission
class specified in applicable building and/or health and safety codes for
residential condominium units. Such compliance shall be certified in the
inspection report.  No occupancy permit shall be issued absent such
sound-proofing compliance.



      (10)   Fire detection systems. Early-warning smoke detection
systems in the living quarters and fire protection appurtenances, as required
by current state and local law, shall be required for all condominium
conversion subdivisions.



      (11)   Fire protection systems.  Fire protections systems for
individual units and for the project as a whole shall be provided as required
by the Fire Department and applicable city codes.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 152.20  SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of this section is to
establish minimum design standards for subdivisions so that all newly created
subdivisions are consistent with the objectives for high design quality set
forth in the General Plan, to provide for residential neighborhoods and
developments that promote healthy living environments and to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the community.  Unless approved by the City
Council via a variance or other mechanism identified in this chapter or the
Zoning Code, all subdivisions shall be subject to the following minimum
subdivision design standards.



   (B)   Access to parcels. Each parcel created by any land division
pursuant to this chapter shall be provided with a means of vehicle access in
any of the following manners:



      (1)   The parcel has approved access which connects with a
public right-of-way.



      (2)   The parcel has approved access which connects to a
private street that is approved by the City Council.



      (3)   For parcels zoned for and planned to support any
multifamily residential use, the parcel has approved access in the form of an
easement/common driveway that is recorded in the office of the County
Recorder.



   (C)   Alleys. The following standards apply to the establishment of
an alley:



      (1)   The minimum width for an alley serving any parcel zoned
strictly for residential use shall be 20 feet;



      (2)   The minimum width for an alley serving both residential
and commercial or industrial uses shall be 25 feet;



      (3)   The minimum width for an alley serving either or both
commercial and industrial uses shall be 30 feet;



      (4)   All alleys shall be provided with exterior lighting for
public safety purposes, and such lighting shall be oriented in a manner that
light and glare does not impact any residential use.  Such lighting shall be
consistent with the city lighting master plan and subject to the approval of
the City Planner;



      (5)   Residential subdivisions that provide alley access to an
approved parking facility shall have the alley access designed in a manner
that serves all approved parking facilities for all of the newly created
parcels; and



      (6)   Any residential subdivision that includes alley access
shall include provisions for an assessment district wherein the city shall be
responsible for improvements and street sweeping, unless otherwise provided
by a development agreement or conditions of approval.



   (D)   Parcels adjacent to city boundaries. No city corporate
boundary line shall divide any newly created parcel or parcels. 



   (E)   Cul-de-sac, turnaround and dead end streets.



      (1)   The design of any cul-de-sac, turnaround or dead end
street, whether public or private, shall include adequate provisions for
drainage pursuant to the requirements of the Public Works Director and City
Engineer.



      (2)   The design of any cul-de-sac, turnaround or dead end
street, whether public or private, shall meet the minimum requirements
established by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.



      (3)   No cul-de-sac, turnaround or dead end street, whether
public or private, shall have a length in excess of 500 feet, as measured
from the centerpoint of one intersection to the centerpoint of the next
nearest intersection, as shown in Figure 152.40.E.



      (4)   The subdivider shall refer to the City Engineer’s
Standards Manual for the design of cul-de-sac, turnaround and dead end
streets.



Figure 152.40.E: Measurement of Distance: Cul-de-Sac, Turnaround, and Dead
End Streets







 



   (F)   Curbs, sidewalks and parkways.



      (1)   All divisions of land shall be designed to include
public rights-of-way that provide pedestrian and bicycle connections between
neighborhoods and districts, consistent with the General Plan. 



      (2)   Parkways of a minimum width of ten feet shall be
provided for all public streets.  Sidewalks shall be provided and have a
minimum width of five feet.  A minimum width of five feet shall be provided
for landscaping. 



      (3)   The corners of all new streets shall include ramps that
meet accessibility requirements consistent with the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA).



      (4)   All rights-of-ways shall be designed to meet ADA
requirements.



      (5)   The subdivider shall refer to the City Engineer’s
Standards Manual for the design of all street improvements, including curbs,
sidewalks and parkways.



   (G)   Drainage.



      (1)   Provision shall be made to convey all runoff to
underground drainage facilities or other facilities approved through the
discretionary permit review process. 



      (2)   As may be required by law, provision shall be made for
underground retention basins or other features designed to provide for the
filtration, infiltration and/or other remediation of surface runoff prior to
its release into underground conveyance systems.



   (H)   Easements. Public utility, sanitary sewer and drainage
easements shall be provided in such locations and to such widths as required
by the Public Works Director and City Engineer.



   (I)   Flag lots and through lots.



      (1)   As set forth in § 153.040.050 of the  Zoning  Code,
the creation of flag lots is prohibited.



      (2)   The creation of new through lots shall not be permitted
unless provision is made to limit street access to one lot frontage, with
such frontage to be established consistent with the frontage of the adjoining
lots.



   (J)   Parcel dimensions.



      (1)   Except for parcels created with a frontage on a
cul-de-sac, no portion of a newly created parcel shall have a width that is
less than the minimum required lot width specified in the Zoning Code for the
zoning district in which parcel is located.



      (2)   The minimum parcel street frontage width for parcels on
a cul-de-sac shall be at least three times as wide as the minimum required
driveway width.



      (3)   The side lines of all parcels, as far as practicable,
shall be at right angles to straight streets or radial to curved streets.



   (K)   Street or alley half-width dedications prohibited. The
dedication and/or construction of half-width streets or alleys shall be
prohibited. The full-width of any required street or alley shall be dedicated
at the time of subdivision.



   (L)   Street names. Street names shall be assigned in accordance
with adopted City Council policy.



   (M)   Streets relation to existing system. Streets within a division
of land shall be designed to relate in the following ways to adjacent
existing street systems:



      (1)   Alignment. Alignment of streets in new divisions of land
shall conform to and provide for the continuation of the principal adjacent
pre-existing streets or their proper projection, where adjoining property has
not been developed.



      (2)   Centerline to centerline. As far as practicable, the
streets shall be in alignment with existing adjacent streets by continuation
of the centerlines thereof and by adjustments by curves.



      (3)   Width. The streets shall be at least as wide as the
pre-existing streets to which they relate and shall be situated in such a way
as to accommodate rational future access and street patterns.



      (4)   Offset.  If centerlines are not aligned within five
feet of each other, streets shall be offset at least 200 feet, unless
otherwise approved by the Public Works Director for reasons of severe
topography, one-way streets or other unusual circumstances.



   (N)   Natural heating and cooling. The design of a subdivision shall
provide, to the extent feasible, for passive or natural heating or cooling
opportunities to be incorporated into the design and construction of any
structures to be built within the subdivision. Consideration shall be given
to configuration of the property to be divided, to design of lot size and
configuration to permit orientation of a structure in an east-west alignment
for southern exposure and to take advantage of shade or prevailing breezes.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 153:  ZONING CODE



Section



153.010  General Provisions



   153.010.010   Title



   153.010.020   Purpose



   153.010.030   Terminology



   153.010.040   Relationship to General Plan



   153.010.050   Relationship to other regulations and plans



   153.010.060   Relationship to California Environmental Quality Act



   153.010.070   Minimum requirements



   153.010.080   Severability of any portion



153.020  Administration and Enforcement



   153.020.010   Composition of Baldwin Park Planning Division



   153.020.020   Responsibilities of the City Council



   153.020.030   Responsibilities of the Planning Commission



   153.020.040   Responsibilities of the Design Review Committee



   153.020.050   Responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator



   153.020.060   Responsibilities of the Director of Public Works



   153.020.070   Responsibilities of the City Planner



   153.020.080   Interpretation of the Zoning Code



   153.020.090   Enforcement and penalty for violation



153.030  Establishment of Zones



   153.030.010   Zones Established



   153.030.020   Official Zoning Map



   153.030.030   Determination of Boundaries



153.040  Residential Zones



Part 1. Permitted Uses and Development Standards



   153.040.010   Intent and purpose



   153.040.020   Use regulations



   153.040.030   Development standards



   153.040.040   Required open space



   153.040.050   Flag lots



   153.040.060   Manufactured housing



   153.040.070   Accessory structures



   153.040.080   Vehicle storage and repair



   153.040.090   Other applicable regulations



Part 2.  Small-Lot Single-Family Developments



   153.040.100   Intent and purpose



   153.040.110   Development standards



Part 3.  Housing Incentives



   153.040.120   Intent and purpose



   153.040.130   Density bonus incentive



   153.040.140   General requirements



   153.040.150   Development standards



   153.040.160   Resale and rental controls



Part 4.  Mobile Home Parks



   153.040.170   Intent and purpose



   153.040.180   Use regulations



   153.040.190   Development standards



153.050  Commercial and Industrial Zones



   153.050.010   Intent and purpose



   153.050.020   Use regulations



   153.050.030   Development standards



   153.050.040   Accessory uses



   153.050.050   Outdoor storage and uses



   153.050.060   Other applicable regulations



153.060  Open Space Zone



   153.060.010   Intent and purpose



   153.060.020   Use regulations



   153.060.030   Other applicable regulations



153.070  Mixed-Use Zones



   153.070.010   Intent and purpose   



   153.070.020   Use regulations



   153.070.030   Development standards



   153.070.040   Additional development standards for mixed-use
developments



   153.070.050   Required residential open space



   153.070.060   Reserved



   153.070.070   Other applicable regulations



153.080  Historic Overlay Zone



   153.080.010   Intent and purpose



   153.080.020   Applicability



   153.080.030   Property maintenance



   153.080.040   Local official register



   153.080.050   Agreements by the City of Baldwin Park



153.090  Sierra Vista Overlay Zone



   153.090.010   Intent and purpose



   153.090.020   Applicability



   153.090.030   Application for approval of development plans



   153.090.040   Development standards



153.100  Planned Development Overlay Zone



   153.100.010   Intent and purpose



   153.100.020   Establishment of a planned development



   153.100.030   Use regulations



   153.100.040   Development standards



   153.100.050   Other applicable regulations



153.110  Specific Plan Zones



   153.110.010   Intent and purpose



   153.110.020   Application



   153.110.030   Minimum development site standard



   153.110.040   Specific plan requirements



   153.110.050   Other applicable regulations



153.115  Reserved



153.120  Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities



Part 1.  Adult Oriented Businesses



   153.120.010   Intent and purpose



   153.120.020   Permit requirements



   153.120.030   Location requirements



Part 2.  Alcohol Sales



   153.120.040   Intent and purpose



   153.120.050   Permit requirements



   153.120.060   Use regulations



   153.120.070   Development standards



   153.120.080   Security regulations



   153.120.090   Abandonment of permit



Part 3.  Game Arcades and Internet Cafes



   153.120.100   Intent and purpose



   153.120.110   Use regulations



   153.120.120   Development standards



Part 4.  Animal Keeping



   153.120.130   Intent and purpose



   153.120.140   Permitted animals



Part 5.  Billiard and Pool Halls



   153.120.150   Intent and purpose



   153.120.160   Use regulations



   153.120.170   Development standards



   153.120.180   Security regulations



Part 6.  Child Day Care Facilities and Large-Family Day Care Homes



   153.120.190   Intent and purpose



   153.120.200   Use regulations



   153.120.210   Development standards



Part 7.  Drive-through Establishments



   153.120.220   Intent and purpose



   153.120.230   Use regulations



   153.120.240   Development standards



Part 8.  Home Occupations



   153.120.250   Intent and purpose



   153.120.260   Permit requirements



   153.120.270   Use regulations



Part 9.  Hotels and Motels



   153.120.280   Intent and purpose



   153.120.290   Permit requirements



   153.120.300   Length of occupancy restriction



   153.120.310   Development standards



Part 10.  Marijuana Uses Prohibited



   153.120.320   Intent and purpose



   153.120.330   Use prohibited



   153.120.340   Reserved



Part 11.  Second Dwelling Units



   153.120.350   Intent and purpose



   153.120.360   Use regulations and development standards



   153.120.370   Second units in R1-7,500



Part 12.  Service Stations



   153.120.380   Intent and purpose



   153.120.390   Development standards



   153.120.400   Driveway regulations



   153.120.410   Landscape regulations



   153.120.420   Site development regulations



Part 13.  Solar Panels



   153.120.430   Intent and purpose



   153.120.440   Development regulations



Part 14.  Vehicle Storage



   153.120.450   Intent and purpose



   153.120.460   Parking regulations



Part 15.  Public Telephones



   153.120.470   Intent and purpose



   153.120.480   Use regulations and development standards



   153.120.490   Abatement



Part 16.  Emergency Shelters



   153.120.500   Intent and purpose



   153.120.510   Use regulations



   153.120.520   Development standards



Part 17.  Massage Establishments and Services



   153.120.530   Intent and purpose



   153.120.540   Use regulations



   153.120.550   Development standards



153.130  Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.130.010   Intent and purpose



   153.130.020   Applicability



   153.130.030   Permitted projections into required yard areas



   153.130.040   Building height



   153.130.050   Architectural standards



   153.130.060   Fences and walls



   153.130.070   Refuse collection facilities



   153.130.080   Property maintenance



   153.130.090   Clear cross-visibility requirement



   153.130.100   Street dedications



   153.130.110   Colors



   153.130.120   Temporary canopies



153.140  Performance Standards



   153.140.010   Intent and purpose



   153.140.020   Applicability



   153.140.030   Hazardous materials and wastes



   153.140.040   Light and glare



   153.140.050   Utilities



   153.140.060   Electrical disturbance



   153.140.070   Noise



   153.140.080   Odor



   153.140.090   Vibration



153.150  Off-Street Parking and Loading



   153.150.010   Intent and purpose



   153.150.020   Applicability



   153.150.030   Parking plan review requirements



   153.150.040   Number of parking spaces required



   153.150.050   Parking development dimensions and locations



   153.150.060   Off-site parking in a residential zone associated with
a commercial or industrial use



   153.150.070   Parking development and maintenance standards



   153.150.080   Parking lot and space location standards



   153.150.090   Use restrictions



   153.150.100   Parking lot and structure design standards



   153.150.110   Parking lot landscaping standards



   153.150.120   Shared parking



   153.150.130   Driveway standards



   153.150.140   Off-street loading standards



   153.150.150   Bicycle parking standards



   153.150.160   Parking in-lieu program



153.160  Water-Efficient Landscaping Standards



   153.160.010   Intent and purpose



   153.160.020   Applicability



   153.160.030   General landscaping standards



   153.160.040   Residential landscaping standards



   153.160.050   Nonresidential landscaping standards



   153.160.060   Landscape approval procedure



   153.160.070   Preliminary landscape design plan



   153.160.080   Elements of the landscape documentation package



   153.160.090   Landscape design plan



   153.160.100   Irrigation design plan



   153.160.110   Water efficient landscape worksheet



   153.160.120   Soil management report



   153.160.130   Grading design plan



   153.160.140   Certificate of completion



   153.160.150   Irrigation scheduling



   153.160.160   Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule



   153.160.170   Irrigation audit report



   153.160.180   Irrigation efficiency



   153.160.190   Recycled water



   153.160.192   Graywater systems



   153.160.200   Stormwater management and rainwater retention



   153.160.210   Public education



   153.160.220   Provisions for existing landscapes



   153.160.225   Prescriptive compliance



   153.160.230   Other applicable regulations



153.165  Tree Preservation and Protection



   153.165.010   Purpose and intent



   153.165.020   Applicability



   153.165.030   Tree Advisory Board - establishment and
responsibilities



   153.165.040   Tree Department - establishment and responsibilities



   153.165.050   Responsibilities of private property owners and city



   153.165.060   Tree Master Plan



   153.165.070   Public tree planting



   153.165.080   Public tree removal, trimming, maintenance, and
protection



   153.165.090   Private property tree removal and trimming



   153.165.100   Exemptions from this subchapter



153.170  Sign Regulations



   153.170.010   Intent and purpose



   153.170.020   Applicability



   153.170.030   Permit requirements



   153.170.040   Exempt signs



   153.170.050   Prohibited signs



   153.170.060   Temporary signs



   153.170.070   General sign standards



   153.170.080   Signs regulations by zone



   153.170.090   Sign regulations for specific land uses



   153.170.100   Sign construction and maintenance



   153.170.110   Other applicable regulations



153.180  Wireless Communications Facilities



   153.180.010   Definitions



   153.180.020   Purpose and intent



   153.180.030   Exempt facilities



   153.180.040   Approval requirements



   153.180.050   General standards



   153.180.060   Development standards



   153.180.070   Review and approval process




   153.180.080   Satellite antennas, amateur radio communication
facilities, and citizen band (CB) radio antennas




   153.180.090   Reserved



   153.180.100   Exceptions



   153.180.110   Nonconforming wireless communications facilities



   153.180.120   Abandonment of communications facilities



153.190  Trip Reduction and Transportation Demand Management



   153.190.010   Intent and purpose



   153.190.020   Applicability



   153.190.030   Review of transit impacts



   153.190.040   Development standards



   153.190.050   Maintenance



   153.190.060   Monitoring



153.200  Nonconforming Buildings, Structures, and Uses



   153.200.010   Application



   153.200.020   Definition



   153.200.030   Continuation of nonconforming uses, buildings and
structures



   153.200.040   Nonconformity



   153.200.050   Abandonment, change, or increase in use



   153.200.060   Expiration of time



   153.200.070   Orders of abatement



   153.200.080   Appeals from decision of Director



   153.200.090   Appeals from Commission’s decisions



   153.200.100   Notice of decision



   153.200.110   Effective date of notice



   153.200.120   Perfecting appeals



   153.200.130   Conduct of hearings



   153.200.140   Repair; maintenance



   153.200.150   Eminent domain; public acquisition



   153.200.160   Permitted repair and/or maintenance of nonconforming
buildings and structures



   153.200.170   Effect of work



   153.200.180   Exemptions and exceptions



   153.200.190   Minor additions to dwellings in R-1 Zone



   153.200.200   Consistency with general plan required



153.210  Administrative Procedures



Part 1.  General Provisions



   153.210.010   Intent and purpose



   153.210.020   Designated approving authority



   153.210.030   Exemptions from permit requirements



   153.210.040   Additional required permits



   153.210.050   Burden of proof



   153.210.060   Precedence



   153.210.070   Concurrent processing of permits



   153.210.080   Application regulations



   153.210.090   General application processing procedures



   153.210.100   Notice of public hearing regulations



   153.210.110   Public hearing regulations



   153.210.120   Permit implementation and time limits



   153.210.130   Permit modification



   153.210.140   Permit revocation



   153.210.150   Appeals



Part 2.  Design Review



   153.210.160   Intent and purpose



   153.210.170   Applicability



   153.210.180   Determination



   153.210.190   Record of review



Part 3.  Zoning Clearance



   153.210.200   Intent and purpose



   153.210.210   Applicability



   153.210.220   Determination



   153.210.230   Record of clearance



Part 4.  Sign Permit



   153.210.240   Intent and purpose



   153.210.250   Applicability



   153.210.260   Determination



   153.210.265   Time for determination



   153.210.270   Record of permit



Part 5.  Temporary Use Permit



   153.210.280   Reference



Part 6.  Zoning Code Interpretation



   153.210.320   Intent and purpose



   153.210.330   Determination



   153.210.340   Record of interpretation



Part 7.  Administrative Adjustment



   153.210.350   Intent and purpose



   153.210.360   Applicability



   153.210.370   Proceedings



   153.210.380   Determination



   153.210.390   Record of permit



Part 8.  Variance



   153.210.400   Intent and purpose



   153.210.410   Applicability



   153.210.420   Proceedings



   153.210.430   Determination



   153.210.440   Record of permit



Part 9.  Conditional Use Permit



   153.210.450   Intent and purpose



   153.210.460   Applicability



   153.210.470   Proceedings



   153.210.480   Determination



   153.210.490   Limited time approval



   153.210.495   Expiration for non-use



   153.210.500   Record of permit



Part 10.  Historic Designation



   153.210.510   Intent and purpose



   153.210.520   Applicability



   153.210.530   Proceedings



   153.210.540   Determination



   153.210.550   Record of designation



Part 11.  Historic Structure Work Permit



   153.210.560   Intent and purpose



   153.210.570   Proceedings



   153.210.580   Record of permit



Part 12.  Historic Structure Demolition Permit



   153.210.590   Intent and purpose



   153.210.600   Proceedings



   153.210.610   Record of permit



Part 13.  Wireless Facility Encroachment Permit



   153.210.620   Intent and purpose



   153.210.630   Proceedings



   153.210.640   Determination



   153.210.650   Record of permit



Part 14.  Specific Plan



   153.210.660   Intent and purpose



   153.210.670   Specific plan initiation



   153.210.680   Proceedings



   153.210.690   Determination



   153.210.700   Record of plan



   153.210.710   Specific plan amendments



Part 15.  Zoning Code Text and Zoning Map Amendments



   153.210.720   Intent and purpose



   153.210.730   Amendment initiation



   153.210.740   Proceedings



   153.210.750   Determination



   153.210.760   Record of amendment



Part 16.  General Plan Text and Map Amendments



   153.210.770   Intent and purpose



   153.210.780   Amendment initiation



   153.210.790   Proceedings



   153.210.800   Determination



   153.210.810   Record of amendment



Part 17.  Development Agreement



   153.210.820   Intent and purpose



   153.210.830   Development agreement application



   153.210.840   Contents of agreement



   153.210.850   Proceedings



   153.210.860   Determination



   153.210.870   Recordation of filing agreement



   153.210.880   Amendment or cancellation



   153.210.890   Periodic review



Part 18.  Downtown Overlay



   153.210.900   Intent and purpose



   153.210.910   Applicability



   153.210.920   Proceedings



   153.210.930   Determination



   153.210.940   Record of overlay



Part 19.  Development Plan (Planned Development Overlay)



   153.210.950   Intent and purpose



   153.210.960   Proceedings



   153.210.970   Required findings for approval



   153.210.980   Record of plan



Part 20.  Reasonable Accommodation



   153.210.990   Intent and purpose



   153.210.1000   Applicability



   153.210.1010   Proceedings



   153.210.1020   Findings



   153.210.1030   Determination



   153.210.1040   Record of reasonable accommodation



153.220  Definitions



   153.220.010   Intent and purpose



   153.220.020   A definitions



   153.220.030   B definitions



   153.220.040   C definitions



   153.220.050   D definitions



   153.220.060   E definitions



   153.220.070   F definitions



   153.220.080   G definitions



   153.220.090   H definitions



   153.220.100   I definitions



   153.220.110   J definitions



   153.220.120   K definitions



   153.220.130   L definitions



   153.220.140   M definitions



   153.220.150   N definitions



   153.220.160   O definitions



   153.220.170   P definitions



   153.220.180   Q definitions



   153.220.190   R definitions



   153.220.200   S definitions



   153.220.210   T definitions



   153.220.220   U definitions



   153.220.230   V definitions



   153.220.240   W definitions



   153.220.250   X definitions



   153.220.260   Y definitions



   153.220.270   Z definitions



   Appendix:     Zoning Map



153.010  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.010.010  TITLE.



   The title of this chapter shall be known as the “Baldwin Park Zoning
Code,” or the “Zoning Code.”



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.020  PURPOSE.



   This Zoning Code is established to regulate the use of land within the
city in an orderly manner consistent with the goals, objectives and policies
of the Baldwin Park General Plan and to protect the public health, safety,
comfort, welfare and general prosperity of the city and its residents through
classifying, designating, regulating and restricting the use of land,
buildings and structures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.030  TERMINOLOGY.



   Words, terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings
usually ascribed to them, or as defined or used in state planning and zoning
laws, or as defined in subchapter 153.220, Definitions, of this chapter. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the following shall apply:



   (A)   Tense. Words in the present tense include the future.



   (B)   Singular number. Words in the singular number include the
plural.



   (C)   Plural number. Words in the plural number include the singular.



   (D)   Mandatory terms. The terms SHALL, WILL and MUST, are mandatory.



   (E)   Gender neutral terms. The term HIS is gender neutral and means
his or her.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.040  RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN.



   This chapter provides the legislative framework to enhance and
implement the goals, policies, plans, principles and standards of the General
Plan.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.050  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS AND PLANS.



   (A)   Effect on other codes. The provisions of this chapter shall
not be interpreted to repeal, amend, modify, alter or change any other code
that is not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered or changed.



   (B)   Other applicable statues, codes and regulations. Nothing in
this chapter shall be interpreted to authorize the use of a lot or parcel in
any way that is in violation of any other applicable statute, code or
regulation.



   (C)   More restrictive provisions apply. Whenever the provisions of
this chapter are different from the provisions of any other ordinance or
adopted code, the more restrictive provisions shall apply, except as the same
may be superseded by resolution or ordinance.



   (D)   Effect on permits, licenses and approvals. The rights granted
by any permit, license or other approval under any ordinance repealed by this
chapter shall be continued, but in the future, to the extent permitted by
law, such rights shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.



   (E)   Effect on easements, covenants and agreements. The provisions
of this chapter are not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants or
other existing agreements which are more restrictive than the provisions of
this chapter.



   (F)   Redevelopment plan standards supersede. Whenever an area of
the city has been included in an approved redevelopment plan, or specific
plan adopted pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65000 et seq., and if such
plan contains any standards relating to land usage, such standards shall
supersede the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.060  RELATIONSHIP TO CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT.



   When a project is determined to be subject to the provisions of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the application shall be
reviewed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the CEQA (Cal.
Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.), the CEQA Guidelines (Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 15000 et seq.) and any environmental guidelines adopted by the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.070  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted and deemed as the
minimum requirements necessary and the maximum potential limits for the
protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare of the city and its residents, unless the context of a specific
regulation clearly provides otherwise.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.010.080  SEVERABILITY OF ANY PORTION.



   If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or
portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it
would have adopted this ordinance and each section, subsection, subdivision,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses,
phrases or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.020  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



§ 153.020.010  COMPOSITION OF BALDWIN PARK PLANNING DIVISION.



   (A)   Planning division functions. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
65100, the city establishes a planning division to carry out the land use and
planning functions of this jurisdiction.  As designated by this chapter the
following participates in the planning process:



      (1)   City Council.



      (2)   Planning Commission



      (3)   Design Review Committee. The Design Review Committee
shall be composed of the Director of Community Development, the City
Engineer, a representative of the Police Department and City Planner as the
chairperson.



      (4)   Zoning Administrator. The Director of Community
Development, the Director of Public Works or a designated representative
shall act as the Zoning Administrator.



      (5)   City Planner.



   (B)   Duties assigned. Responsible agencies shall perform duties as
assigned by this subchapter and subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.020  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.



   The City Council shall have the following responsibilities with respect
to the implementation of this chapter:



   (A)   Appoint Planning Commission. Appoint members of the Planning
Commission.



   (B)   Planning Commission appeals. Act as the appeal body on
decisions made by the Planning Commission.



   (C)   Applications. Hear and act upon applications for specific
plans, Zoning Code text and map amendments, General Plan amendments and
development agreements.



   (D)   Amendments. Direct planning-related policy amendments and
special studies as necessary or desired.



   (E)   Other powers and duties. Exercise other powers and duties as
are prescribed by state law or local ordinance.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.030  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Planning Commission shall have the following responsibilities:



   (A)   Zoning Administrator appeals. Act as the appeal body on
decisions made by the Zoning Administrator.



   (B)   Design Review Committee appeals. Act as the appeal body on
decisions by the Design Review Committee.



   (C)   Conditional use permits and variances. Hear and act upon
applications for conditional use permits and variances.



   (D)   Recommendations to city council. Hear and make recommendations
to the City Council on applications for specific plans, Zoning Code text and
map amendments, General Plan amendments, development agreements and other
related planning studies.



   (E)   Zoning Code amendment studies and recommendations. Initiate
studies of amendments to the Zoning Code and make recommendations to the City
Council for amendments to the Zoning Code.



   (F)   Historic Resource Advisory Committee. Act as the Historic
Resource Advisory Committee and perform the following duties:



      (1)   Regularly survey the city to recommend to the City
Council that certain areas, buildings or structures be designated as
historically significant.



      (2)   Publish and regularly update a register of historic
properties, buildings and districts.



      (3)   Recommend to the City Council steps to encourage public
understanding of and involvement in the unique architectural and
environmental heritage of the city through educational and interpretive
programs.



      (4)   Encourage the protection, retention and use of any
designated or potential historic properties, buildings and districts.



      (5)   Recommend and encourage the protection, enhancement,
appreciation and use of structures of historical, cultural, architectural,
community or aesthetic value that have not been designated as historic
buildings but deserve recognition to acknowledge their importance to the
city. The Committee may recommend to the City Council steps desirable to
recognize these structures without imposing any regulations or controls upon
them.



      (6)   Encourage cooperation between public and private
cultural heritage groups.



      (7)   Review and approve redevelopment plans and make
recommendations to the City Council regarding proposed historic properties,
buildings or districts within the area covered by such plan.



      (8)   Notify all public agencies and public utilities that own
or may acquire property, including easements and public right-of-way in the
city, of the existence of historic properties, buildings and districts.



   (G)   Other powers and duties. Exercise other powers and duties as
are prescribed by state law, local ordinance or as directed by the City
Council.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.040  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.



   The Design Review Committee shall hear and act upon applications for
design review, as further provided in Part 2 of § 153.210. This committee
shall be composed of the Director of Community Development, the City Engineer
or designee, the Building Official, a representative of the Police
Department, a representative of the Fire Department and the City Planner who
will serve as the chairperson.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.050  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Zoning Administrator shall be a city staff person designated by the
Director of Community Development as the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Administrator shall have the following responsibilities:



   (A)   City Planner appeals. Act as the appeal body for of decisions
made by the City Planner, unless otherwise provided in this chapter



   (B)   Zoning Code interpretations and administrative adjustments.
Hear and act upon applications for Zoning Code interpretations and
administrative adjustments.



   (C)   Other powers and duties.  Exercise other powers and duties as
directed by the City Council.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.060  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.



   The Director of Public Works hears and acts upon applications for
wireless facility encroachment permits.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.070  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY PLANNER.



   The City Planner shall have the following responsibilities:



   (A)   Record and maintain. Maintain the Zoning Code, Zoning Map and
records of zoning actions and interpretations.



   (B)   Recommend on Zoning Code interpretations. Hear and make
recommendations to the Zoning Administrator on Zoning Code interpretations.



   (C)   Administrative functions. Conduct administrative functions
authorized by the Zoning Code, including distribution and receipt of permit
applications and corresponding fees; application review and public noticing;
determination and issuance of administrative permits and approvals; and
preparation of staff reports.



   (D)   Public participation. Provide information to the public and
facilitate public participation on planning matters.



   (E)   Other powers and duties. Exercise other powers and duties as
are prescribed by state law, local ordinance or as directed by the City
Council.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.080  INTERPRETATION OF THE ZONING CODE.



   (A)   Authority. If ambiguity arises concerning the meaning or
applicability of any provision of the Zoning Code, the Zoning Administrator
shall have the responsibility to review pertinent facts, determine the intent
of the provision and to issue an administrative interpretation for the
provisions in question pursuant to § 153.210, Administrative Procedures. 
The Zoning Administrator shall then issue an official interpretation that
shall be in writing and cite the interpreted provisions, along with an
explanation of the meaning or applicability of the provision in the
circumstances that caused the need for interpretation. An administrative
record of all such decisions made by the Zoning Administrator shall be
maintained.



   (B)   Appeals. Interpretations by the Zoning Administrator may be
appealed to the designated appeal authority pursuant to § 153.210.020,
Administrative Procedures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.020.090  ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.



   (A)   Zoning Code enforcement. The City Manager shall designate the
Code Enforcement Officer or Officers who, along with the Planning Commission,
Director of Community Development, Director of Public Works, City Planner,
Police Department and all other officials charged with the issuance of
licenses or permits, shall enforce the provisions of the Zoning Code.



   (B)   Public nuisances. Any building or structure erected or
maintained, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of the Zoning
Code, shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance subject to
abatement pursuant to chapter 95, Nuisances, of the Baldwin Park Municipal
Code.



   (C)   Zoning Code violations. Any person, firm or corporation,
whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provisions
of the Zoning Code or failing to comply with any order or regulation made
hereunder, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 10.99 of the
Baldwin Park Municipal Code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.030  ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES



§ 153.030.010  ZONES ESTABLISHED.



   The city is divided into the zones, as shown in the chart below,  for
the purposes of classifying, regulating, restricting and separating the use
of land, buildings and structures; regulating and limiting the type, height
and bulk of buildings and structures; and regulating areas of yards and other
open areas abutting and between buildings and structures.



 


Zone Designation

 

Zone Symbol

 

Corresponding General Plan Land Use Designation





Low-density single-family residential
 
R-1-7,500
 
Single-family residential


Single-family residential
 
R-1
 
Single-family residential


Garden multi-family residential
 
R-G
 
Garden multi-family residential


Multi-family residential
 
R-3
 
Multi-family residential


Neighborhood commercial
 
C-1
 
Neighborhood commercial


General commercial
 
C-2
 
General commercial


Freeway commercial
 
F-C
 
General commercial


Industrial commercial
 
I-C
 
Commercial/industrial


Industrial
 
I
 
General industrial


Mixed use 1
 
MU-1
 
Mixed use


Mixed use 2
 
MU-2
 
Mixed use


Open space
 
OS
 
Parks


Specific plan
 
SP - #
 
All


Downtown overlay
 
(DO)
 
All


Sierra vista overlay
 
(SV)
 
General commercial


Historic overlay
 
(H)
 
All


Planned development overlay
 
(PD)
 
All




 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.030.020  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   The Zoning Map known as the “Official Zoning Map of the City of
Baldwin Park” dated April 11, 2012, as subsequently amended, and on file
with the City Clerk, is adopted herein by reference and shall hereafter exist
pursuant to and as an integral part of this chapter. The Zoning Map shall be
maintained to reflect the current zoning of the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.030.030  DETERMINATION OF BOUNDARIES.



   Where uncertainty exists as to the exact zone boundaries, the following
rules shall apply:



   (A)   Rights-of-way included in zone. A street, alley, railroad
right-of-way, watercourse channel or other right-of-way included on the
zoning maps, unless otherwise indicated, shall be included within the zone of
the adjoining property on either side thereof.



   (B)   Rights-of-way centerline as boundary. Where a street, alley,
railroad right-of-way, watercourse channel or other right-of-way serve as a
boundary between to or more zones, the centerline of that right-of-way shall
be considered the boundary between zones.



   (C)   Lines and limits boundaries. When the zone boundaries
approximately follow lots lines, section lines or city limits, these lines
shall be considered the boundaries.



   (D)   Boundary interpretation authority. Where the boundary splits a
lot or parcel, or uncertainty exists, the exact boundary shall be determined
by written decision of the Zoning Administrator.



   (E)   Right-of-way vacation. When the street, alley or right-of-way
that serves as a zone boundary is vacated, the new zone boundary shall be at
the new property line. Where the vacation does not result in a new property
line, the zone boundary shall be determined by written decision of the Zoning
Administrator.



   (F)   Annexations. Areas annexed to the city shall come into the
city as their existing zone designation. If there is no prior designation,
the Zoning Administrator shall determine the nearest comparable zone for the
area. The Zoning Map shall then be amended to show the new city limits and
zone.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.040  RESIDENTIAL ZONES



Part 1.  PERMITTED USES AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



§ 153.040.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Four residential zones are established to provide residents with
comfortable, healthy, safe and pleasant living environments. These zones
should be separated from incompatible and disruptive activities that may
conflict with this purpose. The zones are designed to accommodate specific
types of development approaches and housing to serve the needs of city
residents.



   (A)   Low-Density Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1-7,500). The
R-1-7,500 zone provides areas for the development of detached single-family
dwelling units on lots greater than or equal to 7,500 square feet in size.
The zone is intended to protect and stabilize desirable characteristics of
single-family residential areas, including larger lot sizes and separation
from incompatible land uses.



   (B)   Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1). The R-1 zone provides
areas for the development of detached single-family dwelling units. The zone
is also intended to protect and stabilize desirable characteristics of
single-family residential areas.



   (C)   Garden Multi-Family Residential Zone (R-G). The R-G zone
provides an environment suitable for both small-lot detached or attached
dwelling units where more than one unit may be built on a lot. The intent is
to promote desirable characteristics for medium-density neighborhoods.



   (D)   High Density Multi-Family Residential Zone (R-3). The R-3 zone
provides opportunities for persons to live in small-lot single family
developments and developments containing multiple units, such as apartments
or condominiums with common open space and other shared amenities.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.020  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. Table 153.040.020 identifies the permitted
uses in all residential zones. Residential uses represent the primary
permitted use, and only those additional uses that are complementary to and
can exist in harmony with the residential character of each zone may be
allowed as accessory or conditionally permitted uses, as indicated in Table
153.040.020.



   (B)   Conditional uses. Certain uses may be subject to special
conditions regarding the location, operation or design of the use. References
to these provisions are made in Table 153.040.020.



   (C)   Prohibited uses. If a use is not specifically listed in Table
153.040.020, that use is prohibited. However, the Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to determine whether the proposed use shall be permitted
based on the finding that the use is similar to and no more detrimental than
a particular use permitted in the zone.



TABLE 153.040.020



 




Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses within Residential Zones

 

P
CUP
A
--

 

Permitted use
Conditional use permit required
Accessory use
Use not allowed




Land Use

 

R-1-
7,500

 

R-1

 

R-G

 

R-3

 

Additional
Regulations



Accessory structures
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

153.040.070



Adult day care facilities
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Boardinghouses
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Child day care homes - large family
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

153.120 Part 6



Child day care homes - small family
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Condominiums
 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 

See § 153.210, Part 2.  Design Review



Dwellings, duplex
 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 

See § 153.210, Part 2.  Design Review



Dwellings, multi-family
 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 

See § 153.210, Part 2.  Design Review



Dwellings, single-family
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

See § 153.210, Part 2.  Design Review



Educational institutions, private
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.040.030



Educational institutions, public
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Home occupations 1
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

153.120 Part 8



Hospitals
 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.040.030



Mobile homes
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Mobile home parks
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.040 Part 4



Off-street parking facilities
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.150.040, 153.150.050



Parking lots (associated with nonresidential use)
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.160.050



Places of assembly
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.040.030



Recreational facilities
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Residential care homes (6 or fewer residents)
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Residential care facilities
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.040.030



Second dwelling units
 

--

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

153.120 Part 11





 



Notes: (1) A home occupation permit must be obtained from the Business
License Department.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Table 153.040.030 identifies the development standards applicable to
all development in residential zones. Certain developments may be subject to
special conditions, as described here or referenced in Table 153.040.030.



   (A)   Unique use standards. Permitted places of assembly,
educational institutions, congregate living health facilities, hospitals and
residential care facilities shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   All such uses shall have and maintain a minimum net lot
area of one-half acre.



      (2)   All such uses shall be located on lots that have a
minimum lot width, lot depth and street frontage of 70 feet.



      (3)   All such uses shall have and maintain a minimum side
yard setback of 10 feet and a rear side yard setback of 20 feet.



      (4)   All such uses shall have and maintain a minimum
vehicular access driveway width of 20 feet.



      (5)   The standard for minimum total square footage of
accessory buildings indicated in § 153.040.070(A) shall not apply to these
uses, provided that the use, size and placement of accessory buildings shall
be subordinate and incidental to the main buildings, and subject to review
through the conditional use permit process.



   (B)   Hospitals. Hospitals shall have and maintain a minimum net lot
area of one-half acre.



   (C)   Residential additional setback. In the R-1-7,500 and R-1
zones, any exterior new structure, or addition to an existing structure, that
exceeds one story in height and that faces any rear or side lot line shall be
set back an additional 10% of the average lot width, up to a maximum required
setback of 20 feet.







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



TABLE 153.040.030



 

Development Standards for Residential Zones
 




Development Standards

 

R-1-7,500

 

R-1

 

R-G

 

R-3

 

Additional Regulations





Lot area - minimum
 

7,500 sf

 

5,000 sf

 

5,000 sf

 

5,000 sf

 

153.040 Part 2



Lot depth - minimum
 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 





Lot width - minimum
 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 

50 ft

 





Lot coverage - maximum
 

40 %

 

45 %

 

50 %

 

60 %

 






Front yard setback - minimum
General
Lot with a side entry garage
Lot adjacent to R-1-7,500 or R-1 zone

 


20 ft
15 ft
20 ft

 


20 ft
15 ft
20 ft

 


15 ft
15 ft
20 ft

 


15 ft
15 ft
20 ft

 

153.130.030




Side yard setback - minimum
General
Corner lot
  - with a side entry garage
Reversed corner lot
  - with a side entry garage
Lot adjacent to R-1-7,500 or R-1 zone

 


5 ft
10 ft
20 ft
15 ft
20 ft
5 ft

 


5 ft
10 ft
20 ft
15 ft
20 ft
5 ft

 


10 ft
15 ft
10 ft
15 ft
10 ft
20 ft

 


10 ft
15 ft
10 ft
15 ft
10 ft
20 ft

 

153.130.030




Rear yard setback - minimum
General
Lot adjacent to R-1-7,500 or R-1 zone

 


20 ft
20 ft

 


20 ft
20 ft

 


10 ft
20 ft

 


10 ft
20 ft

 

153.130.030




Open space area, common - minimum
 

--

 

--

 

250 sf/du

 

250 sf/du

 

153.040.040



Open space area, private - minimum
 

20% of net lot area

 

20% of net lot area

 

200 sf/du

 

200 sf/du

 

153.040.040



Density - maximum
 

5.8 du/ac

 

8.7 du/ac

 

12 du/ac

 

20 du/ac

 





Building height - maximum
 

27 ft

 

27 ft

 

27 ft

 

35 ft

 

153.040.040



Building length - maximum
 

--

 

--

 

125 ft

 

125 ft

 





Building width - minimum
 

20 ft

 

20 ft

 

--

 

--

 





Distance between buildings - minimum
 

--

 

--

 

10 ft

 

10 ft

 





Floor areas - minimum
    Efficiency
    One bedroom
    Two bedrooms
    Three bedrooms
    Each additional bedroom
 


--
900 sf
1,050 sf
1,200 sf
200 sf

 


--
900 sf
1,050 sf
1,200 sf
200 sf

 


500 sf
700 sf
900 sf
1,100 sf
200 sf

 


500 sf
700 sf
900 sf
1,100  sf
200 sf

 







 



   (D)   Multi-family residential rear lot line. A solid masonry,
decorative wall shall be constructed and maintained along all side and rear
lot lines of multi-family residential lots pursuant to § 153.130.060. This
requirement can be waived through the design review process if deemed
necessary and appropriate to achieve city safety and aesthetic goals.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.040  REQUIRED OPEN SPACE.



   Maintaining open space areas provides recreational opportunities,
allows sunlight to enter into living spaces and provides a spacious and
inviting feel. The minimum required open space areas, as listed in Table
153.040.030, shall be maintained pursuant to these regulations.



   (A)   Residential open space. The following regulations apply to
required open space areas within all residentially zoned lots:



      (1)   More than one open space area may be provided on a lot.
The sum of square footages for all eligible open space areas on a lot shall
comprise the total open space area for that lot.



      (2)   Required side or rear yard areas may be included in the
calculated open space area but a required front yard area may not.



      (3)   Open space areas may not be located between a dwelling
unit and the street.



      (4)   Open space areas shall be equally distributed for all
dwelling units on a lot.



      (5)   Open space areas shall have no structural, parking,
driveway or right-of-way encroachments except for swimming pools, spas and
similar accessory uses used for recreational purposes.



   (B)   Private open space minimum dimensions in R-1 and R-1-7,500.
Within R-1 and R-1-7,500 zoned lots, the minimum length and width of each
open space area shall be 15 feet.



   (C)   Private open space regulations in R-G and R-3. The following
regulations apply to private open space areas within R-G and R-3 zoned lots:



      (1)   The minimum length and width of each open space area
shall be ten feet.



      (2)   The minimum length and width of each open space area
within small-lot single-family developments shall be 15 feet.



      (3)   The open space area for an individual dwelling unit
shall be directly accessible to that dwelling unit.



      (4)   Encroachments such as roofs and eaves may project into
an open space area provided such encroachments observe a minimum vertical
clearance of 8 feet.  A minimum distance of three feet shall be maintained
between any encroachment and any lot line, per the requirements contained in
§ 153.130.030 Permitted Projections into Required Yard Areas.



   (B)   Common open space regulations in R-G and R-3. The following
regulations apply to common open space areas within R-G and R-3 zoned lots:



      (1)   The minimum length and width of each open space area
shall be 20 feet.



      (2)   The common open space area shall be open and accessible
to all residents.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.050  FLAG LOTS.



   (A)   No new flag lots. As of the adoption of the ordinance amending
this chapter, no new flag lots may be created.



   (B)   Existing flag lots. Flag lots legally established prior to the
adoption of the ordinance amending this chapter may remain in existence,
provided such lots comply with the development standards set forth in part
one of this subchapter, unless otherwise specified here.



      (1)   The flag lot shall have a minimum lot area of 6,500
square feet.



      (2)   The developable portion of the flag lot, exclusive of
the staff of the lot, shall maintain a minimum area of 5,000 square feet.



      (3)   The flag lot shall maintain a minimum street frontage
and minimum flag staff width of 15 feet.



      (4)   The flag lot shall have a minimum lot width of 65 feet.



      (5)   The flag lot shall have a minimum front yard setback of
15 feet.



      (6)   No portion of the flag lot shall be utilized to provide
vehicular access to any other lot.







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.060  MANUFACTURED HOUSING.



   Manufactured housing units shall comply with the following limitations
and standards.



   (A)   Single-family dwelling. A manufactured housing unit shall be
considered a single-family dwelling, and therefore is subject to the
development standards set forth in part one of this subchapter, except as
provided for within the development standards set forth in part four of this
subchapter.



   (B)   Certification and evidence. If a mobile home was constructed
after October 1, 1976, it shall be certified pursuant to the National Mobile
Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, evidence of which shall
be provided to the Director of Community Development in a manner approved by
him/her.



   (C)   Foundation. A manufactured home shall be installed and
maintained upon a permanent, continuous, exterior, masonry or concrete
foundation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.070  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   All accessory structures. The following regulations apply to
all accessory structures:



      (1)   With the exception of an attached or detached garage, an
accessory structure shall not be located in front of the main building or
directly between the main building and the street.



      (2)   All accessory structures, including detached garages,
may not be located within a required side or rear yard area if the required
side or rear yard area is adjacent to a street or abuts an R-1-7,500 or R-1
zoned property.



      (3)   The total square footage of all non-parking-related
accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed the lesser of these two
quantities: 500 square feet or 50 percent of the ground floor of the main
building.



      (4)   The height of an accessory structure shall not exceed
one story or 15 feet.



      (5)   An accessory structure smaller than 250 square feet may
be constructed of metal or similar material as approved by the City Planner.



      (6)   All accessory structures shall be maintained in good
condition. Any structure considered to be in disrepair, as determined by the
Director of Community Development, shall be repaired, replaced or removed
from the site.



      (7)   Guesthouses as accessory structures are prohibited.



      (8)   Bathrooms within accessory structures are prohibited.



   (B)   Detached accessory structures. The following regulations apply
to detached accessory structures:



      (1)   Detached accessory structures shall be located at least
6 feet from the main building. A breezeway may span the space between the two
structures.



      (2)   Detached accessory structures shall be located at least
5 feet from any property line.



      (3)   Detached accessory structures may not be located above a
garage.



   (C)   Canopy structures. The following regulations apply to canopy
structures:



      (1)   Canopy structures shall not be located within the view
of a public right-of-way, front or side yard area or driveway.



      (2)   Canopy structures with a maximum projected canopy area
of 200 square feet, maximum height of 8 feet and maximum length of 20 feet
may be located within a rear yard area provided that it is fully screened by
6-foot high fencing or shrubs.



      (3)   Reflective, mirrored type covering material shall be
prohibited.



      (4)   A temporary use permit may be obtained pursuant to
subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures, for the placement of a canopy
once a year per property for a period not exceeding five days.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.080  VEHICLE STORAGE AND REPAIR.



   (A)   Recreational vehicle parking. No person shall store or park
any boat, trailer, camper shell or recreational vehicle, or parts thereof, on
any required front yard area in a R-1-7,500 or R-1 zoned lot. A boat,
trailer, camper shell or recreational vehicle, or parts thereof, may be
stored or parked on a pervious surface within a side yard area provided that
a lawfully installed, permanently maintained, six-foot wall or fence provides
a screen from abutting property and the public right-of-way. A temporary use
permit may be obtained pursuant to subchapter 153.210, Administrative
Procedures, which allows a recreational vehicle to be parked within a front
yard area once a year per property for a period not exceeding 60 days.



   (B)   Vehicle repair. The following restrictions shall apply to
vehicle repair activities.



      (1)   A maximum of one vehicle may be repaired at any time.



      (2)   The vehicle being repaired must be currently registered
with the California Department of Motor Vehicles at the property where the
repair is being performed. Repairs made to any other vehicles, whether or not
for compensation of any kind, are expressly prohibited.



      (3)   Repair activity shall be performed only between the 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.



      (4)   Tools, motor vehicle parts, supplies or equipment shall
be stored such that they are not visible from a public right-of-way or
adjoining property, upon completion of repair work.



      (5)   All fluids, liquids and other products that are taken
out of a motor vehicle or used in conjunction with any repair work shall be
lawfully disposed of. In no instance shall these products or substances drain
or spill onto adjoining properties or into a public right-of-way, storm drain
or sewer system.



      (6)   Storage of inoperable vehicles is prohibited at any time
except in an enclosed storage facility approved by the Building and Planning
Divisions.



   (C)   Major repairs of motor vehicles. The following restrictions
shall apply to all major repairs of motor vehicles including, but not limited
to, disassembling, installing or rebuilding an engine block, transmission,
seats, suspension system, emission control system or drive train or
performing bodywork.



      (1)   Repairs shall only be conducted in a completely enclosed
garage or rear yard area provided that the yard is completely enclosed by a
lawfully constructed 6-foot tall fence which screens the area from view of
any public right-of-way and adjoining properties. Major repairs of a vehicle
in any other area are prohibited.



      (2)   Major repair to any one vehicle shall not exceed 5
calendar days in any 30-day period.



   (D)   Minor repairs of motor vehicles. The following restrictions
shall apply to all minor repairs of motor vehicles including all repair
activities not considered as major repairs:



      (1)   The repair shall be performed only on a paved driveway
or on a parking space. The repair of a motor vehicle on any front or side
yard area is expressly prohibited.



      (2)   Repairs may be conducted in a completely enclosed garage
or outdoor rear yard area provided the area is completely enclosed by a
lawfully constructed, 6-foot tall fence which screens the yard from view of
any public right-of-way and adjoining properties. Minor repairs of a vehicle
in any other area are prohibited.



      (3)   Repair to any one vehicle shall not exceed two calendar
days in any 30-day period.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.040.090  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in part one of this
subchapter, Residential Zones, regulations contained in the following
subchapters of this chapter may apply to development in residential zones:



   153.120   Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities



   153.130   Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.140   Performance Standards



   153.150   Off-Street Parking and Loading



   153.160   Landscaping Standards



   153.170   Sign Regulations



   153.180   Antennas and Other Telecommunication Facilities



   153.200   Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



   153.210   Administrative Procedures



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 2.  SMALL-LOT SINGLE-FAMILY DEVELOPMENTS



§ 153.040.100  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Small-lot single-family developments within the R-G and R-3
multi-family residential zones will provide opportunities for affordable,
detached single-family residential development at densities greater than in
the R-1-7,500 and R-1 zones. Development standards will ensure
architecturally appealing design with traditional residential features and
adequate open space areas.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.110  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Table 153.040.110 identifies the development standards applicable to
small-lot single-family developments in the R-G and R-3 zones. Such
developments shall comply with special conditions as described here and with
all other standards and regulations set forth in part 1 of this subchapter.



   (A)   Private and public streets. Private streets shall be
permitted, provided street width and design conform to requirements applied
by various city departments. At a minimum, private streets with parking on
one side shall measure no less than 28 feet in width curb-to-curb, with
required parkways provided as additional width and private streets with
parking on both sides shall measure no less than 34 feet in width. Public
streets shall conform with the city’s street standard manual.



   (B)   No gated entries. Gated entries into small-lot single-family
developments are prohibited.



   (C)   Design Guidelines Manual. Small-lot single-family developments
shall comply with applicable Design Guidelines Manual adopted by the city.



TABLE 153.040.110



 


Development Standards for Small-Lot Single-Family Developments




Development Standards

 

R-G

 

R-3

 

Additional Regulations





Development site area - minimum
 

40,000 sf

 

30,000 sf

 





Lot area - minimum
 

4,000 sf

 

3,000 sf

 





Lot depth - minimum
 

80 ft

 

70 ft

 





Lot width - minimum
 

38 ft

 

30 ft

 





Lot coverage - maximum
 

60 %

 

65 %

 






Front yard setback - minimum1
General
Lot adjacent to R-1-7,500 or R-1

 


10 ft
15 ft

 


10 ft
12 ft

 

153.130.030




Side yard setback - minimum
general - aggregate of all side yards
Corner lot
Reversed corner lot

 


10 ft
8 ft
10 ft

 


8 ft
8 ft
10 ft

 

153.130.030



Rear yard setback - minimum
 

10 ft

 

10 ft

 

153.130.030



Open space area, private - minimum
 

15% net lot area

 

15% net lot area

 

153.040.030



Distance between buildings - minimum
 

10 ft

 

8 ft

 







 



(1)   All garage faces must be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
front or side yard, whichever yard from which access is obtained, except
garages with roll-up doors  are permitted a minimum setback of 18 feet from
the front or side yard.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 3.  HOUSING INCENTIVES



§ 153.040.120  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   These standards establish development policies that assist in the
provision of affordable housing for low- and moderate-income households.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.130  DENSITY BONUS INCENTIVE.



   Density bonus shall be granted if a development meets Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65915.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.140  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Conditional use permit. A conditional use permit is required
for any project in which agreement with the city is entered pursuant to Cal.
Gov’t Code § 65915. The permit shall be obtained prior to the effective
date of such agreement.



   (B)   Development plan. A development plan submittal is required
which shall contain the following:



      (1)   Location of dwelling units within the project intended
for affordable housing.



      (2)   Total number of rental dwelling units and for-sale
dwelling units within the project.



      (3)   Proposed rent schedules and/or sale prices.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.150  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Affordable housing units permitted by such density incentives shall
comply with the following development standards.



   (A)   Location/dispersal of units. Affordable housing units shall be
reasonably dispersed throughout the project.



   (B)   Average number of bedrooms. The average number of bedrooms per
designated affordable housing dwelling unit shall be consistent with the
average number of bedrooms per unit in the project.



   (C)   Harmonious design. Affordable housing units shall be designed
harmoniously with the architectural styles of other units in the project.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.160  RESALE AND RENTAL CONTROLS.



   (A)   Recording, covenant and city review. An agreement shall be
recorded in the County Recorder’s office and shall constitute a covenant
running with the land. The agreement shall ensure continued affordability of
all low- and very low income units that qualified for a density bonus award
for 30 years or a longer period of time pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
65915. Individual, affordable, for-sale housing units shall be
owner-occupied. Upon change in ownership of an affordable housing unit,
notice shall be given to the city. The city shall review each owner proposed
to occupy an affordable housing unit to determine eligibility of such owner.



   (B)   City’s right of refusal. The city shall have the right of
refusal to lease affordable rental housing units. The city shall assign units
to prospective tenants determined to be eligible by the city. Upon subsequent
termination of tenancy, the right of refusal shall revert to the city for
subsequent assignment to an eligible tenant.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 4.  MOBILE HOME PARKS



§ 153.040.170  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   These standards provide for the regulation and control of the
construction, development or expansion of mobile home parks.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.180  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Conditional use permit. The construction, development or
expansion of a mobile home park requires the issuance of a conditional use
permit.



   (B)   Accessory structures and facilities. All accessory structures,
recreation buildings and other facilities for the sole use of the occupants
of the mobile home park are permitted.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.040.190  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Mobile home park construction, development and expansion. The
construction, development or expansion of mobile home parks shall comply with
the following development standards.



      (1)   The development site area shall be two acres gross.



      (2)   The minimum front yard setback shall be 15 feet, and
such setback shall be landscaped with live plant materials.



      (3)   The minimum side yard setback shall be five feet and the
minimum street side yard setback shall be ten feet, and such setbacks shall
be landscaped with live plant materials.



      (4)   The minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet, and such
setback shall be landscaped with live plant materials.



      (5)   Each mobile home park shall provide walls and fences as
required by subchapter 153.130, Site Planning and General Development
Standards.



      (6)   Lighting facilities for safety and security purposes
shall be provided within each mobile home park.



      (7)   Each mobile home park shall provide a minimum of 50
cubic feet of storage for each dwelling unit.



      (8)   Refuse storage areas shall be provided in accordance
with subchapter 153.130, Site Planning and General Development Standards, and
as follows:



         (a)   To accommodate up to six dwelling units, the
refuse storage area shall be at least 25 square feet;



         (b)   To accommodate greater than six dwelling units, an
extra two square feet per dwelling unit shall be added to the refuse storage
area;



         (c)   For mobile home parks supplied with a trash
compactor device, the required areas set forth in divisions (A)(1) and (2) of
this section may be reduced by 50%; and



         (d)   The Planning Division shall approve the specific
locations of refuse storage areas and trash pickup areas.



   (B)   Mobile home lot construction, development, and expansion. The
construction, development or expansion of each individual mobile home lot
shall comply with the following development standards:



      (1)   The minimum lot area shall be 2,500 square feet;



      (2)   Each mobile home lot shall have two parking spaces, one
of which shall be covered. Tandem parking spaces are permitted; and



      (3)   Excluding yard areas, each mobile home lot shall have a
minimum of 300 square feet of landscaped open space as follows:



         (a)   A minimum of 200 square feet of private open space
shall be maintained directly adjacent to each mobile home; and



         (b)   A minimum of 100 square feet of common open space
per dwelling unit shall be centrally located on the site.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.050  COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES



§ 153.050.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Five commercial and industrial zones are established to meet the
commerce and service needs of the resident and business communities while
ensuring compatibility with adjacent land uses. The zones are designed to
accommodate different types and intensities of commercial and industrial
development.



   (A)   Neighborhood Commercial Zone (C-1). The C-1 zone provides
areas for the development and protection of neighborhood-scale, low-intensity
retail and service commercial uses that provide conveniences to neighborhood
residents.



   (B)   General Commercial Zone (C-2). The C-2 zone provides areas for
the development of a broad range of retail, service and entertainment
designed to meet the shopping and service needs of the local residential and
business communities.



   (C)   Freeway Commercial Zone (F-C). The F-C zone provides areas for
the development of freeway-oriented, regional-serving retail and office
complexes and complementary regional commercial centers.



   (D)   Industrial-Commercial Zone (I-C). The I-C zone provides areas
for the development of industrial parks, office complexes and light
manufacturing businesses.



   (E)   Industrial Zone (I). The I zone provides areas for the
development of industries engaged in general assembly, manufacturing and
processing, and support commercial uses.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.050.020  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. Table 153.050.020 identifies the permitted
uses within all commercial and industrial zones.



   (B)   Conditional uses. Certain uses may be subject to special
conditions regarding the location, operation, design or special permitting
requirements of the use. References to these provisions are made in Table
153.050.020.



   (C)   Prohibited uses. If a use is not specifically listed in Table
153.050.020, that use is prohibited. However, the Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to determine whether the proposed use shall be permitted
based on the finding that the use is similar to and no more detrimental than
a particular use permitted in the zone.



   (D)   New merchandise. Any use that involves the sale of
merchandise, retail or wholesale shall limit these sales to only new
merchandise. This shall not apply to antique shops, secondhand stores, used
automotive sales and other uses approved by the Director of Community
Development.



TABLE 153.050.020



 


Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses within Commercial and Industrial
Zones

 

P
CUP
A
–

 

Permitted use
Conditional use permit required
Accessory use
Use not allowed




Land Use

 

C-1

 

C-2

 

F-C

 

I-C

 

I

 

Additional Regulations





Acupressure/acupuncture establishments
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Adult-oriented businesses
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 

153.120 Part 1



Alcohol sales
a.   On-sale outlets
b.   Off-sale outlets
 


CUP
CUP

 


CUP
CUP

 


CUP
CUP

 


CUP
CUP

 


CUP
CUP

 

153.120 Part 2



Antique shops
 

--

 

P

 

--

 

P

 

--

 





Arcades and internet cafes
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

153.120 Part 3



Art/ photography stores, studios and galleries
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

--

 





Astrology and fortunetelling establishments
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Automotive sales and services
a.   Automotive detailing
b.   Automotive repair and installation
c.   Automotive sales, rental and leasing (new)
d.   Automotive sales, rental and leasing (used)
e.   Automotive parts supply stores
f.   Automotive washes
g.   Automotive towing and accessory vehicle storage
 


--
--
--

--

P
--

--

 


CUP
CUP
--

--

P
CUP

--

 


--
--
CUP

--

P
--

--

 


CUP
CUP
CUP

CUP

P
CUP

CUP

 


--
CUP
CUP

CUP

P
CUP

--

 

Automotive wash accessory to a permitted sales or rental facility is permitted



No more than one automobile towing facility shall be permitted within a
radius of 3,000 feet, and have a perimeter block wall.




Banks and financial institutions

 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Boat sales (new or used)
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Business support services (blueprinting, computer-services, publishing, film
processing, equipment rental, etc.)
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Catering establishments
 

--

 

P

 

--

 

P

 

P

 





Commercial entertainment (motion picture theaters, performing arts centers,
dance halls)
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

--

 





Congregate living health facilities
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Day care facilities - child
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

153.120 Part 6



Day care facilities - adult
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Drive-through establishments
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.120 Part 7



Drug stores and pharmacies
 

P

 

P

 

CUP

 

P

 

--

 





Educational institutions
a.   College, university, professional
b.   Elementary and secondary (private)
c.   Elementary and secondary (public)
d.   Vocational and trade schools
 


--
--
P
--

 


CUP
CUP
P
--

 


--
--
P
--

 


CUP
CUP
P
CUP

 


CUP
--
P
CUP

 


153.040.030
153.040.030

153.040.030



Emergency shelters
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 

--

 

153.120 Part 16



Equipment sales, rental or repair - large equipment
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Equipment sales, rental or repair (excludes automotive and large equipment)
 

--

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Food and beverage sales
a.   Grocery stores (includes large, full-service markets)
b.   Specialty stores (deli, coffee, bakery, produce)
c.   Convenience stores
d.   Liquor stores
 


--

P

CUP
--

 


P

P

CUP
CUP

 


CUP

P

CUP
--

 


P

P

CUP
CUP

 


P

P

CUP
CUP

 







153.120 Part 2



Food processing plant
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 





Game machines
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

153.050.040




Helistops, heliports

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

Heliports associated with permitted hospitals may be permitted in association
with any valid discretionary permit




Home improvement store

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Hospitals and medical services:
a.   General hospital facilities (primarily inpatient)
b.   Medical/dental offices
c.   Ambulance services
 


--

P
--

 


CUP

P
--

 


CUP

P
A

 


CUP

P
CUP

 


--

--
CUP

 


153.040.030



Hotels and motels
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

--

 

153.120 Part 9



Kennels
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Laundry facilities, commercial (carpet, upholstery, etc)
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Manufacturing, assembly, industrial, welding, storage, fabrication, research
and testing establishments
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 

This use category applies to both raw and previously prepared materials,
excluding uses involving an incinerator, blast furnace or other similar
industrial process (e.g., batch plants, truss manufacturing, canneries,
co-generation plants, equipment assembly). Uses involving an incinerator,
blast furnace or other similar industrial process shall require a conditional
use permit.



Massage establishments and services
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

153.120 part 17



Medical marijuana dispensaries
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Medical and adult cannabis cultivation, manufacturing and distribution
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P*
(DA)

 

P*
(DA)

 
* Permitted not by right, but pursuant to Ch. 127 of this code and approval
of a Development Agreement (DA)


Mortuaries
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 





Multiple tenant retail - small
 

--

 

P

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Multiple tenant retail - large
 

--

 

--

 

P

 

--

 

--

 





Nightclubs
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

Nightclubs accessory to a permitted primary use are permitted, provided the
permit for the primary use expressly identifies the nightclub as an accessory
use



Off-street parking facility
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

Must be located within 300 ft of the primary use/parcel



Offices - business and professional
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Outdoor storage and use
 

--

 

A

 

--

 

A

 

A

 

153.050.050



Parcel delivery terminals
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Personal services (barber shops, beauty salons/spas, tailors, dry cleaning,
self-service laundry, mailbox services, etc.)
 

P

 

P

 

--

 

P

 

P

 





Pet stores
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

--

 

--

 





Places of assembly
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Recreational facilities
a.   Dance or martial arts studios
b.   Health clubs and gymnasiums
c.   Indoor facilities (billiards, bowling alleys, etc.)
d.   Outdoor facilities (batting cages, golf courses, etc.)
 


P
--
--

--

 


P
CUP
CUP

--

 


--
CUP
CUP

--

 


--
CUP
CUP

CUP

 


--
CUP
CUP

CUP

 

153.120 part 5




Recycling facilities (mobile or staffed facilities)
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

No more than one recycling facility shall be permitted within a radius of
3,000 feet.



Restaurant:
a.   Restaurant with no alcohol sales
b.   Restaurant with alcohol sales
 


P
CUP

 


P
CUP

 


P
CUP

 


P
CUP

 


P
CUP

 

153.120 part 2



Retail shops
 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 

P

 





Secondhand stores
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Self-storage facility (mini-warehouse)
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

Indoor storage only.



Service stations
 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.120 part 12



Studios (film, motion picture, research, testing, etc.)
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

P

 

P

 





Swap meets
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Tobacco shops
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 





Transportation facilities (bus or truck terminals, taxi dispatch yards, etc.)
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 





Vending machines
a.   Regular
b.    Reverse
 


A
--

 


A
A

 


A
A

 


A
A

 


A
A

 

153.050.040



Veterinary services (clinic and hospital)
 

--

 

CUP

 

--

 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Warehouses
 

--

 

--

 

--

 

--

 

CUP

 





Wholesale Sales
 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 

A

 







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1385, passed 6-20-16; Am. Ord. 1401,
passed 8-16-17)



§ 153.050.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Table 153.050.030 identifies the development standards applicable to
all development in commercial and industrial zones. Certain development
standards may be subject to special conditions. References to these
provisions are provided here or are referenced Table 153.050.030.  See also
Figure 153.050.030-1 for illustration of specific standards.



   (A)   Shared property lines with a lot zoned for residential use.



      (1)   Wherever a commercially or industrially zoned reversed
corner lot shares a rear property line with an exclusively residential or a
mixed use zoned lot, a minimum 15-foot wide street side yard area shall be
maintained.



      (2)   Wherever a commercially or industrially zoned lot shares
a property line with an exclusively residential or a mixed use zoned lot, any
exterior new structure, or addition to an existing structure, that exceeds
one story in height and that faces any rear or side lot line shall be set
back twice the required setback.



      (3)   Whenever a commercially or industrially zoned lot shares
a side or rear property line with an exclusively residential or a mixed use
zoned lot, a six-foot tall solid masonry wall shall be provided, along or
adjacent to all such side and rear lot lines pursuant to § 153.160.050. The
wall shall conform to the height regulations applicable to front yard areas
of the residentially zoned lot having the common lot line. A landscape buffer
shall also be provided along the shared lot lines.



   (B)   Driveway abutting a building wall facing side or rear yard.
Wherever a permitted driveway abuts a wall of a building facing a side or
rear yard area, that portion of the wall shall be located at least 20 feet
from the lot line.



Table 153.050.030



 


Development Standards for Commercial and Industrial Zones




Development Standards

 

NC

 

GC

 

FC

 

I-C

 

I

 

Additional Regulations





Lot area - minimum
 

5,000 sf

 

5,000 sf

 

4 ac

 

40,000 sf

 

5,000 sf

 



Lot depth - minimum
 

--

 

--

 

200 ft

 

200 ft

 

--

 



Lot width - minimum
    Standard lot
    Corner lot
 


50 ft
55 ft

 


50 ft
55 ft

 


300 ft
300 ft

 


150 ft
150 ft

 


50 ft
55 ft

 


See Figure 153.050.030- 1




Lot coverage - maximum

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 

50%

 




Front yard setback - minimum
standard lot
corner lot

lot adjacent to a residentially zoned lot

 


--
--

 


5 ft
5 ft

 


5 ft
10 ft

 


10 ft
15 ft

 


5 ft
--

 

153.130.030




Same as front yard requirement of
residentially zoned lot




Side yard setback - minimum
standard lot
lot adjacent to a residentially zoned lot

 


--
10 ft

 


--
10 ft

 


10 ft
10 ft

 


10 ft
10 ft

 


--
10 ft

 

153.130.030




Rear yard setback - minimum
standard lot
lot adjacent to a residentially zoned lot

 


--
10 ft

 


--
10 ft

 


10 ft
10 ft

 


10 ft
10 ft

 


--
10 ft

 

153.130.030



Building height - maximum
 

25 ft

 

35 ft

 

6 stories

 

35 ft

 

25 ft

 

153.130.040





 



Figure 153.050.030-1 - Development Standards for Commercial and Industrial
Zones







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.050.040  ACCESSORY USES.



   (A)   Game machines. Game machines shall be permitted as an
accessory use, provided that all of the following standards are complied with:



      (1)   No more than three game machines shall be permitted at
any one business, provided all other applicable licenses and permits required
by this code are obtained.



      (2)   Any establishment with a game machine shall prohibit
persons 17 years of age and under from using any game machine between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. This restriction
shall not apply during school holidays and school vacations recognized by
public schools within the city.



      (3)   A game machine shall not be located within 500 feet of a
child care facility or an educational institution which conducts classes for
kindergarten through 12th grades.



   (B)   Vending machines. Regular vending machines shall be permitted
as an accessory use, provided that the maximum number of such vending
machines permitted on any lot shall be limited as follows.



      (1)   Lots with a lot width of 50 feet or less, one regular
vending machine.



      (2)   Lots with a lot width of 150 feet or less, two regular
vending machines.



      (3)   Lots with a lot width of 150 feet or more, three regular
vending machines.



   (C)   Reverse vending machines. Reverse vending machines shall be
permitted as an accessory use, provided that all of the following standards
are complied with and a zoning clearance has been obtained pursuant to
subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures:



      (1)   Each reverse vending machine must be capable of
dispensing cash for aluminum and non-aluminum metals, glass and plastic;



      (2)   Each reverse vending machine shall be located adjacent
to a building wall and within 20 feet from the main entrance to a supermarket;



      (3)   The size and bulk of each reverse machine shall not
exceed 50 square feet and the height shall not exceed eight feet;



      (4)   The location of each reverse vending machine shall not
obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;



      (5)   Each reverse vending machine shall be constructed with
durable waterproof and rustproof materials;



      (6)   Each reverse vending machine shall be illuminated to
ensure comfortable and safe operation;



      (7)   Each reverse vending machine shall be available and in
operation during the operating hours of the supermarket;



      (8)   Signage on a reverse vending machine shall not exceed a
total background sign face area of four square feet, exclusive of operating
instructions;



      (9)   Each reverse vending machine shall clearly identify the
type of materials that may be deposited, operating instructions and the
identity and phone number of the owner or a person to call if the machine is
inoperative;



      (10)   Each reverse vending machine shall be maintained in a
clean and litter-free condition on a daily basis; and



      (11)   The color of the reverse vending machine shall be in
harmony with the surrounding buildings and development.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.050.050  OUTDOOR STORAGE AND USES.



   (A)   Outdoor storage of materials. Outdoor storage of materials
shall be limited to the accessory storage of goods sold or utilized by the
principal use of the lot where permitted by Table 153.050.020. All materials
shall be entirely screened from view from public rights-of-way by a six-foot
tall solid fence or masonry wall.



   (B)   Outdoor storage areas. Any areas developed and/or used for
outdoor storage and use shall comply with the most current National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permits implementation of Best
Management Practices (BMP) and maintenance of those BMPs. 



   (C)   Uses restricted to indoors. No manufacturing or assembly
operations shall be performed outside of an enclosed building. With the
exception of the following uses or businesses, all activities shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building:



      (1)   Service stations;



      (2)   Outdoor dining and food service in conjunction with a
cafeteria, café, restaurant or similar establishment; and



      (3)   Other uses as approved by the Zoning Administrator
through the Zoning Code interpretation process pursuant to subchapter
153.210, Administrative Procedures.



   (D)   Outdoor sale and display screening. With the exception of the
following uses or businesses, all other outdoor sale and display areas shall
be entirely screened from view from public rights-of-way with a six-foot tall
solid fence or masonry wall:



      (1)   Motor vehicles, trailers or boat sales;



      (2)   Pool and spa sales;



      (3)   Nursery plants and flower sales;



      (4)   Newspaper stalls; and



      (5)   Other sales and display areas as approved through a
conditional use permit or similar discretionary permit.



   (E)   Outdoor sale and display location. No outdoor sale or display
area shall occupy any required parking spaces or required yard areas.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.050.060  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this chapter regulations
contained in the following subchapters of this chapter may apply to
development in the commercial and industrial zones:



   153.090   Sierra Vista Zone



   153.110   Specific Plan Zone



   153.120   Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities



   153.130   Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.140   Performance Standards



   153.150   Off-Street Parking and Loading



   153.160   Landscaping Standards



   153.170   Sign Regulations



   153.180   Antennas and Other Telecommunication Facilities



   153.200   Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



   153.210   Administrative Procedures



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.060  OPEN SPACE ZONE



§ 153.060.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Open Space Zone is established to maintain open space areas in the
city for recreational opportunities and to prevent incompatible development
in areas that should be preserved or regulated for scenic, recreational,
conservation, aesthetic or health and safety purposes.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.060.020  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the
Open Space Zone:



      (1)   Public school buildings and associated facilities;



      (2)   Public recreational uses;



      (3)   Public utility rights-of-way;



      (4)   Flood control channels and similar flood control
structures; and



      (5)   Creeks, rivers, spreading grounds and other similar
water courses.



   (B)   Conditional uses. The following uses may be permitted within
the Open Space Zone upon issuance of a conditional use permit obtained
pursuant to subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures:



      (1)   Agricultural and horticultural cultivation;



      (2)   Private recreational uses; and



      (3)   Off-street parking in conjunction with an adjacent
commercial or industrial use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.060.030  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter,
regulations contained in the following subchapters of this chapter may apply
to this zone:



   153.130   Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.140   Performance Standards



   153.150   Off-street Parking and Loading



   153.160   Landscaping Standards



   153.170   Sign Regulations



   153.180   Antennas and Other Telecommunication Facilities



   153.200   Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



   153.210   Administrative Procedures



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.070  MIXED-USE ZONES



§ 153.070.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Two mixed-use zones are established to provide development
opportunities for integrated, complementary residential and commercial
development on the same parcel or a contiguous group of parcels. For the
purpose of this Zoning Code, mixed-use developments shall comply with
nonresidential standards when no mixed use standards exist.



   (A)   Mixed-Use Zone 1 (MU-1).  The MU-1 Zone is established to
create opportunities for development that integrates commercial and
residential uses within a large district, with an emphasis on retail,
service, professional office, entertainment and restaurant business oriented
toward street frontages and serving as the primary use, and medium- and
high-density residential uses built to complement such uses. The MU-1 Zone is
intended to create districts that support complementary uses and activities,
particularly in the city’s downtown, and to promote development and uses
which are functionally integrated by location and types of structures, the
efficient use of land, optimal site planning and various public and private
realm design elements.



   (B)   Mixed-Use Zone 2 (MU-2). The MU-2 Zone is established to
create opportunities for mixed-use developments that emphasize medium- and
high-density residential uses, with limited commercial, institutional, office
and service uses. Such projects consist of building approaches which respect
the scale and design to the local street environment and adjacent residential
neighborhoods. Commercial uses are oriented toward meeting more local
neighborhood needs.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.070.020  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses.Table 153.070.020 identifies the permitted uses
in the MU-1 and MU-2 Zones.



   (B)   Conditional uses. Certain uses may be subject to special
conditions regarding the location, operation or design of the use. References
to these provisions are made in Table 153.070.020.



   (C)   Prohibited uses. If a use is not specifically listed in Table
153.070.020, that use is prohibited. However, the Zoning Administrator shall
have the authority to determine whether the proposed use is permitted based
on the finding that the use is similar to and no more detrimental than a
particular use permitted in the zone. 



   (D)   Mixed uses. Permitted uses identified in Table 153.070.020 may
be established on a single site as an integrated project, subject to the
provisions of subchapter 153.120 related to Mixed Use Development.
Stand-alone commercial uses are permitted in Mixed Use Zones. In mixed use
zones, all new development is required to include a commercial component.



TABLE 153.070.020



 


Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses
within Mixed-Use Zones

 

P
CUP
A
--

 

Permitted use
Conditional use permit required
Accessory use
Use not allowed




Land Use

 

MU-1

 

MU-2

 

Specific Regulations





Acupressure/acupuncture establishments
 

--

 

--

 





Alcohol sales
a.   On-sale outlets
b.   Off-sale outlets
 


CUP
CUP

 


CUP
CUP

 

153.120 Part 2



Antique shops
 

P

 

--

 





Arcades and internet cafes
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.120 Part 3



Art/photography stores, studios and galleries
 

P

 

P

 





Banks and financial institutions
 

CUP

 

--

 





Business support services (blueprinting, computer-services, film processing,
small equipment rental, etc.)
 

P

 

P

 





Catering establishments
 

P

 

--

 





Commercial entertainment (motion picture theaters, performing arts centers,
dance halls)
 

CUP

 

--

 





Day care centers - child
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

153.120 Part 6



Day care centers - adult
 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Drug stores and pharmacies
 

P

 

P

 





Dwelling units
a.   Detached single-family dwelling units
b.   Multiple-family dwelling units
 


--
P

 


--
P

 

Housing portion of horizontal mixed use not allowed at intersection corner.





 



 


Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses
within Mixed-Use Zones

 

P
CUP
A
--

 

Permitted use
Conditional use permit required
Accessory use
Use not allowed





Educational institutions
a.   College, university, professional
b.   Elementary and secondary (private)
c.   Elementary and secondary (public)
d.   Vocational and trade schools
 


CUP
CUP
P
CUP

 


--
CUP
P
--

 





Food and beverage sales
a.   Grocery stores (includes large, full-service markets)
b.   Specialty stores (deli, coffee, bakery, produce)
c.   Convenience stores
d.   Liquor stores
 


P
P
P
CUP

 


P
P
P
CUP

 





153.120 Part 2



Game machines
 

A

 

A

 

153.050.040



Home improvement stores
 

CUP

 

--

 





Home occupations 1
 

A

 

A

 

153.120 Part 8



Hotels and motels
 

CUP

 

--

 

153.120 Part 9



Massage establishments and services
 

--

 

--

 

153.120 Part 17



Medical/dental offices
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

Only allowed on second floor or above




Medical marijuana dispensaries

 

--

 

--

 





Multiple tenant retail - small
 

P

 

--

 





Nightclubs
 

CUP

 

--

 

Nightclubs accessory to a permitted primary use are permitted in the MU-1
zone, provided the permit for the primary use expressly identifies the
nightclub as an accessory use




Off-street parking facility

 

CUP

 

CUP

 

Must be located within 300 ft of the primary use/parcel




Offices - business and professional

 

P

 

P

 

Only allowed on second floor or above




Outdoor storage and use

 

A

 

A

 

153.070.060



Personal services (barber shops, beauty salons/spas, tailors, dry cleaning,
self-service laundry, etc.)
 

P

 

P

 





Pet stores
 

CUP

 

CUP

 







 



 


Permitted and Conditionally Permitted Uses
within Mixed-Use Zones

 

P
CUP
A
--

 

Permitted use
Conditional use permit required
Accessory use
Use not allowed





Places of assembly
 

CUP

 

CUP

 

Located on second floor or above only



Recreational facilities
a.   Health clubs and gymnasiums
b.   Dance or martial arts studios
 


CUP
P

 


--
CUP

 





Residential care facilities
 

CUP

 

CUP

 





Restaurants
a.   Restaurants with no alcohol sales
b.   Restaurants with alcohol sales
 


P
CUP

 


P
CUP

 



153.120 Part 2



Retail shops 
 

P

 

P

 





Vending machines
a.   Regular
b.    Reverse
 


A
A

 


--
--

 


153.050.040



Secondhand stores
 

--

 

--

 





Notes: (1) A home occupation permit must be obtained from the Business
License Department.




 



   (E)   Limitations on use. The nonresidential component of a
mixed-use project shall be a use allowed within the applicable mixed-use
zone, subject to the following additional limitations.



      (1)   In the MU-1 and MU-2 Zones, no more than 50% of the
ground floor shall be developed with and dedicated to residential uses.



      (2)    The following uses and activities shall not be
permitted within any mixed-use development:.



         (a)   Vehicle maintenance or repair (e.g., body or
mechanical work, including boats and recreational vehicles), vehicle
detailing and painting, upholstery, or any similar use.



         (b)   Storage of flammable liquids or hazardous
materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use.



         (c)   Manufacturing or industrial activities, including
but not limited to welding, machining, or any open flame work.



         (d)   Any other activity or use, as determined by the
responsible review authority to not be compatible with residential activities
and/or to have the possibility of affecting the health or safety of live/work
unit residents due to the potential for the use to create dust, glare, heat,
noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration or other impacts, or
would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes.



      (3)   After approval, a mixed-use building shall not be
converted to entirely residential use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.070.030  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   General. Table 153.070.030 identifies the development
standards applicable to all development in the mixed-use zones. Certain
development standards may be subject to special conditions. These standards
are provided here or where otherwise referenced.



TABLE 153.070.030



 


Development Standards for Mixed-Use Zones




Development Standards

 

MU-1

 

MU-2

 

Specific Regulations





Lot area - minimum
 

15,000 sf

 

15,000 sf

 



Lot depth - minimum
 

100 ft

 

100 ft

 



Lot width - minimum
 

50 ft

 

40 ft

 



Lot coverage - maximum
 

70%

 

60%

 



Front yard depth - minimum
 

0 ft

 

0 ft

 
153.130.030
Ground-floor residential uses shall have a minimum front yard depth of 10 ft


Side yard width - minimum
 

0 ft

 

10 ft

 
153.130.030
Ground-floor residential uses shall have a minimum side yard depth of 10 ft


Rear yard depth - minimum
 

10 ft

 

15 ft

 
153.130.030


Common open space area - minimum
 

Minimum 100 sf per unit

 
Required for residential uses only. Minimum dimension shall be 20 ft.


Private open space area - minimum
 

Minimum 36 sf per unit

 
Required for residential uses only. Minimum dimension shall be 6 ft.


Floor-area ratio - maximum for  commercial only development
 

1.5

 

1.5

 



Floor-area ratio - maximum for mixed-use development
 

2.0

 

2.0

 



Residential density - maximum
 

30 du/ac

 

15 du/ac if parcel less than 20,000 sf; 30 du/acre if parcel greater than
20,000 sf

 



Building height - maximum
 

50 ft

 

35 ft

 
153.130.040


Floor areas - minimum
    Efficiency
    One bedroom
    Two bedrooms
    Three bedrooms
    Each additional bedroom
 


500 sf
700 sf
900 sf
1,100 sf
200 sf

 


500 sf
700 sf
900 sf
1,100  sf
200 sf

 





 



   (B)   Pedestrian access. Pedestrian access from the public
right-of-way shall be incorporated into all development within the MU-1 and
MU-2 Zones. The design of new projects shall promote walkability and
connectivity to include design and orientation standards such as:



      (1)    A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all
buildings on a site to each other, to on-site automobile and bicycle parking
areas, and to any on-site open space areas and pedestrian amenities.



      (2)   Lighting shall be incorporated along sidewalks or other
pedestrian walkways to enhance the pedestrian environment and provide for
public safety. Lighting shall be low mounted and downward casting in a manner
that reduces light trespass onto adjacent properties.



      (3)   Connections between on-site walkways and the public
sidewalk shall be provided. An on-site walkway shall connect the primary
building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. Such
walkway shall be the shortest practical distance between the primary entry
and sidewalk, generally no more than 125% of the straight line distance.



   (C)   Parking.



      (1)   Surface parking shall be located on the interior side or
rear of the site to the greatest extent practicable. Surface parking between
the sidewalk and buildings shall be prohibited.



      (2)   Any parking structure with at least one floor of parking
at grade or above, and which contains primary property frontage along a
primary street, shall incorporate wrapped residential uses or retail
businesses with shopping windows viewable from the sidewalk along the ground
floor, or two or more of the following features:



         (a)   Display or shopping windows;



         (b)   Landscape material (e.g., foundation plantings,
vertical trellis with vines, planter boxes with cascading landscape material)
that results in the parking structure being adequately screened from
adjoining parcels;



         (c)   Architectural detailing and articulation that
provides texture on the façade or structure openings and effectively
integrates the parking structure into the basic building design; and/or



         (d)   Artwork such as sculptures, murals, and mosaics.



   (D)   Building orientation and entrances. Street-facing primary
entrances for nonresidential uses shall be unlocked and accessible to the
public during business hours. Residential and nonresidential entries shall be
clearly defined features of front façades, and of a scale that is in
proportion to the size of the building and number of units being accessed.
Larger buildings shall have a more prominent building entrance, while
maintaining a pedestrian scale.



   (E)   Building transparency/windows and openings facing streets.
Placement and orientation of doorways, windows, and landscape elements shall
create strong, direct relationships with the street. Street-facing façades
of all buildings shall incorporate windows and openings providing light to
adjacent spaces, rooms, and uses.



      (1)   Commercial ground-floor uses. Windows and openings
facing streets shall constitute a minimum of 50% of street-facing building
faces. Windows shall provide a clear and transparent view into ground
floor-uses or shall display merchandise to reinforce a pedestrian scale.



      (2)   Commercial upper-floor uses. Windows and openings facing
streets shall constitute a minimum of 40% of street-facing building faces.



      (3)   Residential ground-floor uses. Windows and openings
facing streets shall constitute a minimum of 30% of street-facing building
faces.



      (4)   Residential upper-floor uses. Windows and openings
facing streets shall constitute a minimum of 20% of street-facing building
faces.



   (H)   Shared property lines with a residentially zoned lot.



      (1)   Wherever a mixed-use zoned reversed corner lot shares a
rear property line with a residentially zoned lot and nonresidential uses are
located within 15 feet of that rear property line, a minimum 15-foot wide
street side yard area shall be maintained.



      (2)   Whenever a mixed-use zoned lot shares a side or rear
property line with a residentially zoned lot, and nonresidential uses are
located within 15 feet of that side or rear property line, a six-foot tall
solid masonry wall shall be provided, along or adjacent to all such side and
rear lot lines pursuant to § 153.160.050. The wall shall conform to the
height regulations applicable to front yard areas of the residentially zoned
lot having the common lot line. A landscape buffer shall also be provided
along the shared lot lines.



   (I)   Driveway abutting a building wall facing side or rear yard.
Wherever a permitted driveway abuts a wall of a building facing a side or
rear yard area, that portion of the wall shall be located at least 20 feet
from the lot line.



   (J)   Entrances. When nonresidential and residential uses are
located in the same building, separate pedestrian entrances shall be provided
for each use.  The entrances for nonresidential uses shall be designed to be
visually distinct from the entrances for residential uses. 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.070.040  ADDITIONAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS.



   This section provides additional development standards for mixed-use
developments. The primary intent of these standards and criteria is to
balance the needs of nonresidential uses for access, visibility, parking,
loading, safety, and economic development with the needs of residential uses
for privacy, security, and relative quiet.



   (A)   Loading and unloading activities of mixed-use developments. 
Where applicable, the covenants, conditions, and restrictions of a mixed-use
development shall indicate the times when the loading and unloading of goods
may occur on the street, provided that, in no event, shall loading or
unloading take place after 10:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m. on any day of the
week.



   (B)   Lighting standards for mixed-use developments.  Lighting for
nonresidential uses shall be appropriately designed, located, and shielded to
ensure that they do not negatively impact the residential uses in the
development nor any adjacent residential uses.



   (C)   Recycling and refuse storage facilities standards for
mixed-use developments.  Recycling and refuse storage facilities for
nonresidential uses shall be located as far as possible from residential
units and shall be completely screened from view from the residential portion
of the development. Recycling and refuse storage facilities for
nonresidential uses shall be compatible in architectural design and details
with the overall project.  The location and design of trash enclosures shall
mitigate nuisances from odors when residential uses might be impacted. Trash
areas for food service and sales uses, when occupying the same building as
residential uses, shall be refrigerated to control odor.



   (D)   Integration and standards for nonresidential uses in vertical
mixed-use buildings.



      (1)   Nonresidential uses shall be located along street
frontages and shall have a minimum depth of 18 feet.  The responsible review
authority may reduce the depth requirements for nonresidential uses located
on a secondary street.



      (2)   On corner parcels, the nonresidential space shall turn
(wrap around) the corner for a distance of at least 50% of the building
façade, but not less than 30 feet along secondary/side streets. The
termination of use shall occur at an architectural break in the building.



   (E)   Residential noise notice. Residents of new mixed-use
development projects in the Mixed Use Zones (MU-1 or MU-2), whether owners or
tenants, shall be notified in writing before taking up residence that they
will be living in an urban-type environment and that the noise levels may be
higher than a strictly residential area. The covenants, conditions, and
restrictions of a residential or mixed-use project shall require that
prospective residents acknowledge the receipt of the written noise
notification.  Signatures shall confirm receipt and understanding of this
information.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.070.050  REQUIRED RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE.



   Maintaining open space areas provides recreational opportunities,
allows sunlight to enter into living spaces and provides a spacious and
inviting feel. The minimum required open space areas for residential uses, as
listed in Table 153.070.030, shall be maintained pursuant to these
regulations.



   (A)   Residential open space. The following regulations apply to
required residential open space areas within all mixed-use zoned lots.



      (1)   More than one open space area may be provided on a lot.
The sum of square footages for all eligible open space areas on a lot shall
comprise the total open space area for that lot.



      (2)   Required side or rear yard areas may be included in the
calculated open space area but a required front yard area may not.



      (3)   All required open space shall be usable. Usable open
space shall be improved to support residents’ passive or active use. Such
open space shall be located on the same parcel as the dwelling units for
which it is required. The computation of such open space shall include no
obstructions other than devices and structures designed to enhance its
usability, such as swimming pools, changing facilities, fountains, planters,
benches, and landscaping.



      (4)   Open space areas shall have no parking, driveway or
right-of-way encroachments.



      (5)   Usable open space does not need to be located on the
ground. Rooftop gardens and rooftop landscaping, including rooftops above
parking structures, may be used to satisfy the open space requirement.



   (B)   Private open space orientation. Private open space(s) attached
to residential units shall be designed to avoid direct visibility into the
interiors of adjacent units.



   (C)   Uses restricted to indoor.  Unless otherwise indicated in
this subchapter 153.070, all uses listed in table 153.070.020 must be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building. The following uses or
businesses are exceptions to this rule:



      (1)   Outdoor dining and food service in conjunction with a
cafeteria, café, restaurant or similar establishment;



      (2)   Newspaper stalls;



      (3)   Other sales and display areas as approved through a
conditional use permit or similar discretionary permit; and



      (4)   Other uses as approved by the Zoning Administrator
through the Zoning Code interpretation process pursuant to subchapter
153.210, Administrative Procedures.



   (D)   Outdoor storage of materials. Outdoor storage of materials
shall be limited to the accessory storage of goods sold or utilized by the
principal use of the lot where permitted by Table 153.070.020. All materials
shall be entirely screened from view from public rights-of-way by a six-foot
tall solid fence or masonry wall.



   (E)   Outdoor storage areas. Any areas developed and/or used for
outdoor storage and use shall comply with the most current National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permits Implementation of Best
Management Practices (BMP) and maintenance of those BMPs. 



   (F)   Outdoor sale and display location. No outdoor sale or display
area shall occupy any required parking spaces or required yard areas.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.070.060  RESERVED.



§ 153.070.070  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter, Mixed-Use
Zones, regulations contained in the following subchapters of this chapter may
apply to development in these zones:



   153.110   Specific Plan Zone



   153.120   Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities



   153.130   Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.140   Performance Standards



   153.150   Off-Street Parking and Loading



   153.160   Landscaping Standards



   153.170   Sign Regulations



   153.180   Antennas and Other Telecommunication Facilities



   153.200   Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



   153.210   Administrative Procedures



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.080  HISTORIC OVERLAY ZONE



§ 153.080.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Historic Overlay Zone is established to recognize, protect and
ensure proper utilization of historic resources in the interest of public,
health, safety, prosperity, social and cultural enrichment, and general
welfare. The purpose of the Historic Overlay is as follows.



   (A)   Cultural history. Safeguard the heritage of the city by
protecting designated buildings and structures which reflect the city’s
cultural history.



   (B)   Public involvement. Encourage public understanding and
involvement in the unique heritage of the city.



   (C)   Civic pride. Strengthen civic pride in the beauty and notable
accomplishments of the past.



   (D)   City attractions. Protect and enhance the city’s attractions
to residents and visitors and to support and stimulate business and industry.



   (E)   Aesthetic character. Enhance the visual and aesthetic
character of the city.



   (F)   Promote use. Promote the use of historic buildings, structures
and historic districts.



   (G)   Property rights. Protect and safeguard the property rights of
the owners whose property is declared to be historic or is located in an area
designated as a historic district.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.080.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Historic Overlay Zone creation. Historic Overlay zones shall
be applied n the same manner as property is reclassified from one zone
classification to another, as set forth in subchapter 153.210, Part 15 -
Zoning Code Text and Zoning Map Amendments.  When a Historic Overlay Zone
has been created, it shall be designated upon the zoning map of the city as
an overlay zone. At the time the Historic Overlay Zone is created, a specific
set of development and design standards shall be adopted by the City Council,
in addition to those applicable to the underlying zone classification,
identifying the allowable uses, improvements, accessory uses, signs and other
development standards which are determined to be necessary to maintain
integrity of the district while allowing reasonable use of the properties
therein.



   (B)   Historic designation where applied to an individual building,
structure or place, such application may be referred to as a “Historic
Designation”.



   (C)   Historic structure work permit. No work shall be done on any
building or structure located within a Historic Overlay Zone or designated as
historic unless a work permit is issued pursuant to subchapter 153.210,
Administrative Procedures.



   (D)   Historic structure demolition permit. No demolition shall be
done on any building or structure located within a Historic Overlay Zone or
designated as historic unless a demolition permit is issued pursuant to
subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures.



   (E)   Unsafe or dangerous exception. None of the provisions of this
chapter shall be construed to prevent any work or demolition necessary to
correct or eliminate any unsafe or dangerous condition of any building or
structure located in a historic district, where such condition has been
declared unsafe or dangerous by the city and where the work is necessary to
correct or eliminate such condition, and has been ordered by the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.080.030  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.



   The owner or occupant of a building, structure or place designated as
historic or located within a Historic Overlay Zone shall maintain all
exterior and interior portions of such buildings, structures and places in
good repair to prevent deterioration, decay or excessive wear and tear.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.080.040  LOCAL OFFICIAL REGISTER.



   Resolutions adopting a historic designation of a building, structure or
place shall collectively be known as the Local Official Register of Historic
Resources. The Local Official Register shall be kept on file with the
Secretary of the Historic Resources Advisory Committee, who shall transmit
copies to the City Clerk, the Director of Community Development and the
County Librarian.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.080.050  AGREEMENTS BY THE CITY OF BALDWIN PARK.



   The provisions of a disposition and development agreement or owner
participation agreement, approved and entered into by the City of Baldwin
Park, may contain provisions superseding the provisions of this subchapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.090  SIERRA VISTA OVERLAY ZONE



§ 153.090.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Sierra Vista Overlay Zone is established to allow
large-scale development under a flexible plan, to facilitate land assembly
and to promote master-planned retail, commercial, office, industrial or
mixed-use developments not otherwise possible under conventional zoning
controls.



   (B)   The regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply to
all land within the city for which the Sierra Vista Overlay Zone has been
adopted by the City Council.  The location and boundaries of the overlay
zone hereby established are shown on the zoning map.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.090.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Sierra Vista Overlay Zone creation. The Sierra Vista Overlay
Zone shall be applied in the same manner as property is reclassified from one
zone classification to another, as set forth in subchapter 153.210, Part 15 -
Zoning Code Text and Zoning Map Amendments. When a Sierra Vista Overlay Zone
is created, it shall be designated upon the zoning map of the city as an
overlay zone.



   (B)   Development plan. No building permit shall be issued for the
construction, reconstruction or relocation of any building or structure, nor
shall any use of land be commenced or permitted on any lot which is
classified in a Sierra Vista Overlay Zone unless a development plan has been
approved. The conditions of approval imposed upon the development plan and
the provisions of subchapter 153.090, Sierra Vista Overlay Zone, shall be
observed in development of the district.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.090.030  APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS.



   (A)   Development plan application preparation. All applications for
approval of development plans shall be prepared by a design team consisting
of a licensed architect, registered civil engineer or land surveyor, and any
additional qualified persons.



   (B)   Development plan application filing and content. The
application shall be filed with the Secretary of the Planning Commission, and
shall include the following information:



      (1)   The number of lots involved, lot dimensions and total
lot area;



      (2)   The proposed location, use, size, height, floor area,
elevations and type and color of materials to be used on building exterior of
all proposed and existing buildings;



      (3)   The location, type and height of all walls and fences;



      (4)   The location and dimensions of public and private
streets, access ways, pedestrian walkways and loading areas;



      (5)   The location, height and design of all outdoor lighting
fixtures;



      (6)   A schematic landscaping plan, including the location,
size and type of planting;



      (7)   The proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions;



      (8)   A phasing plan, if applicable;



      (9)   A proposed sign program for all exterior signage; and



      (10)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the
Director of Community Development.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.090.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Development standards and conditions of approval. The
development standards applicable to the underlying zone classification shall
apply. If specific conditions of approval are imposed upon the development
plan related to lot area, lot width, lot depth, required yard areas, parking
stall dimensions, sign regulations or any other standards, these conditions
shall take precedent over the development standards for the underlying zone.



   (B)   Design Guidelines Manual. Developments within the Sierra Vista
Overlay zone shall comply with applicable Design Guidelines Manual.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.100  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE



§ 153.100.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Flexible plan. The Planned Development Overlay Zone provides
opportunities to establish development policies and controls that allow
development under a flexible plan that may not otherwise be possible under
conventional zoning controls. The mechanism for allowing such flexible
standards is through the application of the Planned Development Overlay Zone
to a property and the accompanying approval of a development plan pursuant to
part 19 of subchapter 153.210.



   (B)   Additive zoning. The Planned Development Overlay Zone is
additive to the underlying zone, and the standards established as part of the
applicable development permit shall not be used to increase the maximum
allowable residential density for a development project or to change the uses
permitted in the underlying zone. The standards for the underlying zone shall
apply with regard to both maximum allowable density and use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.100.020  ESTABLISHMENT OF A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   A Planned Development Overlay Zone shall be applied in the
same manner as property is reclassified from one zone to another, as set
forth in subchapter 153.210, Part 15 - Zoning Code Text and Zoning Map
Amendments. When a Planned Development Overlay Zone is created, it shall be
indicated upon the zoning map of the city as an overlay zone.



   (B)   The regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply to
all land within the city for which Planned Development Overlay Zone has been
adopted by the City Council.  The location and boundaries of the overlay
zone hereby established are shown on the zoning map.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.100.030  USE REGULATIONS.



   Only those uses permitted within the underlying zone classification
shall be permitted within the Planned Development Overlay zone.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.100.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Development Plan conformance. All lots and structures within
the Planned Development Overlay zone shall comply with the development
standards set forth in the applicable adopted Development Plan document.



   (B)   Development standards. No property within any residential zone
shall be considered for application of a Planned Development Overlay Zone
unless the associated development permit includes provisions that meet the
requirements set forth in Table 153.100.040.



TABLE 153.100.040



 


Development Standards for
Planned Development Zones

 

Zone




Development Standards

 

R-1

 

R-G

 

R-3





Project lot area - minimum
 

1.5 acres net

 

40,000 sf net

 

30,000 sf net



Project lot depth - minimum
 

Single-loaded: 150 ft
Double-loaded: 200 ft

 

N/A

 

N/A



Density - maximum
 

8.7 du/ac

 

12 du/ac

 

20 du/ac



Individual lot area - minimum
 

4,000 sf

 

3,700 sf

 

3,000 sf




Individual lot width - minimum
Interior lot
Corner lot

 


40 ft
45 ft

 


38 ft
43 ft

 


35 ft
40 ft



Individual lot depth - minimum
 

80 ft

 

75 ft

 

70 ft




Front yard setback - minimum
Habitable portion of structure
Garage with roll-up door
Garage without roll-up door

 


15 ft
18 ft
20 ft

 


15 ft
18 ft
20 ft

 


15 ft
18 ft
20 ft



Side yard setback - minimum
 



 



 






   Interior lot

 

5 ft

 

5 ft

 

5 ft




   Corner lot

 

10 ft

 

10 ft

 

10 ft



Rear yard setback - minimum
 

15 ft

 

15 ft

 

15 ft



Open space area, private - minimum
 

600 sf/du - minimum dimension 15 ft

 

300 sf/du - minimum dimension 12 ft

 

300 sf/du - minimum dimension 10 ft



Open space area, common - minimum
 

400 sf/du - minimum dimension 40 ft

 

300 sf/du - minimum dimension 30 ft

 

250 sf/du - minimum dimension 30 ft




Minimum floor areas
One bedroom
Two bedrooms
Three bedrooms
four bedrooms
each additional bedroom

 


900 sf
1,250 sf
1,400 sf
1,600 sf
200 sf

 


900 sf
1,250 sf
1,400 sf
1,600 sf
200 sf

 


900 sf
1,250 sf
1,400 sf
1,600 sf
200 sf



Building width - minimum
 

30 ft

 

20 ft

 

20 ft



Building height - maximum
 

27 ft

 

27 ft

 

27 ft



Public street width - maximum
 

40 ft curb to curb with 60 ft right-of-way including sidewalks and parkway

 

40 ft curb to curb with 60 ft right-of-way including sidewalks and parkway

 

40 ft curb to curb with 60 ft right-of-way including sidewalks and parkway



Individual lot site coverage - maximum
 

50%

 

60%

 

65%



Guest parking - minimum
 

1.5 spaces/du

 

1.5 spaces/du

 

1.5 spaces/du





 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.100.050  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter,
regulations contained in the following subchapters of this chapter may apply
to development in these zones:



   153.120    Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities



   153.130   Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.140   Performance Standards



   153.150   Off-Street Parking and Loading



   153.160   Landscaping Standards



   153.170   Sign Regulations



   153.180   Antennas and Other Telecommunication Facilities



   153.200   Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



   153.210   Administrative Procedures



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.110  SPECIFIC PLAN ZONES



§ 153.110.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Specific Plan Zone is established to allow for the comprehensive
site planning and building design of parcels requiring special attention and
treatment, to allow creative approaches to the use of land through variation
in building location and mix of land uses and to provide a means to establish
more specific land use regulations and design standards for clusters of
properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.110.020  APPLICATION.



   (A)   The regulations set forth in this subchapter apply to all land
within the city for which a specific plan has been adopted by the City
Council. Specific Plan Zones shall be applied in the same manner as property
is reclassified from one zone classification to another, as set forth in
subchapter 153.210, Part 15 - Zoning Code Text and Zoning Map Amendments.
When a Specific Plan Zone is has been adopted, the plan shall be indicated as
such on the Zoning Map.



   (B)   The regulations set forth in this subchapter shall apply to
all land within the city for which a Specific Plan Zone has been adopted by
the City Council.  The location and boundaries of the overlay zone hereby
established are shown on the zoning map.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.110.030  MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT SITE STANDARD.



   A Specific Plan Zone may only be established for a parcel or group of
contiguous parcels if the combined lot area is greater than or equal to the
following standards.



   (A)   For residential uses, combined lot area of two acres.



   (B)   For commercial and industrial uses, combined lot area of two
acres.



   (C)   For mixed-use, combined lot area of five acres.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.110.040  SPECIFIC PLAN REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Standards supplement and/or supersede. Specific plans may
either supplement or supersede land use regulations applicable to the subject
property, including all previously adopted ordinances, standards and
guidelines. In the event an inconsistency or conflict exists between
standards adopted within a specific plan and comparable provisions of this
chapter or other development standards, the standards and regulations made
part of the specific plan shall prevail.



   (B)   Specific Plan content. Each specific plan shall identify
specific land uses, standards and criteria necessary for the development,
maintenance and use of the subject property in compliance with the policies
and programs of the General Plan. Each specific plan shall clearly specify
how and to what extent the plan is to improve upon, supplement or supersede
any adopted ordinance, regulations and standards. Where not otherwise
specifically referenced and addressed by a specific plan, all adopted
ordinances, regulations, standards and guidelines of the city shall apply.



   (C)   Specific Plan additional content. In addition to the minimum
content requirements specified in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65451, the following
shall be included in all specific plans:



      (1)   Statement of the relationship of the specific plan to
the General Plan;



      (2)   Policies for development and standards for regulating
development within the plan area;



      (3)   The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan;



      (4)   General site design standards and guidelines for all
developments;



      (5)   The types and location of streets;



      (6)   Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve
developments within the plan area;



      (7)   Landscaping and parking lot treatments;



      (8)   Proposed conservation, open space or recreation areas;
and



      (9)   Any other programs, guidelines or standards appropriate
for the plan area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.110.050  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter,
regulations contained in the following subchapters of this chapter may apply
to development in these zones:



   153.120   Standards for Specific Land Uses and Activities



   153.130   Site Planning and General Development Standards



   153.140   Performance Standards



   153.150   Off-Street Parking and Loading



   153.160   Landscaping Standards



   153.170   Sign Regulations



   153.180   Antennas and Other Telecommunication Facilities



   153.200   Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses



   153.210   Administrative Procedures



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.115  RESERVED



153.120  STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES



Part 1.  ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES



§ 153.120.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Adult-oriented businesses are regulated by chapter 124 of this code.
The purpose of regulating adult-oriented businesses is to guard against the
known adverse effects such businesses can have on the community and the
neighborhoods in which they are located, including conditions of blights,
crime and perceived and real threats to public health, safety, morals and
general welfare. The provisions contained in this subchapter shall be used
together with chapter 124 to prevent the concentration of such businesses and
to ensure that any such use operates in a manner that minimizes potentially
adverse effects on surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.020  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   To establish and operate an adult entertainment business or adult
entertainment enterprise, a special business permit, obtained pursuant to the
requirements of chapter 124 of this code is required. This requirement shall
apply to all new and existing adult businesses.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.030  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Allowable zones and distances. No adult-oriented business
shall be established, located or operated in any zone in the city other than
the I (Industrial) and I-C (Industrial-Commercial) zones and only when within
the ascribed distances of the certain specified land uses or zones as set
forth here.



      (1)   No such business shall be established or located within
1,000 feet from any existing legal or legal nonconforming residential zone or
use, unless separated from the residential zone or use by a major freeway
(Interstate 10 or State Highway 605) or by a right-of-way at least 100 feet
in width.



      (2)   No such business shall be established or located within
1,000 feet from any existing legal or legal nonconforming park, church or
school.



   (B)   Distance measurement. These distances shall be measured as a
radius from the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business to the
property lines of the property so zoned or used for, if on the same property,
from the primary entrance of the establishment from which the distance is
measured without regard to intervening structures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 2.  ALCOHOL SALES



§ 153.120.040  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating the sale of alcohol is to ensure the
compatibility of establishments that sell alcohol with surrounding properties
and to minimize potentially adverse impacts on public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare of the residents in the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.050  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Conditional use permit required. The following establishments,
businesses and facilities must obtain a conditional use permit pursuant to
subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures, before engaging in the sale of
alcoholic beverages:



      (1)   Any establishment, business or facility that does not
currently sell alcoholic beverages but proposes to do so.



      (2)   Any establishment, business or facility that currently
sells alcoholic beverages and proposes to change the type of alcoholic
beverages to be sold by changing the type of retail license classification it
holds under authority of the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.



      (3)   Any establishment, business or facility that currently
sells alcoholic beverages and proposes to substantially change its mode or
character of operation, including, but not limited to, the following:



         (a)   An increase in the floor area of the
establishment, business or facility; and



         (b)   An addition of dancing or live entertainment.



   (B)   Existing establishments. Existing establishments, businesses
or facilities that currently sell alcoholic beverages shall either comply
with all conditional use permit requirements or shall cease selling alcoholic
beverages in a manner and time consistent with the amortization provisions
provided in subchapter 153.200, Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses.



   (C)   Specific location attributes. In any decision to issue a
conditional use permit, consideration shall be given to the location of the
proposed facility. The general vicinity shall not have an unusually high
crime rate such that the proposed use could result in further criminal
activity, thus requiring additional police services if the conditional use
permit is granted.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.060  USE REGULATIONS.



   Any minor commercial retail establishment or on-sale outlet which sells
alcohol shall be subject to the following use restrictions.



   (A)   Cash register location. The cash register of all minor
commercial retail establishments that are off-sale outlets shall be located
so it is clearly visible from outside the premises.



   (B)   Property maintenance plan. All minor commercial retail
establishments that are serving as off-sale outlets and on-sale outlets,
other than restaurants or service clubs, shall submit a property maintenance
plan which will outline measures to be taken in order to prevent loitering,
panhandling, graffiti, littering and other public nuisances. The property
maintenance plan shall be subject to approval and compliance with the plan
shall be included as a condition of approval of the conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.070  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The development standards set forth in subchapter 153.050, Commercial
and Industrial Zones, shall apply to all establishments selling alcohol,
unless otherwise specified here.  The following shall apply to all
establishments selling alcohol.



   (A)   Buffers. The establishment shall be sufficiently buffered in
relation to any abutting residentially zoned properties so as not to
adversely affect the residential areas. A minimum 20-foot-wide landscaped
area shall be provided between any abutting residentially zoned property and
any establishment which sells alcohol. Also, any other buffers required as a
condition of the conditional use permit shall be provided and continuously
maintained.



   (B)   Exterior property appearance. The exterior appearance of the
property, including, but not limited to, landscaping and architectural
treatment of the building, shall not detract from the character of the
surrounding neighborhood, and, as necessary, shall improve upon the
characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood with exceptional design
characteristics, as determined by the Design Review Committee.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.080  SECURITY REGULATIONS.



   All minor commercial retail establishments that serve as off-sale
outlets and on-sale outlets, other than restaurants or service clubs, shall
submit a detailed plan for security measures. The security plan shall be
approved and compliance with the plan shall be a condition of the conditional
use permit. Security measures may include items such as alarms, security
guards and interior and/or exterior security cameras.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.090  ABANDONMENT OF PERMIT.



   Any establishment, business or facility that is either abandoned or
discontinued general operations or the sale of alcoholic beverages for a
period of 60 consecutive days shall be deemed to have abandoned its ability
to sell alcoholic beverages. The establishment shall obtain a new conditional
use permit before re-engaging in the sale of alcoholic beverages.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 3.  GAME ARCADES AND INTERNET CAFES



§ 153.120.100  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating arcades, internet cafes and similar
establishments is to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties and to
avoid and/or minimize any impacts associated with such uses.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.110  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Adult attendants. At all times, each arcade or internet café
operator shall maintain adult attendants on the premises, the number of which
shall be set forth in the approved conditional use permit.



   (B)   Age restrictions. Each arcade or internet café shall prohibit
persons 17 years of age and under from using any game machine between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. This restriction
shall not apply during school holidays and school vacations recognized by
public schools within the city.



   (C)   Signage. Signage informing the public of the prohibition on
the use of drugs, smoking, loud conduct and the hours of operation shall be
posted and plainly visible to customers within the establishment in at least
two locations.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.120  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the development standards set forth in subchapter
153.050, Commercial and Industrial Zones, the following shall apply to
arcades and internet cafés.



   (A)   Location. An arcade or internet café shall not be located
within 500 feet of a child care facility or an educational institution which
conducts classes for kindergarten through 12th grades.



   (B)   Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area that each arcade or
internet café shall provide for the operation of game machines shall be 750
square feet.



   (C)   Unobstructed aisle widths. Game machines located along one
side of an aisle shall maintain a minimum unobstructed aisle width of five
feet. Game machines located along both sides of an aisle shall maintain a
minimum unobstructed aisle width of 7.5 feet.



   (D)   Clear unobstructed view. Each arcade or internet café shall
provide and maintain a clear unobstructed view of the interior from the
outside of the building using windows and doors made of glass or other
transparent material.



   (E)   Lighting. All entrances, exits and interior areas shall have
adequate lighting.



   (F)   Public restroom facilities. Each arcade or internet café
shall provide and maintain a minimum of two public restroom facilities
accessible to both customers and employees.



   (G)   Bicycle racks. The owner and operator of an arcade shall
provide and maintain bicycle racks in a sufficient quantity and location, as
set forth in the approved conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 4.  ANIMAL KEEPING



§ 153.120.130  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating the maintenance of animals, fish and fowl is
to minimize potentially adverse effects on surrounding residents and
properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.140  PERMITTED ANIMALS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following animals, fish and
fowl are deemed to be household pets which may be housed and maintained in
any dwelling unit, in accordance with the following limitations.



   (A)   Household pets in a dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit may
contain any combination of the following.



      (1)   Up to three weaned, domesticated dogs.



      (2)   Up to three weaned, domesticated cats.



      (3)   Up to ten canaries, finches, parrots and other similar
predatory birds, provided that such birds shall be kept within the dwelling
unit.



   (B)   Household pets outside a dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit
located within the R-1-7,500 and R-1 zone may also contain any combination of
the following animals outside the dwelling unit, provided that all such
animals are maintained in cages within the rear yard area and are located a
minimum of 15 feet away from any habitable building,



      (1)   Up to ten birds.



      (2)   Up to three hen chickens.



   (C)   Roosters. Roosters are not permitted.



   (D)   Kennel, pet shop, veterinary hospital. These regulations shall
not prohibit the maintenance of any animals in connection with a legally
permitted kennel, pet shop or veterinary hospital.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 5.  BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS



§ 153.120.150  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating billiard and pool halls is to establish a
comprehensive set of regulations that ensure compatibility with surrounding
properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.160  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Adult attendants. At all times, each billiard or pool hall
operator shall maintain adult attendants on the premises, the number of which
shall be set forth in the approved conditional use permit.



   (B)   Age restrictions. Each billiard or pool hall shall enforce the
following age restrictions:



      (1)   Prohibit persons 17 years of age and under from using
any game machine between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday. This restriction shall not apply during school holidays and school
vacations recognized by public schools within the city.



      (2)   Prohibit persons 17 years of age and under to remain in
the billiard or pool hall after 10:00 p.m.



      (3)   Prohibit persons 20 years of age and under to enter a
billiard or pool hall that serves alcoholic beverages.



   (C)   Hours of operation. Hours of operation shall be determined by
the Approving Authority based upon the sensitivity of the area surrounding
the proposed billiard hall during the approval of the conditional use permit.



   (D)   Signage. Signage informing the public of the prohibition on
the use of drugs, smoking, loud conduct, age restrictions and the hours of
operation shall be posted and plainly visible to customers within the
establishment in at least two locations.



   (E)   Dress code. Billiard and pool halls which have been authorized
to serve alcoholic beverages shall enforce a customer dress code, which at a
minimum shall prohibit gang-related attire. The dress code shall be posted at
all public entrances.



   (F)   Gambling prohibited. Any and all forms of gambling are
prohibited.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.170  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the development standards set forth in subchapter
153.050, Commercial and Industrial Zones, the following shall apply to
billiards and pool halls.



   (A)   Location. A billiard or pool hall shall not be located within
1,500 feet of a child care facility or an educational institution which
conducts classes for kindergarten through 12th grade, within 150 feet of a
residentially zoned property or within 1,000 feet of another billiard or pool
hall.



   (B)   Clear and substantially unobstructed view. Each billiard and
pool hall shall provide and maintain a clear and substantially unobstructed
view of the interior from the outside of the building using windows and doors
made of glass or other transparent material. No more than 10% of each
individual glass door and/or window shall be covered.



   (C)   Partitions prohibited. With the exception of washrooms, toilet
rooms and storage closets, partitions used to form other rooms, stalls or
other enclosures where people may congregate are prohibited.



   (D)   Separation of pool tables. A minimum five-foot separation
shall be maintained between all pool tables and cocktail tables, counters,
walls, partitions, immovable barriers, seating areas and other pool tables.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.180  SECURITY REGULATIONS.



   (A) Security plan. A security plan shall be submitted for review and
approval by the Police Department as a part of the conditional use permit
application, and shall be incorporated as a condition of approval.



   (B)   Surveillance cameras. At least two interior security
surveillance/recording cameras and one exterior camera shall be installed and
permanently maintained. All video tapes from these cameras shall be retained
and made available for viewing by the Police Department for a minimum of
seven days.



   (C)   Alarm system. An electronic intrusion alarm system shall be
installed and permanently maintained.



   (D)   Lighting. All interior and exterior areas of the building
shall be well lit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 6.  CHILD DAY CARE FACILITIES AND LARGE-FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES



§ 153.120.190  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating child day care facilities and large-family
day care homes is to safeguard the health, safety and general welfare of
children, and to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.200  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   California use restrictions. All child day care facilities
shall comply will all applicable State of California use restrictions at all
times.



   (B)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation for any child day
care facility shall be based upon the uses and characteristics of the area in
which the facility is located and shall be set forth in any required
conditional use permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.210  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Child day care development standards. The following
development standards shall apply to all child day care facilities:



      (1)   All such facilities shall comply with all applicable
State of California development standards at all times; and



      (2)   All such facilities shall comply with the city’s noise
regulations for residential uses, as set forth in subchapter 153.140,
Performance Standards.



   (B)   Large-family day care development standards. The following
development standards shall apply to large-family day care homes:



      (1)   A minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet is required for
any large-family day care home.



      (2)   No large-family day care home shall be located within
500 feet of an existing or proposed large-family day care home. However, if a
large-family day care home is proposed on the same street as an existing
large-family day care home, the minimum distance between large-family day
care homes shall be 1,000 feet.



      (3)   All large-family day care homes shall provide adequate
on-street parking located along the home’s street frontage, or shall
provide off-street parking for the drop-off and pick-up of children.



      (4)   No off-street parking provided for the drop-off and
pick-up of children shall require vehicles to backup directly into a travel
lane of a designated major arterial street.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 7.  DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENTS



§ 153.120.220  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating drive-through establishments is to prevent
potentially adverse impacts on adjacent properties, neighborhoods and
residences due to customer and employee parking demands, traffic generation,
noise, light and litter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.230  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Hours of operation. When located on a site adjacent to or
separated by an alley from any residentially zoned property, a drive-through
establishment shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.



   (B)   Litter. Employees shall collect on-site and off-site litter
generated by customers at least once per business day.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.240  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the development standards set forth in subchapter
153.050, Commercial and Industrial Zones, the following shall apply to
drive-through establishments.



   (A)   Minimum lot size. A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet
shall be required for the establishment of any drive-through facility.



   (B)   Two-way driveways. Drive-through facilities shall have two-way
driveways.



   (C)   Minimum queuing distances. Minimum queuing distances shall be
provided as illustrated in Figure 153.120.240. Queuing aisles shall not be
placed on any more than two sides of a building.



Figure 153.120.240  Queuing Standards for Drive-through Facilities







 



   (D)   Circulation plan. A parking and vehicular circulation plan
encompassing adjoining streets and alleys shall be submitted for review and
approval prior to the approval of a conditional use permit. Such plan shall
provide for safe pedestrian access from parking lots to the main door and
shall comply with applicable requirements of the American with Disabilities
Act.



   (E)   Trash receptacle provision. A minimum of one outdoor trash
receptacle shall be provided onsite. At least one additional on-site outdoor
trash receptacle shall be provided for every ten required parking spaces.



   (F)   Noise generating equipment. No noise-generating compressors or
other such equipment shall be placed on or near any property line adjoining
any residential zoned property.



   (G)   Speaker system noise. Drive-through speaker systems shall emit
no more than 50 decibels four feet from the vehicle and the speaker, and
shall not be audible above the daytime ambient noise levels beyond the
property boundaries. The system shall be designed to compensate for ambient
noise levels in the immediate area and shall not be located within 30 feet of
any residentially zoned property.



   (H)   Screen wall. On any lot where a drive aisle or driveway is
located such that vehicle headlights will shine onto an adjacent
residentially zoned property, a screen wall shall be provided.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 8.  HOME OCCUPATIONS



§ 153.120.250  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of regulating home occupations is to recognize the
need of some homeowners and cottage food operators to operate small
businesses and cottage food operations from their home, and to provide a
means of ensuring that adverse impacts, due to the mix of residential and
commercial or professional uses, are mitigated to preserve the character of
the residential area.



   (B)   The County of Los Angeles shall administer all county
regulations and standards related to the health and safety and sanitation of
food facilities within the jurisdiction of the City of Baldwin Park. The city
shall administer the laws set forth in this chapter relating to cottage food
operations. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as waiving or limiting
the application of local and state regulatory standard for the health, safety
and sanitation of food facilities within the jurisdiction of the City of
Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)



§ 153.120.260  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   To establish a home occupation which does not fall within the
meaning of cottage food operation as defined by § 153.220.040, a "home
occupation permit" shall be obtained from the Business License Department, in
addition to all other required licenses and permits.



   (B)   To establish a home occupation which falls within the meaning
of cottage food operation as defined by § 153.220.040, a "cottage food
operation permit" shall be obtained from the Business License Department upon
payment of a fee as set forth from time to time by resolution of the City
Council, in addition to all other required licenses and permits.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)



§ 153.120.270  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   The use of a home occupation which does not fall within the
meaning of cottage food operation as defined by § 153.220.040, shall comply
with the following regulations:



      (1)   No display or storage. No display or storage of goods,
wares, merchandise or stock in trade shall be maintained on the premises.



      (2)   Occupancy employment. No one other than persons residing
on the lot where the home occupation is located may be regularly employed in
such occupation.



      (3)   Dust, fumes, noise, and odor. No equipment used in
conjunction with such occupation that emits dust, fumes, noise or odor, which
could interfere with the peaceful use and enjoyment of adjacent properties is
permitted.



      (4)   Floor space limit. Not more than 150 square feet of
floor space of the dwelling shall be devoted to the home occupation.



      (5)   Traffic. No appreciable increase of traffic, pedestrian
or vehicular shall result from such occupation.



      (6)   Signage. No sign not otherwise permitted in the zone in
which the occupation is located shall be used.



   (B)   The use of a home occupation which falls within the meaning of
cottage food operation as defined by § 153.220.040 shall comply with the
following regulations:



      (1)   Spacing. No cottage food operation shall be approved if:



         (a)   The property line of the site of the proposed use
is located within 300 feet on the same street or the corner of a cross-street
of the property line of any single family home where another cottage food
operation is located; or



         (b)   If the proposed use is located within the same
building of an apartment complex or other multi-family housing (i.e.
condominium or townhomes) where another cottage food operation exists.



      (2)   Employee. Only one  employee, paid or unpaid, shall be
permitted. This shall not include family members or a household member of the
cottage food operator.



      (3)   Parking and loading requirements.



         (a)   For single family homes, parking spaces in the
property's garage or carport (if present) and driveway shall be available for
the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for
the applicant's own vehicles, a parking space for an employee, if an employee
is present, and one parking space for customers if direct sales on the
property are proposed.



         (b)   For apartments and multi-family developments, the
cottage food operator's designated space(s) shall be available for the actual
parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the
applicant's own vehicles, parking spaces for an employee if employee is
present, and one parking space for customers if direct sales on the property
are proposed. On-site parking in an apartment complex or other multi-family
residence requires approval from the property owner, landlord, homeowners
association or property manager.



         (c)   On-street parking spaces may be used for persons
picking-up and/or delivering materials for the cottage food operation and
third party retailers coming to the property if proposed.



         (d)   If the proposed cottage food operation will
involve loading of food products into vehicles, such loading may occur
anytime within an enclosed garage when the garage door is shut. Hours for
loading vehicles outside of a garage are limited from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Monday through Friday, and 10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays.
Vehicles shall not idle when being loaded.



      (4)   Noise control. Cottage food operations shall not create
noise levels in excess of those allowed in the applicable residential areas
in the noise element of the general plan or in excess of those allowed in
residential property by Chapter 153 of this Code.



      (5)   Size. Cottage food operations shall occupy no more of a
residence than the lesser of:



         (a)   Thirty percent (30%) of the floor area of the
dwelling excluding the garage area; or



         (b)   The area permitted by the Department.



      (6)   No signage. Cottage food operations shall not install or
post signage or advertisements identifying the cottage food operation at the
site or building where the cottage food operation is located.



      (7)   No outdoor sales. No outdoor sales or on-site sales
shall be allowed at the site of the cottage food operation.



      (8)   No dining. If direct sales are proposed at the site of
the cottage food operation, no third parties or customers shall be permitted
to dine at the cottage food operation.



      (9)   Code requirements. While the use of a residence for a
cottage food operation shall not constitute a change of occupancy for
purposes of building and fire codes, to the extent that building
modifications are proposed (e.g. more walls for storage areas, new electrical
panel for range) the cottage food operation shall meet all requirements of
Chapter 150 (Building) of this Code.



      (10)   Operational requirements. Cottage food operations shall
comply with the operational requirements as set forth in Cal. Health & Safety
Code §§114365 et seq.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)  Penalty, see §
10.99



Part 9.  HOTELS AND MOTELS



§ 153.120.280  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating hotels and motels is to establish a
comprehensive set of use regulations applicable to the operation of hotels
and motels that will ensure compatibility with surrounding properties and
will safeguard against potentially adverse impacts on adjacent neighborhoods
and residences.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.290  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   To establish and operate a hotel or motel, a market feasibility study
shall be performed and submitted contemporaneously with the application for
design review.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.300  LENGTH OF OCCUPANCY RESTRICTION.



   No person shall permit the use or occupancy of any room, unit or
combination of rooms or units, in a hotel or motel, for a period in excess of
30 consecutive calendar days.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.310  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the development standards set forth in subchapter
153.050, Commercial and Industrial Zones, the following shall apply to hotels
and motels.



   (A)   Location. The lot upon which the proposed hotel or motel will
be located must be within 300 feet of a freeway right-of-way, as designated
by the State of California.



   (B)   Minimum number of guest units. The hotel or motel shall
contain a minimum of 100 guest units.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 10.  MARIJUANA USES PROHIBITED



§ 153.120.320  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The State of California passed the Compassionate Use of
Marijuana Law in 1996, which allows for the use of marijuana for medical
purposes. However, the Federal Government through its Controlled Substances
Act prohibits the use and distribution of marijuana. The Supreme Court has
confirmed that the Controlled Substances Act does not contain a
"compassionate use" exemption; it is therefore a violation of federal law to
possess or distribute marijuana, including possession or distribution for
medical or recreational purposes.



   (B)   The intent of regulating medical and recreational marijuana
dispensaries, cultivation, deliveries and mobile dispensaries is to ensure
consistency with federal law and minimize adverse impacts on properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1382, passed 1-20-16)



§ 153.120.330  USE PROHIBITED.



   All marijuana uses, including but not limited to the following, are
prohibited in the city:



   (A)   Medical marijuana dispensaries;



   (B)   Recreational marijuana dispensaries; and



   (C)   Medical and recreational marijuana mobile dispensaries.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1382, passed 1-20-16; Am. Ord. 1401,
passed 8-16-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.340  RESERVED.



Part 11.  SECOND DWELLING UNITS



§ 153.120.350  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   These regulations are provided pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§
65852.1, 65852.150 and 65852.2 to regulate the establishment and use of
second dwelling units.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.360  USE REGULATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Second dwelling units shall be permitted as a matter of right, without
any required discretionary review or permit, in conjunction with any existing
single-family dwelling unit in the R-1, R-G and R-3 zones, provided any such
second dwelling unit conforms to the following standards.



   (A)   Allowable density applies. The second dwelling unit shall not
be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is
located.



   (B)   Owner occupancy. The owner of the property shall reside within
the primary or second dwelling unit.



   (C)   Rental requirements. The second dwelling unit may be rented
but not sold. If the unit is rented, the property owner shall obtain a
business license.



   (D)   Minimum lot size and dimensions apply. A second dwelling unit
shall only be permitted on lots that have and maintain the minimum lot size
and dimensions set forth in Table 153.040.030 of this chapter.



   (E)   Location. Each second dwelling unit shall be located within
the rear 50% of the lot.



   (F)   One second dwelling unit permitted. Only one second dwelling
unit shall be permitted per parcel or lot in conjunction with an existing
single-family dwelling (primary dwelling unit).



   (G)   Minimum development standards apply. The second unit shall
meet all minimum development standards for the zoning district in which it is
located, including, but not limited to, height, setbacks, lot coverage and
distance from animal-keeping areas.



   (H)   Building code. The second unit shall meet all building code
requirements.



   (I)   Maximum height. Each detached second dwelling unit shall be
limited in height to one story, with a maximum height not to exceed 15 feet
at peak of roof or 12 feet for a flat-roofed structure. For a second unit
attached to the existing single-family unit, the height shall not exceed the
height of the existing structure, and the roof pitch shall match the existing
structure.



   (J)   Detached second dwelling unit maximum floor space. For a
detached second unit, the total floor space of the unit shall not exceed
1,000 square feet.



   (K)   Attached second dwelling unit allowable floor area. For a
second unit attached to the existing single-family dwelling unit, the floor
area of the second unit shall not exceed 30% of the floor area of the
existing unit, provided, however, that a minimum of 400 square feet of
habitable area shall be permitted.



   (L)    Parking. One enclosed parking space shall be provided for the
second unit, in addition to any other parking required for the primary unit.



   (M)   Vehicular access. The second dwelling unit shall utilize the
same vehicular access that serves the existing main dwelling unit, unless the
second unit has access from an alley contiguous to the lot.



   (N)   Similar architectural features. The second dwelling unit shall
incorporate the same or similar architectural features, building materials
and color as the primary dwelling unit on the property. These features shall
include, but are not limited to, roofing material, roof design, fascia,
exterior building finish, color, exterior doors and windows including, but
not limited to, ratios of window dimensions (e.g., width to height) and
window area to wall area, garage door and architectural enhancements.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.370  SECOND UNITS IN R1-7,500.



   Second units are not permitted in the R1-7,500 zone.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 12.  SERVICE STATIONS



§ 153.120.380  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating service stations is to establish a
comprehensive set of regulations regarding the placement, location and
development of service stations to ensure compatibility with surrounding
properties and minimize potentially adverse impacts associated with increased
traffic and permitted outdoor activities.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.390  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the development standards set forth in subchapter
153.050, Commercial and Industrial Zones, the following shall apply to
service stations.



   (A)   Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area upon which a service
station is located shall comply with these requirements.



      (1)   The minimum lot area required for a service station
shall be 15,000 square feet.



      (2)   The minimum lot area required for a service station that
is combined with another principal use shall be 20,000 square feet.



      (3)   The minimum lot area required for a service station that
has the facilities for dispensing diesel fuel shall be 20,000 square feet.



   (B)   Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width of a service station
shall be 100 feet.



   (C)   Minimum yard dimensions. The following minimum yard dimensions
shall be required for all service station developments.



      (1)   The minimum front yard setback shall be 15 feet.



      (2)   The minimum street side yard setback shall be 15 feet.



   (D)   Yard area. No buildings or structures shall be permitted in
any required yard area, except for the following permitted accessory uses.



      (1)   Front and street side yard areas may contain
freestanding signs and light fixtures.



      (2)   Side yard areas may contain any permitted accessory use.



      (3)   Rear yard areas may contain any permitted accessory use
per these standards.



         (a)   The minimum distance between a building or
structure and the property line separating the rear yard from an alley shall
be five feet.



         (b)   The minimum distance between a building or
structure and the property line separating the rear yard from a street shall
be 15 feet.



   (E)   Vehicle circulation. Vehicle circulation for the pump islands
shall not block or obstruct on-site parking facilities and/or off-site
traffic circulation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.400  DRIVEWAY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Driveway approach approval. To minimize traffic hazards, the
location and size of driveway approaches from any street shall be subject to
approval of the Director of Public Works.



   (B)   Driveway abutting a building wall facing side or rear yard.
Wherever a permitted driveway abuts a wall of a building facing a side or
rear yard area, that portion of the wall shall be located at least 20 feet
from the lot line.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.410  LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS.



   All landscaping shall be automatically irrigated and maintained and
provided as follows.



   (A)   Landscape planter. A five-foot-wide planter shall be installed
along all street side property lines, with the exception of driveway openings.



   (B)   Corner lot planting area. A minimum of 150 square feet of
planting area shall be maintained at the main corner intersection of a corner
lot.



   (C)   Building façade planting area. A minimum of 40 square feet of
planting area along the building façade that faces a street shall be
maintained.



   (D)   Enclosed landscaped areas. All landscaped areas shall be
enclosed within a masonry planter box or a six-inch concrete curbing.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.420  SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Employee breakroom entrance. The entrance to all employee
breakrooms shall be screened from view of abutting or adjacent properties and
streets by a decorative screen.



   (B)   Tire display. Movable pallets or racks for the display of new
tires shall be permitted, provided that they are located within ten feet of
the service station building. In addition, one permanent enclosable tire
cabinet shall be permitted, provided that it is located within ten feet of
the service building and not within the required yard areas.



   (C)   Equipment within enclosed building. Hydraulic hoists or pits
and all lubrication, greasing, automobile washing, steam cleaning and repair
equipment shall be used and wholly stored within an enclosed building.



   (D)   Merchandise within closeable cabinets/racks. With the
exception of tires, batteries, accessories and lubricating items, all other
merchandise shall be stored and displayed within closeable cabinets or racks
inside of the service station building.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 13.  SOLAR PANELS



§ 153.120.430  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating solar panels is to continue to maintain a
high aesthetic standard within residential neighborhoods.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.440  DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Solar panels and equipment roof-mounted and visible from
street. Solar panels and related equipment mounted on roofs clearly visible
from the street shall conform to the following:



      (1)   Solar panels shall be generally mounted parallel with
the roof pitch;



      (2)   The distance between the roof and the uppermost portion
of the solar panel shall not exceed 18 inches; and



      (3)   Roof penetration shall be used to conceal water lines
and/or electrical wiring from public view.



   (B)   Solar panels and equipment roof-mounted but not visible from
street. Solar panels and related equipment mounted on roofs not clearly
visible from the street shall conform to the following:



      (1)   Solar panels shall be generally mounted parallel with
the roof pitch;



      (2)   The distance between the roof and uppermost portion of
the collector shall not exceed two feet; and



      (3)   Exposed water lines are permitted, provided the covering
insulation is colored to match that of the abutting roof and wall surfaces,
and eave penetration is used for perpendicular descent of water lines from
the roof to the exterior building wall surfaces.



   (C)   Structural supports and brackets. All mounting brackets and
related structural supports extending more than three inches above the roof
surface shall be covered in a manner architecturally compatible with the
building to screen from public visibility and/or abutting properties.



   (D)   Match abutting surface color. All solar equipment, except
portions of the collectors that must be black or clear glass or plastic to
allow light transmission, including mounting brackets and/or screening
materials, shall match the abutting surface color.



   (E)   Ridge line and gutter line. No portion of any roof-mounted
solar equipment may extend above the ridge line or below the gutter line.



   (F)   Certification and labeling. The system must be certified by
the state and appropriately labeled.



   (G)   Building permits and code requirements. All installations must
be have applicable building permits and done in compliance with building and
safety code requirements.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 14.  VEHICLE STORAGE



§ 153.120.450  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating the storage, parking and repairing of
vehicles is to minimize potentially adverse effects on surrounding residents
and properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.460  PARKING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Parking in parking facility or driveway. No person shall park
any vehicle, or any component thereof, for any purpose, in any area on any
private property other than in a legally established parking facility or
driveway leading to a parking facility.



   (B)   No parking on unimproved lot. No person shall park any
vehicle, or any component thereof, for any purpose, on an unimproved lot.



   (C)   Offering vehicle for sale. No person shall park any vehicle,
or any component thereof, in a public or private parking lot or area for the
purpose of offering the vehicle for sale.



   (D)   Abandoned and inoperable vehicles. No person shall store or
park an abandoned or inoperable automobile, recreational vehicle, camper
shell or boat on the driveway of a private property for more than seven days.



   (E)   Commercial vehicles over one ton. No person shall store or
park any commercial vehicle, as described in the State Vehicle Code, weighing
over one ton in any residential zone.



   (F)   Vehicles over 6,000 pounds. No person shall store or park any
vehicle, weighing over 6,000 pounds, on any portion of a commercially or
industrially zoned lot, with the exception of an off-street parking or
loading facility permitted pursuant to this Zoning Code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Part 15.  PUBLIC TELEPHONES



§ 153.120.470  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating the location and standards for public
telephones is to minimize potentially adverse effects on surrounding
properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.480  USE REGULATIONS AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   Public coin-operated telephones, hereafter telephone, shall be
permitted as accessory uses on lots classified in any of the C or I zones,
provided any such telephone conforms to the following standards.



   (A)   Lighting. The area in which a telephone is located shall be
fully lit to provide adequate security lighting, as approved by the Police
Department.



   (B)   Maintenance responsibility. The owner and/or person entitled
to occupancy of the lot upon which a telephone is located shall be
responsible to ensure that the telephone is maintained at all times in good
working order and condition.



   (C)   Maintenance and operation. Each telephone shall be maintained
in an operative condition. Inoperative telephones shall be removed within 30
days after they become inoperative.



   (D)   Location related to public right-of-way. No telephone shall be
located so that it projects into a public right-of-way or be located so that
any person using the telephone is required to be in a public right-of-way.



   (E)   Maximum number of telephones. The maximum number of telephones
permitted on any lot shall be limited as follows.



      (1)   On lots having a lot area of 15,000 square feet or less,
two telephones.



      (2)   On lots having a lot area of more than 15,000 square
feet, but less than ten acres, three telephones.



      (3)   On lots having a lot area of ten acres or more, four
telephones.



   (F)   Signage. That one sign, not exceeding four square feet of sign
face area, shall be permitted to be located upon each lot where a telephone
is located, and the purpose of such a sign shall be to advise by words,
letters or symbols the fact that a telephone is located on the premises.



   (G)   Location related to setback. Telephones and their supporting
structures may not be located within any required setback, whether or not
such setback is landscaped.



   (H)   Location related to entrances. The telephone shall be located
a minimum of ten feet away from each entrance and/or exit to a building or
commercial unit.



   (I)   Telephones within enclosed building. The limitations contained
in divisions (A) through (H) of this section shall not apply to a telephone
which is located within an enclosed building, if such building has at least
500 square feet of floor area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.490  ABATEMENT.



   Any telephone nonconforming to the standards listed in §
153.120.480(A) through (I) shall be subject to immediate abatement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 16.  EMERGENCY SHELTERS



§ 153.120.500  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65582, 65583(a) and 65589.5, all
California cities are required to identify a zone in which to permit
emergency shelters by right. The purpose of regulating the siting of
emergency shelters is to ensure the development of emergency shelters do not
adversely impact adjacent parcels or the surrounding neighborhood, and shall
be developed in a manner which protects the health, safety and general
welfare of the nearby residents and businesses, while providing for the
housing needs of the homeless.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.510  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Maximum beds. The emergency shelter shall contain a maximum of
30 beds and shall serve no more than 30 homeless persons at a time.



   (B)   Maximum length of stay. Temporary shelter shall be available
to residents for no more than six months. Staff and services shall be
provided to assist residents to obtain permanent shelter and income.



   (C)   Lighting. Adequate external lighting shall be provided for
security purposes. The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from
adjacent properties and public rights-of-way and of an intensity compatible
with the neighborhood.



   (D)   Onsite management. Onsite management of the facility shall be
required during all open hours of operation.



   (E) Management plan. The emergency shelter provider/operator shall have
a written management plan including, as applicable, provisions for staff
training, neighborhood outreach, security, screening of residents to ensure
compatibility with services provided at the facility and for training,
counseling and treatment programs for residents.



   (F)   Licenses. The emergency shelter facility shall demonstrate
that it is in and maintains in good standing county and/or state licenses, if
required by these agencies for the owner(s), operator(s) and/or staff on the
proposed facility.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.520  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In addition to the development standards set forth in subchapter
153.050, Commercial and Industrial Zones, the following shall apply to
emergency shelters.



   (A)   Proximity to other emergency shelters. No more than one
emergency shelter shall be permitted within a radius of 300 feet.



   (B)   Waiting and intake areas. Interior onsite waiting and client
intake areas must be at least 200 square feet. Outdoor onsite waiting areas
may be a maximum of 100 square feet, and must be located within 50 feet of
the public right-of-way.



   (C)   Security. Parking and outdoor facilities shall be designed to
provide security for residents, visitors and employees.



   (D)   Common facilities. The development may provide one or more of
the following specific common facilities for the exclusive use of the
residents:



      (1)   Central cooking and dining room(s);



      (2)   Recreation Room;



      (3)   Counseling center;



      (4)   Child care facilities; and



      (5)   Other support services.



   (E)   Parking. On-site parking for emergency shelters shall be
subject to requirements set forth in § 153.150.040.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 17. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND SERVICES



§ 153.120.530  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of regulating massage and accessory massage uses is to
promote operation of legitimate massage services and to prevent problems of
blight and deterioration that accompany and are brought about by large
numbers of massage establishments that may act as fronts for prostitution and
other illegal activity.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.120.540  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Chapter 118: Massage Establishments. All accessory massage
services and massage establishments shall comply with all applicable
provisions of Title XI, Chapter 118, Massage Establishments, of this code.



   (B)   Accessory massage services. Accessory massage services shall
only be provided in conjunction with a bona fide athletic club, gym, health
club, hotel, day spa, medical office, chiropractic office, holistic health
practitioner establishment, beauty parlor, beauty salon or hair salon.



   (C)   Hours of operation. The hours of operation for an accessory
massage service and/or a massage establishment functioning as an independent
use shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.120.550  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The development standards set forth in subchapter 153.050, Commercial
and Industrial Zones, shall apply to massage establishments, unless otherwise
specified here. The location of massage establishments shall be limited as
follows.



   (A)   Proximity to other massage establishments. No more than one
massage establishment shall be permitted within a radius of 500 feet.



   (B)   Proximity to schools, parks and playgrounds. A massage
establishment shall not be located within 500 feet of any public or private
school, park or playground.



   (C)   Proximity to residential zoning districts. A massage
establishment shall be a minimum of 250 feet from a residential zoning
district.



   (D)   Locational restrictions waiver. A property owner may apply for
a waiver of the locational restrictions contained in this section. The review
authority, after a public hearing, may waive any location restriction, if all
of the following findings are made:



      (1)   The proposed use will not be contrary to the public
interest or injurious to nearby properties, and that the spirit and intent of
this section will be observed;



      (2)   The use at the proposed location will not adversely
affect the use of a place used exclusively as a school, park or playground;
and



      (3)   All applicable standards of this code and this zoning
code will be observed.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



153.130  SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



§ 153.130.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The site planning and general development standards in this subchapter
regulate the use of all buildings, structures and land within the city and
are established to encourage high-quality design, enhance the aesthetic
character of the city’s neighborhoods and business districts, ensure
compatibility between adjacent land uses, minimize public hazards and prevent
the creation of nuisances and other conditions that are potentially harmful.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.020  APPLICABILITY.



   The standards in this subchapter shall apply to all new construction,
and to the renovation and alteration of existing uses or structures in all
zones.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.030  PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARD AREAS.



   With the exception of the following, every required yard area shall
remain open and unobstructed from the ground upwards:



   (A)   Maximum two foot projection. The following architectural and
structural features may project up to two feet into a required yard area:



      (1)   Cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, bay windows,
buttresses or other similar architectural features;



      (2)   Stairways, balconies and fire escapes; and



      (3)   Guard rails.



   (B)   Maximum three foot projection. The following architectural and
structural features may project up to three feet into a required yard area:



      (1)   Planting boxes and masonry planters ; and



      (2)   Fireplace structures.



   (C)   Projection and lot line minimum distance. A minimum distance
of three feet shall be maintained between any permitted projection and any
lot line.



Figure 153.130.030-1: Permitted Projections into Setbacks.







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.040  BUILDING HEIGHT.



   (A)   Measurement of building height. Building height shall be
measured as the vertical distance from the average level of the finished
grade of the lot to the highest roof point of the building being measured.



Figure 153.130.030-2: Measurement of Building Height.







 



   (B)   Exceptions to building height. Penthouses or roof structures
that house elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilation fans or other equipment
used to operate and maintain the building, skylights, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, fire or parapet walls and other similar structures may exceed
the building height standard by a maximum of 15 feet, provided any such
projection above the maximum permitted building height shall be subject to
Zoning Clearance review, pursuant to subchapter 153.210, Administrative
Procedures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.050  ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS.



   All buildings and structures shall be built and maintained in
accordance with the following architectural standards.



   (A)   Exterior siding composition. Each structure shall have and
maintain exterior siding composed of brick, wood, stucco, concrete or other
similar material as approved by the City Planner. Metal siding and corrugated
plastic or metal are prohibited.



   (B)   Roofing material. Each structure shall have and maintain a
roof constructed with wood shake, shingle, asphalt, composition, tile (slate,
concrete or clay) or other similar roofing material as approved by the City
Planner. Metal roofing is prohibited.



   (C)   Eave projection. Each dwelling shall have and maintain an eave
projection between 18 inches and 24 inches on at least two opposing sides.



   (D)   Security bars. Security bars shall not be mounted on the
outside of an exterior wall, window or door of any dwelling unit.



   (E)   Design Guidelines Manual. All development shall comply with
the adopted Design Guidelines Manual applicable to the type of development
proposed.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.060  FENCES AND WALLS.



   (A)   Height. Fence and wall height shall be measured as the
vertical distance from the lowest ground elevation or finished grade to the
highest point of the fence or wall.



   (B)   Height in residential zones. The following additional
standards shall apply to all residential zones.



      (1)   Walls, fences and hedges shall not exceed three feet in
height within or along any front yard area. However, any fence consisting 
of wrought iron or combination wrought iron and pilasters, whereby the solid
pilasters do not comprise more than 30% of the lineal fence length, shall be
permitted to a maximum height of five feet.



      (2)   Walls, fences and hedges shall not exceed six feet in
height within or along any side or rear yard area.



      (3)   Barbed wire, including, but not limited to, razor wire,
razor tape or razor ribbon, are prohibited on any residentially zoned lot.



      (4)   Corrugated metal and plastic as fencing materials are
prohibited.



      (5)   Chain link as fencing material is prohibited within any
front yard or street side yard area.



   (C)   Height in commercial and industrial zones. Walls, fences and
hedges in commercial and industrial zones shall not exceed eight feet in
height within or along a side yard or rear yard area.



   (D)   Retaining wall height. A retaining wall containing fill shall
comply with the above height requirements, except the height of the wall used
to retain the fill shall not contribute to the height of the wall. However,
the overall height of the wall, including the retaining portion of the wall,
shall not exceed ten feet.



   (E)   Front yard fence or wall. The construction, installation, or
significant modification of any fence or wall in a front yard area shall
require Zoning Clearance pursuant to subchapter 153.210, Administrative
Procedures.



Figure 153.130.030-3: Fence and Wall Regulations.







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.070  REFUSE COLLECTION FACILITIES.



   (A)   Development standards. All refuse collection areas shall
comply with the following development standards.



      (1)   The refuse collection area shall be enclosed by a
six-foot-tall masonry wall with an opaque and latchable gate.



      (2)   The minimum dimensions of the refuse collection area
shall measure six feet in width and eight feet in length.



      (3)   An area directly in front of the refuse collection area
measuring at least six feet by eight feet shall be maintained free of any
obstacles to permit easy access. This area shall be paved with concrete no
less than five inches thick.



      (4)   The refuse collection area shall be screened in a manner
approved by the City Planner so that the contents are not visible from any
public street or adjacent property.



Figure 153.130.030-4:  Refuse Collection Enclosures







 



      (5)   The refuse collection area shall be conveniently located
to the uses served to allow easy refuse disposal and collection by refuse
vehicles.



   (B)   Maintenance. All refuse collection areas shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary manner.



   (C)   Common refuse facilities. For those multi-family residential
uses which have common refuse facilities, the following regulations shall
apply.



      (1)   Table 153.130.060 lists the minimum number of refuse
bins that shall be provided and maintained.



TABLE 153.130.060



 


Required Trash Bins for
Multi-family Residential Zones




Number of
Dwelling Units

 

Minimum Number of Bins Required 1




2-14

 

1




15-24

 

2




25-34

 

3




35-44

 

4




45+

 

5










Note (1) Each bin shall have a minimum capacity of three cubic yards.



      (2)   In addition to the refuse collection area, a minimum
25-square-foot area shall be provided for the collection of recyclable
materials.



      (3)   The refuse collection area shall be located no more than
150 feet from the dwelling units served.



   (D)   Commercial and industrial refuse collection facilities. All
commercial and industrial uses shall comply with the following refuse
collection facility regulations.



      (1)   For any one business or combination of businesses in a
building or related collection of



buildings containing 1,000 to 20,000 square feet of gross leasable floor
area, one refuse collection facility shall be provided.



      (2)   For any one business or combination of businesses in a
building or related collection of buildings containing 20,001 square feet or
more of gross leasable floor area, one refuse collection facility for the
first 20,001 square feet, plus one additional facility for each 15,000 square
feet in excess of 20,001 shall be provided.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.080  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.



   The following standards are established to regulate the maintenance of
all properties, land uses and structures within the city.



   (A)   Property maintenance. All properties within the city shall be
kept and maintained in a clean, neat, orderly, operable and usable condition
that is safe both to occupants and passers-by. This requirement applies to
buildings, portions of buildings, paving, fences, walls, landscaping, water,
earth and any other structure or natural feature.



   (B)   Building and structure maintenance. All buildings and
structures shall be kept and maintained as follows in a manner that does not
detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood and that protects
the health, safety and welfare of the use, occupants and the general public:



      (1)   Buildings and structures shall be maintained in such a
manner to prohibit dry rot, warping, termite infestation, decay, cracking,
peeling or chalking to ensure that the building is not unsafe, unsightly or
in a state of disrepair.



      (2)   Building exteriors, driveways, chimneys, gutters,
downspouts, sidewalks and walkways shall be maintained in such a manner to
prohibit broken, deteriorated, substantially defaced, structurally unsound or
other similar conditions to ensure that such structures are not dangerous,
defective or unsightly.



      (3)   Structurally unsafe buildings, including, but not
limited to, those with known fire hazards, faulty weather protective roofs,
broken window and doors, partially constructed structures, unoccupied and
open buildings, abandoned signs and damaged buildings shall be demolished,
removed or fenced to prevent public access or harm.



      (4)   Maintenance of premises shall be in harmony or
conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties to prohibit
substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of adjacent
properties.



   (C)   Fence and wall maintenance. All fences and walls shall be kept
and maintained as follows in a manner that does not to detract from the
appearance of the immediate neighborhood, and that protects the health,
safety and welfare of the user, occupant and general public:



      (1)   Fences and walls shall not be sagging, broken, rotted or
have defective, broken or missing support posts, fence boards or other
structural members.



      (2)   Fences and walls shall be maintained in such a manner to
prohibit dry rot, holes or warped or leaning areas, or other hazardous
conditions harmful to property owners, occupants or passers-by.



      (3)   Fences and walls shall be maintained free of graffiti.



      (4)   Fences and walls shall not be used as clotheslines.



   (D)   Paved area maintenance. All paved areas including sidewalks,
driveways and private roadways shall be kept and maintained in a manner that
does not detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood, and that
protects the health, safety and welfare of the user, occupant and general
public.



   (E)   Yard and landscaping maintenance. All yards, landscaped areas
and other open space areas of private property shall be kept free of trash,
old building materials, junk, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles, broken or
discarded furniture, appliance, building materials, toys, boxes, salvage
materials, clotheslines, shopping carts and other such material and equipment
which, by its appearance, location or use, makes it incompatible with the
principal use or other predominate principal uses in the neighborhood.



   (F)   Ground and water maintenance. Erosion, subsidence and surface
water problems within a property shall be abated.



   (G)   Residential use and storage of solid waste containers. The
following provisions apply to residential use and storage of solid waste
containers:



      (1)   Trash receptacles shall not be permanently stored in the
front yard of any residential property be may be placed no earlier than 6
p.m. on the day before collection and must be put away no later than 24 hours
following collection.



      (2)   All items too large to fit into containers including,
but not limited to, appliances, furniture and mattresses, shall be disposed
of by self-transport of such items to end-disposal facilities.



      (3)   All loose materials which normally fit into containers
but which are excess as a result of special circumstances such as holidays
shall be bundled and tied securely to prevent them from blowing or scattering
and shall be placed beside the containers.



      (4)   No resident shall deposit household solid waste in any
receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of
litter by pedestrians.



      (5)   Removal of trash or other scavenging from private
residential solid waste containers is prohibited.



   (H)   Nonresidential use and storage of solid waste containers. The
following provisions apply to nonresidential use and storage of solid waste
containers:



      (1)   All establishments and institutions which generate solid
waste for collection by the city or approved contractors shall provide
appropriate containers for storage of solid waste, as proscribed by this
subchapter.



      (2)   Containers shall be kept covered at all times.



      (3)   No owner, manager or employee of a commercial or
industrial business or any institution shall deposit solid waste from that
establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at
any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.090  CLEAR CROSS-VISIBILITY REQUIREMENT.



   To safeguard against vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian collisions caused
by visual obstructions at street intersections, a clear cross-visibility area
shall be maintained at the intersection of public rights-of-way, unobstructed
by any fence or wall taller than 36 inches above the street grade, as
provided in the diagram to the right. At any corner formed by the
intersection of two streets, the required clear cross-visibility area shall
be a triangle having two sides, each 15 feet long extending along the curb
line of each street.







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.100  STREET DEDICATIONS.



   (A)   Dedication as condition of approval. To mitigate potential
problems associated with project generated traffic and circulation,
dedication of right-of-way and construction of street related improvements
may be required as a condition of approval of permits.



   (B)   Dedication standards. The following standards shall govern any
street dedications or improvements:



      (1)   No new construction or renovation shall be granted
utility connections and a certificate of occupancy until one-half of the
street along the lot frontage is dedicated and improved according to city
standards. For development of a portion of a lot, dedication and improvement
shall apply only to abutting streets of that portion of the lot.



      (2)   Additional street improvements shall not be required
when the abutting street is already improved according to city standards.



      (3)   A deed granting an easement for a public street shall be
submitted to the City Engineer before approval of any permit.



      (4)   All streets shall be dedicated to the width established
in the General Plan Circulation Element.



      (5)   Street improvements shall include curb and gutter,
pavement, sidewalks, storm drains and a landscaped parkway, or as otherwise
denoted by the Director of Community Development and Director of Public Works.



      (6)   Street dedications shall include a clear
cross-visibility area at intersections pursuant to § 153.130.090.



   (C)   Dedication interpretation authority. Whenever uncertainty
exists regarding the need for street dedication and improvement, the Director
of Public Works shall determine the need for dedication or improvement based
upon road standards studies and information contained in applicable plans.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.110  COLORS.



   The following standards are established to enhance and preserve the
city’s visual and aesthetic image through the placement and use of color on
structures.



   (A)   Colors on new structures. The following standards shall govern
any new structures within all commercial, industrial, residential and open
space zones.



      (1)   The primary exterior color of the building shall be
limited to an earthen hue background color, which is integral or applied
consistently to the exterior material. Acceptable colors include off-whites,
siennas, light grays, beiges, tans, browns, or other similarly subdued tones,
shades or colors as determined by the Director of Community Development.



      (2)   Special architectural features may use brighter colors
as an accent. Colors shall complement the main body color of the building, as
well as highlight decorative details (such as ornaments, trims, fascias
inlays, tile, ironwork, awnings and other architectural features), as
determined by the Director of Community Development.



      (3)   Exterior structure colors shall be reviewed in
conjunction with a request for any type of entitlement review as required by
this code or as a result of any determination of non-conforming status.



      (4)   Exterior building elevation plans and color samples
indicating proposed color schemes shall be provided as required by the
Director of Community Development.



      (5)    Approval authority for colors on the exterior of all
buildings shall be by the Director of Community Development or Design Review
Committee, as applicable.



   (C)   Colors on existing structures. Existing structures which are a
color that does not comply with the provisions of this section shall be
required to comply within five years of written notice to the property owner.
Structures which are painted after 2004 with a color(s) that does not comply
with the provisions of this section shall be required to comply with this
ordinance within 90 days of written notice to the property owner.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.130.120  TEMPORARY CANOPIES.



   (A)   Canopy structures within view of public right-of-way. Canopy
structures located within the view of a public right-of-way, which includes
any front yard area, side yard and driveway areas, shall be prohibited in all
residential zones, with the following exception.



      (1)   Canopy structures with a projected canopy area of no
greater than 200 square feet, a height no greater than eight feet and a
length of no greater than 20 feet may be permitted in a rear yard area that
is fully screened by fencing or shrubs at least six feet in height.



   (B)   Canopy structure maintenance. Canopy structures shall be
maintained in good condition. Torn fabric and bent or broken support members
shall be replaced or repaired as needed. Any structure considered to be in
disrepair, as determined by the Director of Community Development, shall be
repaired, replaced or removed from the site.



   (C)   Covering material. Reflective, mirrored-type covering material
is prohibited.



   (D)   Nonconformity and abatement. Any existing canopy shall be
deemed nonconforming and is subject to immediate abatement. In no event shall
any such structure be permitted to remain. Should the city receive notice of
a violation relating to any canopy structure, the property will be issued a
notice to completely remove the canopy structure from the site within 72
hours of receiving the notice.



   (E)   Temporary canopy. A temporary permit may be issued for the
placement of a temporary canopy once a year per property, not to exceed a
period of five days. Such permit issuance shall be subject to review and
approval of the Planning Division.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.140  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS



§ 153.140.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The performance standards in this subchapter are established to
minimize public hazards, prevent the creation of nuisances and other
conditions that are potentially harmful or discomforting, protect and improve
the environment and the appearance of the community and deter blighting.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.140.020  APPLICABILITY.



   The performance standards in this subchapter shall apply to all new
construction, renovation and alteration of existing uses or structures in all
zone districts. Buildings and land uses shall not be used or constructed if
they create a dangerous, noxious, fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or
vibration; smoke, dust, odor, air pollution or glare; or liquid or solid
wastes in amounts that adversely affect surrounding areas. These standards
shall be applied in addition to the development standards required for each
zone.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.140.030  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND WASTES.



   (A)   Hazardous materials standards. To protect the health and
welfare of the residents and business community of the city, the use,
storage, manufacturing or disposal of hazardous materials shall be regulated
and monitored according to standards established by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the California Department of Health
Services (DHS), the California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC)
and others identify hazardous materials and prescribe handling, use and
disposal practices.



   (B)   Risk management and prevention program. A risk management and
prevention program, together with an inventory statement that is in
accordance with federal, state and local laws, shall be prepared for all
structures and land uses using materials identified as hazardous by the EPA,
DHS, DTSC or other agency, as applicable.



   (C)   Flammable materials and open fires. The use and storage of
flammable or explosive materials shall comply with the fire prevention code
of the city and all applicable ordinances. No open burning is permitted
unless a written permit for such activity has been issued by the South Coast
Air Quality Management District.



   (D)   Hazardous materials discharge. No liquid or solid waste or
similar material that may contaminate water supplies, interfere with
bacterial processes in sewage treatment or otherwise cause the emission of
dangerous or offensive elements shall be discharged into the public sewer or
private disposal system, except in accordance with the requirements of
Baldwin Parks’ Public Works Code and other applicable regulations.



   (E)   Radioactivity. No activity that emits dangerous levels of
radioactivity shall be permitted at any time.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.140.040  LIGHT AND GLARE.



   (A)   Safety lighting. Lighting for safety purposes shall be
provided at entryways, along walkways, between buildings and within parking
areas.



   (B)   Lighting support structure height. Lighting support structures
shall not exceed the maximum permitted building height for the zone in which
they are located. However, in no event shall a lighting support structure
exceed a height of 40 feet.



   (C)   Candle-power. The candle-power of all lights shall be the
minimum required to accomplish the purpose of the light. The adjacent diagram
shall be used as a guide for determining the lighting required.







 



   (D)   Constant light. Flickering or flashing lights shall not be
permitted. All lights shall be constant and shall not change intensity or
color more often than once every 30 minutes.



   (E)   Buffer areas. Light sources shall not be located in buffer
areas, except those required to illuminate pedestrian walkways.



   (F)   Lighting orientation and shielding. All lights shall be
directed, oriented and shielded to prevent light from shining onto adjacent
properties, onto public rights-of-way, and into driveway areas in a manner
that would obstruct motorists’ vision.



   (G)   Advertising signs lighting. Lighting for advertising signs
shall not cause light or glare on surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.140.050  UTILITIES.



   (A)   Utility service connections. The developer or owner of a
property shall be responsible for utility service connections, in cooperation
with responsible utility companies.



   (B)   Underground utilities. To protect public safety and improve
the appearance of the community, all new development shall be required to
install all electrical distribution lines of 16 kilovolts or less, telephone,
cable television and similar wires that provide customer services
underground, except for the following:



      (1)   Utility poles within six feet of the rear lot line for
terminating underground facilities;



      (2)   Temporary utilities while construction is ongoing;



      (3)   Risers and poles as provided by the developer or owner;



      (4)   Meter boxes, terminal boxes and similar equipment;



      (5)   Transformers, except that all transformers shall be
located in underground vaults where possible; and



      (6)   Infill development in residential zones where existing
overhead lines serve the area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.140.060  ELECTRICAL DISTURBANCE.



   No activity shall be permitted if it causes electrical disturbance that
affects the operation of equipment located beyond the property line. Radio,
television and microwave transmitters shall be suitably wired, shielded and
controlled so that they do not emit electrical waves or impulses that may
affect other electronic devices or equipment.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.140.070  NOISE.



   (A)   Standards applicable to all zones. The regulations in this
section aim to prohibit unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all
sources, as certain noise levels are detrimental to the health and welfare of
individuals. The standards apply to all land uses in all zones unless
otherwise specified.



   (B)   Noise measurements. Noise shall be measured with a sound level
meter that meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI Section S1.4-1979, Type 1 or Type 2). The unit of measure shall be
designated as a decibel (dBA). Noise levels shall be measured in dBA at the
property line of the receptor property, and at least four feet above the
ground and five feet from the nearest structure or wall.  Where a boundary
or wall exists, the measurement shall be made on the receptor property. A
calibration check shall be made of the instrument at the time any noise
measurement is made.



   (C)   Exterior noise standards.



      (1)   No person shall create or allow the creation of noise
that causes the exterior noise level to exceed the noise standards set forth
in Table 153.140.070 (C).



TABLE 153.140.070 (C)



 


Noise Standards




Zone

 

Time

 

Allowable Noise Level (dbA)





Residential
 
7 a.m. - 7 p.m. (Day)
 
55


Residential
 
7 p.m. - 10 p.m. (Evening)
 
50


Residential
 
10 p.m. - 7 a.m. (Night)
 
45


Commercial
 
7 a.m. - 10 p.m. (Day and evening)
 
65


Commercial
 
7 p.m. - 7 a.m. (Night)
 
55


Industrial
 
Anytime
 
65




 



      (2)   Increases in the allowable exterior noise levels listed
in Table 153.140.070 (C) may be permitted in accordance with the standards
outlined in Table 153.140.070 (D).



TABLE 153.140.070 (D)



 


Permitted Increases in Noise Levels




Permitted Increase (dbA)

 

Duration (cumulative minutes per 24 hour period)



5
 
15


10
 
5


15
 
1


20
 
Less than 1 minute



 



   (D)   Interior noise standards.



      (1)   No person shall create or allow the creation of noise
that causes the interior noise level when measured within any dwelling unit
to exceed 45 dbA at any time.



      (2)   Increases in the allowable interior noise level may be
permitted in accordance with the standards outlined in Table 153.140.070 (F).



TABLE 153.140.070 (F)



 


Permitted Increases in Interior Noise Levels




Permitted Increase (dbA)

 

Duration (cumulative minutes per 24 hour period)



5
 
1


10
 
Less than 1 minute



 



   (E)   Enclosed equipment. Utilization of compressors or other
equipment, including, but not limited, to vents, ducts and conduits, but
excluding window or wall-mounted air-conditioners, which are located outside
of the exterior walls of any building, shall be enclosed within a permanent,
noncombustible, view-obscuring enclosure to ensure that the equipment will
not emit noise in excess of the ANSI standards.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.140.080  ODOR.



   (A)   Odor standards. Any process that creates or emits and odors,
gases or other odorous matter shall comply with standards set by the South
Coast Air Quality Management District.



   (B)   Continuous, frequent or repetitive odorous gases. No use shall
be permitted to emit continuous, frequent or repetitive odorous gases such as
to be detectable without the aid of instruments at or beyond the lot line of
the site. An odor emitted no more than 15 minutes in any one day shall not be
deemed as continuous, frequent or repetitive.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.140.090  VIBRATION.



   Vibration may disturb the conduct of certain activities and create
discomfort for some individuals. To minimize the disturbance and
inconvenience from vibrations, no person or use shall create, maintain or
cause ground vibration that is discernable without the aid of instruments to
a person of normal sensitivity at any point on a property that is adjacent to
the property of the vibration source. The ground vibration caused by moving
vehicles, trains, aircraft or temporary construction or demolition is
exempted.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.150  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING



§ 153.150.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The intent of the regulations in this subchapter is to ensure that all
land uses in the city provide adequate off-street parking facilities, loading
areas and vehicle movement areas; that the use of land does not adversely
interfere with the circulation on public rights-of-way; that private on-site
circulation does not pose potential safety issues; and that surrounding uses
are insulated from noise and traffic impacts associated with off-street
parking and loading activities.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.020  APPLICABILITY.



   Every use permitted in each zone shall provide and permanently maintain
off-street parking facilities and vehicular loading spaces as required by the
provisions of this subchapter. The minimum standards shall apply to all new
construction and to the expansion, renovation, conversion or alteration of
any existing use or structure in any zone.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.030  PARKING PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Parking plan. Parking lot design shall be reviewed in
conjunction with a building permit or any other land use or development
permit required for a project. Wherever four or more parking spaces are
required for a new or modified development, a site plan of the premises shall
be required. The site plan shall be submitted to the City Planner and shall
include sufficient detail to determine compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. The Director of Community Development shall have the authority to
require that the parking plan address ingress and egress locations, traffic
movements and other operational conditions.



   (B)   Zoning clearance. Modification or improvement to an existing
parking lot that impacts the parking space layout, or the configuration or
number of parking stalls shall require a zoning clearance to authorize the
modification, pursuant to subchapter 153.210, Administrative Procedures.



   (C)   Exempt from parking plan review. The following parking lot
improvements shall be considered minor in nature and shall be exempt from
parking plan review:



      (1)   Repair of any defects in the surface of a parking area,
including holes and cracks;



      (2)   Resurfacing, slurry coating and restriping of a parking
area with identical delineation of parking spaces; and



      (3)   Repair or replacement of damaged planters and curbs in
the parking area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.040  NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.



   Table 153.150.040 below indicates the minimum number of parking spaces
required for each listed land use.  The following regulations shall apply to
the calculation of required parking spaces.



   (A)   Fractional numbers. Any fractional parking space greater than
or equal to one-half shall be rounded to the next whole number.



   (B)   Off-street parking for unlisted land use. The number of
parking spaces required for land uses not specifically listed shall be
determined by the City Planner based on common functional, product or
compatibility characteristics and activities. Such determination is
considered a formal interpretation of the Zoning Code and shall be decided
and recorded as such.



   (C)   Multiple uses on one site. If more than one land use is
located on a site, the number of required off-street parking spaces shall be
equal to the sum of the number requirements prescribed for each land use.



   (D)   Handicapped/accessible parking. Handicapped/accessible parking
shall be provided as required by state law.



Table 153.150.040



 


Number of Required Parking Spaces




Land Use

 

Minimum Number of Spaces Required





Artist studio/gallery
 
1 space/450 square feet of gross floor area


Automotive and equipment sales/service


a.   Automotive sales/rental/leasing



b.   Automotive repair/installation



c.   Automotive storage



d.   Heavy equipment rental and sales



e.   Large equipment repair

 



a.   1 space/2,000 square feet of site area



b.   1 space/250 square feet of building area, plus 3 spaces/service bay



c.   1 space/employee



d.   1 space/400 square feet of building area, plus 1 space/2,000 square
feet of site area



e.   2 spaces/service bay



Banks and financial services
 
1 space/200 square feet of building area


Banquet hall/lodge/ meeting hall
 
1 space/3 seats or 1 space/35 square feet of assembly area


Caretaker housing
 
1 space/dwelling unit



Day care facilities



a.   Small-family day care home




b.   Large-family day care home





c.   Day care facility

 





a.   No requirement beyond standard single-family residential dwelling



b.   2 spaces for single-family dwelling, plus 1 space/employee not
residing in the home, plus 1 space for drop-off and pick-up



c.   1 space/employee plus 1 space/facility vehicle, plus 1 space/8
children (or adult, if adult day care) at facility licensed capacity



Church or other place of worship
 
1 space/3 fixed seats or 1 space/50 square feet of assembly area, plus spaces
required for auxiliary uses



Commercial entertainment



a.   Motion picture or live theater



b.   Dance halls




c.   Sports arenas

 





a.   1 space/3 seats



b.    1 space/3 seats, plus 1 space/50 square feet of dance floor area



c.   1 space/3 seats




Commercial recreation



a.   Health/fitness club



b.   Billiard/bowling alley



c.   Arcade/internet café

 


a.   1 space/150 square feet of building area

b.    3 spaces/100 square feet of building area

c.   1 space/150 square feet of building area


Drug store/pharmacy
 
1 space/250 square feet of building area or space within an associated
facility




 



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Number of Spaces Required






Dwelling



a.   Single-family detached, duplex, condominium and townhouse



b.   Apartments




c.   Efficiency Apartments



d.   Senior housing

 





a.   2 garage spaces/dwelling unit, plus 1 additional garage or surface
space where dwelling unit contains 5 or more bedrooms



b.   1 carport space/dwelling unit, plus 1 other space/dwelling unit



c.   1 space/dwelling unit



d.   1 space/dwelling unit


For all but single-family detached dwellings, guest parking shall be provided
at 1 space/3 dwelling units


Emergency shelter
 
1 space/5 beds and 2 additional  spaces


Equipment sales and rental


a.   Indoor display



b.   Outdoor display

 



a.   1 space/250 square feet of building area



b.   1 space/1,000 square feet if display area, plus any required for
indoor display or related use



Food and beverage sales:


a.   Grocery store, liquor store, specialty food shop



b.   Convenience store

 


a.   1 space/200 square feet of building area



b.   1 space/150 square feet of building area



Industrial/manufacturing/materials/ goods processing
 
1 space/500 square feet of building area


Hospital/medical service


a.   General hospital service



b.   Medical/dental office



c.   Ambulance service

 



a.   2 spaces/1 bed



b.   1 space/200 square feet of building area



c.   1 space/ambulance, plus 1 space/250 square feet of office space



Hotel/motel
 
1 space/guest room, plus additional parking as required for any on-site
restaurant, conference facility or other auxiliary use


Kennel
 
1 space/250 square feet of site area


Laundry
 
1 space/750 square feet of building area


Mobile home park
 
2 spaces/mobile home site, plus 1 guest space/5 mobile home sites


Office - business and professional (other than medical or dental)
 
1 space/250 square feet of building area


Personal service business
 
1 space/200 square feet of building area




 



 


Land Use

 

Minimum Number of Spaces Required



Restaurant/bar


a.   Bar



b.   Restaurant



c.   Night clubs and discotheques

 



a.   1 space/150 square feet of building area



b.   1 space/100 square feet of building area



c.   1 space/100 square feet of building area



Retail sales - general
 
1 space/250 square feet of building area


School


a.   Elementary or secondary (private)


b.   High school (private)



c.   Specialized and vocational

 



a.    1 space/employee plus, 1 space/classroom




b.   1 space/employee plus, 1 space/ 2 students in 11th and 12th grade



c.   1 space/35 square feet devoted to instructional purposes plus, 1
space/classroom



Self-storage facility
 
4 spaces, plus 2 spaces for management and employees


Service station


a.   Stand-alone station



b.   With accessory retail/convenience market



c.   With vehicle maintenance/repair

 



a.   2 spaces/service bay



b.   5 spaces or first 1,000 square feet, plus 1 space/300 square feet
thereafter



c.   2 spaces/service bay



Warehousing and distribution
 
1 space/1,000 square feet of building area



 



Note:  Building area defined as gross usable area



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.050  PARKING DEVELOPMENT DIMENSIONS AND LOCATIONS.



   All required parking facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following regulations.



   (A)   Minimum standard parking space dimensions and location. Each
standard surface parking space shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Have a minimum width of ten feet, unless it is adjacent
to a structure, such as a fence or wall, and then shall have a minimum width
of ten feet six inches;



      (2)   Have a minimum length of 20 feet;



      (3)   Be located so that an automobile is not required to back
onto a public street; and



      (4)   Maintain at least 24 feet of backup space directly
behind each parking space.



   (B)   Minimum parallel parking space dimensions. Each parallel
surface parking space shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Have a minimum width of ten feet; and



      (2)   Have a minimum length of 23 feet.



   (C)   Minimum enclosed garage parking space dimensions. Each
enclosed garage parking space shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   Have a minimum width of ten feet; and



      (2)   Have a minimum length of 20 feet.



   (D)   Parking located in required yard areas. All parking spaces and
facilities shall not be located within a required front or street side yard
area.



   (E)   Underground parking facilities. Underground parking facilities
shall comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   The parking facilities may be located within a required
yard area, except a required front yard area; and



      (2)   The parking facilities must be constructed in a manner
acceptable to the City Engineer to ensure that there will be adequate lateral
support and safe vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.060  OFF-SITE PARKING IN A RESIDENTIAL ZONE ASSOCIATED WITH A
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL USE.



   In addition to the requirements set forth in § 153.150.050, any
parking lot or structure developed in conjunction with any commercial or
industrial use that is legally established within a residential zone shall
comply with the following standards and limitations.



   (A)   Parking space ingress and egress. Each surface parking space
shall be located so that an automobile is not required to back onto a public
street or onto any adjacent lot developed with a residential use.



   (B)   Passenger vehicle parking only. The parking facility shall be
used solely for the parking of private passenger vehicles belonging to
patrons of the permitted use.



   (C)   Parking facility location. The parking facility shall be
located directly adjacent to the nonresidential use it serves.



   (D)   Perimeter wall. A minimum six-foot-high masonry block wall
shall be constructed on any lot abutting any residentially zoned property.
The wall shall be reduced to three feet in height in and along any required
front yard area.



   (E)   Front yard. A front yard area of at least ten feet in depth is
required for such parking facilities, which shall be fully landscaped.



   (F)   Landscaped buffer. In addition to the masonry block wall, a
fully landscaped buffer strip measuring a minimum of three feet in depth
shall be provided on the nonresidential side of the wall.



   (G)   Access driveway width. The parking facility shall have and
maintain a minimum vehicular access driveway width of 20 feet.  However, the
Director of Community Development shall have the authority to require a wider
driveway width based on city and county fire department requirements and/or
other circumstances associated with the location, purpose, and design of the
driveway.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.070  PARKING DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Pavement. All off-street parking spaces, driveways and aisles
shall be paved with concrete or asphalt concrete pavement in accordance with
adopted city standards.



   (B)   Pavement maintenance. The pavement within all parking and
storage areas shall be structurally sound, clean and free of dust, mud and
trash. All pavement repair, reconstruction or restoration work shall be done
in accordance with city standards.



   (C)   Striping. All parking spaces shall be clearly striped showing
the layout of the intended parking stalls. Striping shall not be less than
three inches in width and shall be maintained so it is clear and visible.



   (D)   Wheel stops. Suitable concrete curb wheel stops or continuous
curbing designed to stop the movement of vehicles may be required as a
condition of project approval. Such curbing shall be securely installed and
permanently maintained.



   (E)   Signage. Where required as conditions of approval for safety
purposes, approved exit, entrance and directional signs and markings shall be
installed and maintained.



   (F)   Screening wall. A solid masonry wall shall screen all parking
areas located abutting a residentially zoned lot, street or alley. The wall
shall be a minimum of 6 feet in height along rear and side yards and 3 feet
along front and street side yard areas. All wall heights shall be measured
from the grade of the surface of the residentially zoned lot. A minimum
six-foot tall landscape berm may be substituted for the required wall
adjacent to a front or street side yard, at the discretion of the City
Planner, or by discretionary applications subject to Planning Commission
review and approval.



   (G)   Lighting. Suitable lighting shall be provided to adequately
illuminate each parking area. The lighting shall be arranged and maintained
to reflect light away from adjacent properties, pursuant to subchapter
153.140, Performance Standards.



   (H)   Surface runoff. All parking lots shall be designed to drain in
a manner that collects surface runoff consistent with standards enforced by
the City Engineer which implements the requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System Permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.080  PARKING LOT AND SPACE LOCATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Parking space access. All required off-street parking spaces
shall be located in parking lots independently accessible from a street at
all times.



   (B)   Location. All required off-street parking spaces shall be
located within 300 feet of the use or development requiring such spaces. If
the parking spaces are provided on a lot separate from the use it serves, a
covenant, acceptable to the City Attorney, shall be recorded associating the
parking spaces to the use or development so served.



   (C)   Parking located in required yard areas. Required off-street
parking spaces shall not be located within any required front and/or street
side yard area.



   (D)   Pedestrian and emergency access. Parking spaces shall not
preclude direct and free access to stairways, walkways, elevators, pedestrian
access ways or fire safety equipment. Such access shall maintain a minimum
width of 44 inches, no part of which shall be within a parking space.



   (E)   City Engineer approval. To ensure that interference with
traffic flow on adjacent streets and alleys will be minimal, the location and
design of all entrances and exits to streets or alleys from off-street
parking facilities shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.090  USE RESTRICTIONS.



   Parking facilities shall be used only temporarily and in conjunction
with the uses they serve. Parking facilities shall not be used for other
purposes, including, but not limited to, the storage of vehicles.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.150.100  PARKING LOT AND STRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS.



   (A)   Vehicle overhang. Overhang of vehicles into landscaped areas
is permitted, provided no vehicle overhangs a sidewalk or walkway and
further, provided the landscape area is three feet or more in depth.



   (B)   Motorcycle stalls. Motorcycle stalls may be used as an option
to utilize areas that would otherwise not be of adequate size for
conventional parking spaces.  Unless otherwise determined by the City
Planner for a particular project, motorcycle stalls shall not count toward
the number of required parking spaces.



   (C)   Parking space abutting wall or pillar. Piers and pillars shall
not encroach into parking spaces. Where a parking space is located abutting a
wall, pillar or similar structure, the parking space width and/or length
shall be increased by a minimum of two feet.



   (D)   Tandem parking prohibited. Each parking space shall be
accessible without requiring the movement of another vehicle. Tandem parking
arrangements are specifically prohibited.



   (E)   Parking lot design.  The city shall adopt by resolution and
maintain standards for the design and development of parking lots.  All
parking lot design and development shall adhere to those standards.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.110  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   Within parking lots, landscaping shall be provided for shade and
climate control, to enhance project design and to screen the visual impact of
vehicles and large expanses of pavement. Landscaped areas within parking lots
shall comply with the following standards.



   (A)   Trees required. Trees shall be planted and maintained in all
parking lots at a ratio of one tree for every ten parking spaces. The trees
shall be placed throughout the parking lot in a manner that will ensure that
most portions of the lot receive tree shade. Trees shall be of a variety that
provides a broad canopy. The minimum size of such trees at planting shall be
36-inch box.



   (B)   Perimeter planter landscaping. Landscaping within the
perimeter planter between the parking lot and any right-of-way shall be
designed and maintained for partial screening of vehicles to a minimum height
of 36 inches, measured from the finished grade of the parking lot. Screening
materials may include any combination of plant materials, earthen berms,
raised planters or other screening device deemed acceptable by the City
Planner or Planning Commission.



   (C)   Required landscaping. A minimum of  10% of the parking lot
area shall be landscaped. Parking lot landscaping shall not count toward
required landscape coverage otherwise required for the zone in which a
project is located.



   (D)   Landscape irrigation and maintenance. All landscaped areas
shall be equipped with an automated irrigation system and shall be maintained
at all times in a neat and healthy condition. To the greatest extent
possible, native and drought-tolerant plant materials shall be used.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.120  SHARED PARKING.



   (A)   Shared parking conditions.  The shared use of parking
facilities may be permitted where particular uses or activities meet the
following conditions:



      (1)   Parking facilities for any nonresidential use may share
parking facilities with another use only if no substantial conflict exists in
the principal operating hours of the uses proposed to share parking
facilities.;



      (2)   The maximum distance between the outer boundaries of the
uses proposed to share parking facilities shall be 300 feet;



      (3)   All prospective users shall agree upon the shared use of
the off-street parking facilities; and



      (4)   The adjacent or nearby properties shall not be adversely
affected by the proposed shared parking.



   (B)   Shared parking report required. A parking report shall be
prepared for review and approval by the Director of Community Development
documenting the parking requirements of each use proposing to share parking
facilities and further documenting how the sharing arrangement will satisfy
the parking needs of each affected use.



   (C)   Legal agreement approved and recorded. If approved by the
Director of Community Development, all parties sharing parking facilities
shall sign a legal agreement. Such agreement shall be approved by the City
Attorney and the Director of Community Development, and recorded with the
County Recorder’s office. Copies of the agreement shall be filed with the
Director of Community Development.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.130  DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.



   (A)   Residential zones. The City and County Fire Department shall
approve the driveway widths and clearances. However, the following minimum
standards shall be observed for driveways in residential zones:



      (1)   The minimum driveway width for R-1-7,500 and R-1 zoned
properties shall be nine feet. No more than one driveway shall be provided on
R-1-7,500 and R-1 lot;



      (2)   The minimum driveway width for R-G and R-3 zoned
properties shall be 26 feet; and



      (3)   The minimum lot street frontage for all residential
zones shall be 50 feet where dual driveways are provided.



   (B)   Nonresidential zones. Driveways serving parking facilities in
nonresidential zones shall a minimum width of 24 feet.  However, the
Director of Community Development shall have the authority to require a wider
driveway width or allow a narrower driveway width based on City and County
Fire Department requirements and/or other circumstances associated with the
location, purpose, and design of the driveway. 



   (C)   Shared driveways. Shared use of driveways used in combination
with abutting properties are permitted for commercial and industrial lots
when proper easements or agreements, approved by the City Attorney, have been
executed, recorded and filed with the city.



   (D)   Safety considerations.



      (1)   Driveways shall be designed and located in such a manner
so as to ensure proper visibility to on-street traffic. Driveway design shall
take into consideration slopes, curvature, speed and conflicting turning
movements in the area. A clear cross-visibility area shall be maintained
pursuant to § 153.130.080 and be kept free of obstacles such as signs,
landscaping and structures.



      (2)   Driveways shall not be located where they would impede
traffic on streets or intersections.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.150.140  OFF-STREET LOADING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Loading minimum dimensions. The minimum dimensions of a
loading space shall be 15 feet in width, 15 feet in length and 14 feet of
vertical clearance.



   (B)   Minimum loading spaces required. The number of off-street
loading spaces shall be in compliance with the standards set forth in Table
153.150.140.



TABLE 153.150.140



 


Required Loading Spaces




Use

 

Minimum Number of Loading Spaces



Nonresidential use with 5,000 to 10,000 square feet of floor area
 

1



Commercial uses with greater than 10,000 square feet of floor area
 

2



Office uses with greater than 10,000 square feet of floor area
 

2



Industrial uses with greater than 10,000 square feet of floor area
 
1 space for every 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof, with a maximum of 4
spaces required, unless otherwise required by Approving Authority to meet
demands of a specific use.



 



 



   (C)   Loading maneuvering. Loading areas shall be designed so that
all truck back-up maneuvering occurs entirely on private property and does
not utilize any public right-of-way.



   (D)   Loading facilities located in setback areas. Off-street
loading facilities may not be located within any required setback area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.150  BICYCLE PARKING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Minimum bicycle parking required. Bicycle parking shall be
provided for multi-family residential, public and civic facilities, schools,
retail, commercial and office uses in accordance with the following
regulations:



      (1)   For multi-family dwelling units, one bicycle space for
every five units shall be provided;



      (2)   For public and civic facilities, one bicycle space for
each three automobile parking spaces, not required to exceed 25 bicycle
spaces; and



      (3)   For retail and office uses,  five bicycle spaces for
the first 25 automobile spaces shall be provided, plus one space per ten
additional vehicle spaces, but not required to exceed 20 bicycle spaces.



   (B)   Bicycle parking location. Bicycle parking shall be located on
a paved surface, in proximity to a building entrance, in a visibly secure and
well-lit location and adjacent to the building served.



   (C)   Bicycle parking minimum dimensions. The minimum dimensions for
bicycle parking areas shall be two feet by six feet, plus a five-foot
maneuvering space behind the bicycle rack area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.150.160  PARKING IN-LIEU PROGRAM.



   (A)   Off-street parking waiver. A maximum of 40% of the off-street
parking required by this subchapter may be waived when the lot or parcel of
land is located within 500 feet of a city-owned public parking facility, with
such distance measured between the property line of the subject parcel and
the nearest point of the city-owned public parking facility.



   (B)    Waiver application and in-lieu fee. An application for waiver
shall be reviewed by the City Council, which shall consider the effect that
the waiver would have on the availability of and need for public parking
within the neighborhood of the project. The City Council may approve the
application in whole or in part, or may deny the application, as it
determines appropriate to protect public health, safety and welfare. If the
City Council determines to grant the application in whole or in part, the
developer of parking the lot or parcel shall pay to the city an in-lieu
parking fee for each space waived, in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council.



   (C)   Parking in-lieu fee special fund. All fees collected pursuant
to this section shall be deposited into a special fund that shall be
specifically utilized for the purposes of providing for, facilitating the use
of or maintaining city-owned public parking spaces.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.160  WATER-EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING STANDARDS



§ 153.160.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   Landscaping minimum standards and guidelines. The landscaping
standards in this subchapter are established to set forth minimum standards
and guidelines for the design, maintenance and installation of
water-efficient landscaping and irrigation systems. Landscaping shall be
utilized to enhance the visual quality of the environment, to reduce heat and
glare, to identify building entries, to provide shade, to relieve the
monotony of long expanses of building and walls, to control soil erosion and
to buffer areas and land uses potentially incompatible with one another.



   (B)   Water conservation. Water conservation measures shall be
addressed through the water-efficient landscape and irrigation design.
Sustainable landscapes are encouraged through actions that conserve and
recycle the resources invested in landscapes.



   (C)   Legislative direction. The California State Legislature has
found:



      (1)   That waters resources in California are of limited
supply and are subject to ever-increasing demands.



      (2)   That the continuation of California's economic
prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for
future uses.



      (3)   That it is the policy of the state to promote the
conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this
valuable resource.



      (4)   That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in
California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an
enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion,
offering fire protection and replacing ecosystems lost to development.



      (5)   That landscape design, installation, maintenance and
management can and should be water efficient.



      (6)   That Cal. Const. Art. X, §2 specifies that the right to
use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use
to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or
unreasonable method of use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Landscape projects. After December 1, 2015 and consistent with
Executive Order No. B-29-15, the provisions of this subchapter shall apply to
all of the following landscape projects:



      (1)   New development projects with an aggregate landscape
area equal to or greater than 500 square feet requiring a building or
landscape permit, plan check, or design review.



      (2)   Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate
landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a
building or landscape permit, plan check or design review.



   (B)   The reporting requirements of this subchapter shall become
effective December 1, 2015 and the remainder of this subchapter shall be
effective no later than February 1, 2016.



   (C)   Any project with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square
feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this subchapter
or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in § 153.160.225.



   (D)   For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater
captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than
2,500 square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water
requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated
graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to §
153.160.220(A)(5) of the city's Municipal Code.



   (E)   Exceptions. The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:



      (1)   Registered local, state or federal historical sites;



      (2)   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a
permanent irrigation system;



      (3)   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a
permanent irrigation system; and



      (4)   Plant collections as part of botanical gardens and
arboretums open to the public.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.030  GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   The landscaping standards provided in this section shall apply to all
parcels within the city.



   (A)   Landscape Design Manual and Design Guidelines Manual. A
Landscape Design Manual and a Design Guidelines Manual, adopted by resolution
of the City Council, shall together establish criteria for the design and
review of landscape and irrigation plans, and such criteria shall be adhered
to in the design of landscape and irrigation plans.



   (B)   Landscape height. Shrubs, flowers, plants and hedges shall not
exceed three feet in height.



   (C)   Tree location. Trees may be planted in any required yard area.



   (D)   Landscaping and irrigation system. Landscaping and a permanent
irrigation system shall be maintained in the area between the front property
line and the dwelling, building or structure.



   (E)   Landscaping maintenance. Landscaping and vegetation shall be
maintained as follows:



      (1)   All landscaped areas shall be kept and maintained in a
manner that does not detract from the appearance of the immediate
neighborhood, and that protects the health, safety and welfare of the user,
occupants and general public.



      (2)   All landscaped areas shall be kept and maintained in a
neat and clean condition, free of weeds, debris, litter, dead, diseased or
dying vegetation and broken or defective decorative elements.



      (3)   Vegetation in landscaped areas shall be mowed, groomed,
trimmed, pruned and watered to maintain a healthy, growing condition.



      (4)   Irrigation systems shall be kept in good working
condition and repair to prevent leaks or public health hazards.



      (5)   Vegetative overgrowth shall not be permitted in a manner
that is likely to harbor rodents, vermin, insects or other nuisances; or
impedes, obstructs or denies pedestrian or other lawful travel on sidewalks,
walkways or other public rights-of-way.



      (6)   All property owners shall water, prune, weed and
otherwise maintain landscaping in the parkway portions of adjoining streets,
including street trees.



      (7)   Parkway landscaping shall be maintained by the abutting
property owner.



   (F)   Water Conservation in Landscaping Act. Landscape planting
shall emphasize drought-tolerant and native species, complement the
architectural design of structures on the site and be suitable for the soil
and climatic conditions of the site. Consistent with the purposes of Cal.
Gov’t Code §§65591 et seq. (Water Conservation in Landscaping Act), all
new and rehabilitated landscape projects shall comply with the following
water-conserving landscape requirements:



      (1)   To the greatest extent possible, landscape material
shall consist of drought-tolerant plants. Low-water-use plants shall be used
in at least 50% of the total planted area. Planted areas shall consist of
plant material well-suited to the given soil and climate of the region. Plant
selection shall take into consideration water conservation through
appropriate use and groupings of plants that are well adapted to particular
sites and require similar watering needs and climatic, geological and
topographical conditions.



      (2)   The maximum area permitted for turf shall be 50% of the
total landscaped area on the site. Higher percentages may be permitted when
sod is an essential part of the development such as playing fields for
schools or parks and residential model units. Turf usage shall only be
permitted for highly visual and functional use areas. Turf shall not be
permitted in areas difficult to irrigate, such as sidewalk strips, slopes
over 15% or narrow pathways.



      (3)   Where decorative water features such as pools, ponds or
waterfalls are used in landscaped areas, such features shall incorporate
recycling of water and where available, use of reclaimed water. Decorative
water features shall be designed to minimize water loss.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.040  RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   The following standards shall apply to all parcels in the R-1 -7,500,
R-1, R-G and R-3 zones:



   (A)   Minimum landscaping of lot. A minimum of 20% of the entire lot
shall be fully landscaped with plant materials.



   (B)   Minimum landscaping of front yard area. A minimum of 50% of
the front yard area between the street and dwelling unit shall be fully
landscaped. Non-landscaped areas shall only be used for the purpose of
pedestrian and vehicular access.



   (C)   Minimum landscaping of side yard area. A minimum of 50% of the
street side yard areas between the street and dwelling unit shall be fully
landscaped.



   (D)   Landscape maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all landscaping, including parkway landscaping, with
maintenance, including, but not limited to, watering, pruning, fertilizing
and replacing deteriorated plant materials.



   (E)   Landscaping adjacent to driveways and buildings. A strip of
landscaping shall be installed and maintained adjacent to all driveways and
buildings located upon any R-G and R-3 zoned lots. The location, area and
design of such landscaped areas are subject to review and approval by the
Director of Community Development or designee.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.050  NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.



   All new and rehabilitated landscaping plans undertaken in conjunction
with any private development project on commercial, industrial, mixed-use and
other nonresidential properties, or those projects requiring a grading,
building or use permit, shall comply with the following standards:



   (A)   Unpaved areas. All unpaved areas, including those portions of
required yard areas not utilized for vehicular and pedestrian access, shall
be landscaped with plant material, including some combination of trees,
shrubs, groundcover and turf. Dry landscape material may be incorporated into
the landscape design.



   (B)   Automatic irrigation system. All landscaped areas shall be
provided with an automatic irrigation system, unless the Director of
Community Development finds that such an irrigation system, due to the size,
location or configuration of the landscaped area, cannot reasonably be
installed and maintained.



   (C)   Plant sizes and plant spacing. To achieve an immediate effect
of a landscape installation and to allow sustained growth of planting
materials, plant material sizes and plant spacing shall comply with the
following standards:



      (1)   The minimum plant size for trees shall be 15 gallons,
unless otherwise specified by the provisions of this chapter. Trees planted
within ten feet of a street, sidewalk, paved trail or walkway shall be a
deep-rooted species or shall be separated from paved surfaces by a root
barrier to prevent physical damage to public improvements. A minimum distance
of 15 feet is required between the center of trees to street light standards,
water meters, back-flow prevention systems, sewer cleanouts and fire hydrants.



      (2)   The minimum plant size for shrubs shall be five gallons.



      (3)   Groundcover, including turf, shall be planted in a
manner to provide 100% coverage within one year of initial planting.



   (D)   Freeway frontage landscaping. Lots with freeway frontage shall
provide and maintain freeway frontage landscaping on private property
fronting the freeway.



   (E)   Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be
provided pursuant to § 153.150.110.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.060  LANDSCAPE APPROVAL PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Preliminary Landscape Design Plan required. In conjunction
with any application subject to design review, a Preliminary Landscape Design
Plan shall be provided. The plan shall contain the information described in
§ 153.160.070, and shall be reviewed by the Design Review Committee for
compliance with the landscape design criteria contained in §§ 153.160.030,
153.160.040 and 153.160.050. The design review process represents the basis
for approval or denial of a design proposal. No grading, building or use
permit can be issued until a project has received approval from the Design
Review Committee.



   (B)   Landscape Design Plan. Following the granting of all required
planning and subdivision approvals, full construction drawings shall be
submitted to the Building Division for plan check approval. Drawings
submitted for plan check shall include the entire Landscape Documentation
Package described in § 153.160.080, including the approved Preliminary
Landscape Design Plan. The Landscape Design Plan shall be in substantial
conformity with the approved Preliminary Landscape Design Plan prior to
issuance of building permits.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.070  PRELIMINARY LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN.



   A Preliminary Landscape Design Plan shall specify the items detailed
below. Special design attributes may require detail drawings and/or the
submittal of manufacturer's literature.



   (A)   Planting material. Locate and identify all landscape planting
material, including trees, shrubs, groundcover and turf. Planting symbols
shall be clearly drawn.



   (B)   Reference. Reference planting symbols, specifying botanical
name, common name, container size, spacing and quantities.



   (C)   Existing mature trees. Locate all existing mature trees,
noting biological name, common name and approximate trunk size, measured at
two feet above existing grade. Note trees to be removed, relocated on-site or
maintained in place.



   (D)   Hydrozones. Express variation in water need. Designate
hydrozones as low, moderate or high water usage.



   (E)   Hardscape. Locate and identify all paving and hardscape
material.



   (F)   Height. Locate and identify the height of all walls, fences
and gates.



   (G)   Outdoor amenities. Locate and identify all outdoor amenity
features, including, but not limited to pools, spas, various water features,
trellises, gazebos, play equipment, picnic tables and benches.



(Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.080  ELEMENTS OF THE LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE.



   The Landscape Documentation Package shall include the following
elements:



   (A)   The following project information shall be provided in the
Landscape Documentation Package.



      (1)   Date.



      (2)   Project applicant.



      (3)   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot
number(s)).



      (4)   Total landscape area (square feet).



      (5)   Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private,
cemetery, homeowner-installed).



      (6)   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and
identify the local water purveyor.



      (7)   Checklist of all documents in Landscape Documentation
Package.



      (8)   Project contacts to include contact information for the
project applicant and property owner.



      (9)   Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to
comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and
submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package."



   (B)   Approved Preliminary Landscape Design Plan.



   (C)   Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet as described in §
153.160.110.



   (D)   Soil Management Report as described in § 153.160.120.



   (E)   Landscape Design Plan as described in § 153.160.090.



   (F)   Irrigation Design Plan as described in § 153.160.100.



   (G)   Grading Design Plan as described in § 153.160.130.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.090  LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN.



   (A)   Landscape design criteria. For the efficient use of water, a
landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function
of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria
shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation Package:



      (1)   Plant material.



         (a)   Any plant may be selected for the landscape,
providing the estimated total water use (as described in § 153.160.110(D))
in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance (as
described in § 153.160.110(C)). To encourage the efficient use of water, the
following is highly recommended:



            1.   Protection and preservation of native species
and natural vegetation.



            2.   Selection of water-conserving plant and turf
species.



            3.   Selection of plants based on disease and pest
resistance.



            4.   Selection of trees based on applicable local
tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines.



            5.   Selection of plants from local and regional
landscape program plant lists.



         (b)   Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with
similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed
water use, as specified in § 153.160.100(A)(2)(d).



         (c)   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately
based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic and topographical
conditions of the project site. To encourage the efficient use of water, the
following is highly recommended:



            1.   Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System
which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude
and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate.



            2.   Recognize the horticultural attributes of
plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage
to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines).



            3.   Consider the solar orientation for plant
placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.



         (d)   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than 25%
where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where
25% means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of
horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).



         (e)   A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone
areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone
around a building or structure is required pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code
§4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable
mulches.



         (f)   The use of invasive and/or noxious plant species
is strongly discouraged.



         (g)   The architectural guidelines of a common interest
development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums,
planned developments and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include
conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use
plants as a group.



      (2)   Water features.



         (a)   Recirculating water systems shall be used for
water features.



         (b)   Where available, recycled water shall be used as a
source for decorative water features.



         (c)   Surface area of a water feature shall be included
in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.



      (3)   Mulch and amendments.



         (a)   A minimum two-inch layer of mulch shall be applied
on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping
or rooting groundcovers or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated.



         (b)   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on
slopes.



         (c)   The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in
hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.



         (d)   Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to
recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants
selected.



   (B)   Landscape design plan attributes. The landscape design plan,
at a minimum, shall have the following items:



      (1)   North arrow.



      (2)   Scale (preferably an engineer's scale of 1"=10' or
1"=20').



      (3)   Delineated property lines and easements, including
utility easements.



      (4)   Adjacent streets, including location, dimension, and
centerline.



      (5)   Existing and proposed public improvements, including
right-of-way and street dedications.



      (6)   All existing and planned buildings and structures on
site.



      (7)   Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter or
other method.



         (a)   Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high
water or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall
be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation.



         (b)   Identify recreational areas.



         (c)   Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to
edible plants.



         (d)   Identify areas irrigated with recycled water.



         (e)   Identify type of mulch and application depth.



         (f)   Identify soil amendments, type and quantity.



      (8)   Identify type and surface area of water features.



      (9)   Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious).



      (10)   Identify location and installation details, and 24-hour
retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best
management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of
stormwater. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the
landscape design plan and examples include, but are not limited, to:



         (a)   Infiltration beds, swales and basins that allow
water to collect and soak into the ground.



         (b)   Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that
retain water, handle excess flow and filter pollutants.



         (c)   Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable
pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff.



      (11)   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment
technologies as discussed in §153.160.220 and their 24-hour retention or
infiltration capacity.



      (12)   Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping
system components and area(s) of distribution.



      (13)   Contain the following statement: "I have complied with
the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water
in the landscape design plan."



      (14)   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect,
licensed landscape contractor or any other person authorized to design a
landscape. (See Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1,
5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701 and 7027.5, § 832.27 of Title
16 of the California Code of Regulations and Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 6721.)



(Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.100  IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN.



   (A)   Irrigation system requirements. This section applies to
landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require
temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the
efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements
listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation
system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for
proper installation, management and maintenance. An irrigation design plan
meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the
Landscape Documentation Package:



      (1)   System.



         (a)   Landscape water meters, defined as either a
dedicated water service meter or private



submeter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of
1,000 square feet and residential irrigated landscaped of 5,000 square feet
or greater. A landscape water meter may be either



            1.   A customer service meter dedicated to
landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or



            2.   A privately owned meter or submeter.



         (b)   Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either
evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory
shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.



         (c)   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the
recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of
a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure
at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure
range for optimal performance.



            1.   If the static pressure is above or below the
required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating
devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps or other devices
shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation
system.



            2.   Static water pressure, dynamic or operating
pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point
of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the
design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the
measurements shall be conducted at installation.



         (d)   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, and the like), either
integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during
unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems,
as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided
during windy or freezing weather or during rain.



         (e)   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball
valve or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the
point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an
emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.



         (f)   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to
protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system.



         (g)   Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions
created by system damage or malfunction are required for all non-residential
landscapes and residential landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger.



         (h)   Master shut-off valves are required on all
projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the
individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a
system equipped with low pressure shut down features.



         (i)   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent
runoff, low head drainage, overspray or other similar conditions where
irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property,
non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways or structures.



         (j)   Relevant information from the soil management
plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when
designing irrigation systems.



         (k)   The design of the irrigation system shall conform
to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.



         (l)   The irrigation system must be designed and
installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as
described in § 153.160.110 regarding the Maximum Applied Water Allowance.



         (m)   All irrigation emission devices must meet the
requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological
Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape
Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard", All sprinkler heads installed in
the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or
higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.



         (n)   It is highly recommended that the project
applicant inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating
demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact
the effectiveness of the irrigation system.



         (o)   In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume
irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.



         (p)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall
have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the
manufacturer's recommendations.



         (q)   Head to head coverage is recommended. However,
sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible
distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations.



         (r)   Swing joints or other riser-protection components
are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes
or in high traffic areas of turf grass.



         (s)   Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on
all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.



         (t)   Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction
shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no
runoff or overspray.



         (u)   Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within
24 inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the
setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line or other low
flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The
surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel or other porous material. These
restrictions may be modified if:



            1.   The landscape area is adjacent to permeable
surfacing and no runoff occurs.



            2.   The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are
designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.



            3.   The irrigation designer specifies an
alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation
Package, and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system
design criteria in § 153.160.100(A)(1)(h). Prevention of overspray and
runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.



         (v)   Slopes greater than 25% shall not be irrigated
with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per
hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an
alternative design or technology, as part of the Landscape Documentation
Package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention
of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.



      (2)   Hydrozone.



         (a)   Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar
site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions and plant materials with similar
water use.



         (b)   Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall
be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that
hydrozone.



         (c)   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate
valves from shrubs, groundcovers and turf to facilitate the appropriate
irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be
considered when designing irrigation for the tree.



         (d)   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate
and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:



            1.   Plant factor calculation is based on the
proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor.



            2.   The plant factor of the higher water using
plant is used for calculations.



         (e)   Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water
use plants shall not be permitted.



         (f)   On the landscape design plan and irrigation design
plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter or other
designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by
each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the
hydrozone information table which is required in the Water Efficient
Landscape Worksheet. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and
programming the controller.



   (B)   Irrigation design plan requirements. The irrigation design
plan, at a minimum, shall contain:



      (1)   The point of connection to the public water supply, and
location and size of separate water meters for landscape.



      (2)   Location, type, size and manufacturer of all components
of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines,
valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick
couplers, pressure regulators and backflow prevention devices.



      (3)   Static water pressure at the point of connection to the
public water supply.



      (4)   Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches
per hour) and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each
station.



      (5)   Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in §
153.160.190.



      (6)   The following statement: "I have complied with the
criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use
of water in the irrigation design plan."



      (7)   The signature of a licensed landscape architect,
certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor or any other
person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701
and 7027.5, §832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations and
Cal. Food & Agric. Code § 6721.)



(Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.110  WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET.



   (A)   Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet required. A project
applicant shall submit the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet, as provided
in the Landscape Design Manual, which contains information on the plant
factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with
each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the
evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does
not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for
non-residential areas, exclusive of Special Landscape Areas. The ETAF for a
landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods
selected. The Maximum Applied Water Allowance is calculated based on the
maximum ETAF allowed and expressed as annual gallons required. The Estimated
Total Water Use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation
method selected for the landscape design. The ETWU must be below the MAWA. In
calculating the Maximum Applied Water Allowance and Estimated Total Water
Use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the Reference
Evapotranspiration Table contained in the water-efficient landscape packet
available from the Community Development Director. Because the city is not
covered by the Reference Evapotranspiration Table as provided in the
Landscape Design Manual, projects shall use data from other cities located
nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, such as the City of
Monrovia, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map,
Department of Water Resources, 1999.



   (B)   Water budget calculations. Water budget calculations shall
adhere to the following requirements:



      (1)   The plant factor used shall be from the Water Use
Classification of Landscape Species (WUCOLS) or from horticultural
researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as
approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant
factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for
moderate water use plants and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.



      (2)   All water features shall be included in the high water
use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low
water use hydrozone.



      (3)   All Special Landscape Areas shall be identified and
their water use calculated as described below.



      (4)   ET Adjustment Factor for new and existing
(non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.120  SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT.



   Soil management report required. To reduce runoff and encourage healthy
plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project
applicant, or his or her designee, as follows:



   (A)   Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and
recommendations.



      (1)   Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with
laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth
for the intended plants.



      (2)   The soil analysis shall include, as applicable:



         (a)   Soil texture.



         (b)   Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or
soil texture infiltration rate table.



         (c)   pH.



         (d)   Total soluble salts.



         (e)   Sodium.



         (f)   Percent organic matter.



         (g)   Recommendations.



   (B)   The project applicant, or his or her designee, shall comply
with one of the following:



      (1)   If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil
analysis report shall be submitted as part of the Landscape Documentation
Package.



      (2)   If significant mass grading is planned, the soil
analysis report shall be submitted as part of the Certificate of Completion.



   (C)   The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely
manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and
irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.



   (D)   The project applicant, or his or her designee, shall submit
documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report
recommendations with Certificate of Completion.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.130  GRADING DESIGN PLAN.



   Grading. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site
shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff and water waste. A grading
plan, prepared by a civil engineer, shall be submitted as part of the
Landscape Documentation Package.



   (A)   The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan
that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area
including all of the following:



      (1)   Height of graded slopes.



      (2)   Drainage patterns.



      (3)   Pad elevations.



      (4)   Finish grade.



      (5)   Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.



   (B)   To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly
recommended that project applicants do the following:



      (1)   Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains
within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes.



      (2)   Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and
undisturbed soil.



      (3)   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.



   (C)   The grading design plan shall contain the following statement:
"I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them
accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and
shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.140  CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.



   Upon receipt of the permit for the Landscape Documentation Package and
completion of the landscaping and irrigation system, the developer shall
submit a Certificate of Completion, as provided in the Landscape Design
Manual, to the Director of Community Development for review. The following
details apply to the Certificate of Completion:



   (A)   Standard form. The Certificate of Completion shall be on a
standard form approved by the Director of Community Development.



   (B)   Compliance statement. The Certificate of Completion shall
include a statement that the landscaping and irrigation system have been
installed in substantial compliance with the approved Landscape Documentation
Package. It shall acknowledge the evaluation of the landscape and irrigation
system by a California licensed landscape architect, landscape contractor or
other individual deemed qualified by the Director of Community Development.



      (1)   Where there have been significant changes made in the
field during construction, these 'as-built' or record drawings shall be
included with the certification;



      (2)   SA diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones
shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management
purposes.



   (C)   Irrigation scheduling parameters. The Certificate of
Completion shall include the irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the
controller pursuant to § 153.160.150.



   (D)   Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule. The Certificate
of Completion shall include a landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule
pursuant to § 153.160.160.



   (E)   Irrigation audit report. The Certificate of Completion shall
include an irrigation audit report pursuant to § 153.160.170.



   (F)   Soils analysis report. The Certificate of Completion shall
include a soils analysis report if not previously submitted with the
Landscape Documentation Package pursuant to § 153.160.120.



   (G)   Submit Certificate of Completion to Director. The developer
shall submit the Certificate of Completion to the Director of Community
Development prior to the issuance of occupancy permits.



   (H)   Submit Certificate of Completion to purveyor and owner. The
developer shall submit approved copies of the Certificate of Completion to
the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.150  IRRIGATION SCHEDULING.



   For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be
developed, managed and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water
required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the
following criteria:



   (A)   Automatic irrigation controllers. Irrigation scheduling shall
be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.



   (B)   Allowable hours of irrigation. Overhead irrigation shall be
scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent
it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor or
other agency, a stricter schedule shall apply. Operation of the irrigation
system outside the normal watering window is only allowed for auditing and
system maintenance.



   (C)   Irrigation schedule implementation. For implementation of the
irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run
times, emission device, flow rate and current reference evapotranspiration,
so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual
applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance.
Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation
controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or
soil moisture sensor data.



   (D)   Automatic controller parameters. Parameters used to set the
automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the
following:



      (1)   The plant establishment period.



      (2)   The established landscape.



      (3)   Temporarily irrigated areas.



   (E)   Stations. Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each
station all of the following that apply:



      (1)   Irrigation interval (days between irrigation).



      (2)   Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation
event to avoid runoff).



      (3)   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation
event to avoid runoff.



      (4)   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a
monthly basis.



      (5)   Application rate setting.



      (6)   Root depth setting.



      (7)   Plant type setting.



      (8)   Soil type.



      (9)   Slope factor setting.



      (10)   Shade factor setting.



      (11)   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.160  LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Regular maintenance schedule required. Landscapes shall be
maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule
shall be submitted with the Certificate of Completion.



   (B)   Regular maintenance schedule contents. A regular maintenance
schedule shall include, but not be limited to: routine inspection, auditing,
adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components, aerating
and dethatching turf areas, topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch,
fertilizing; pruning, weeding in all landscape areas and removing
obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside
the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.



   (C)   Irrigation equipment repairs. Repair of all irrigation
equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their
equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.



   (D)   Sustainable practices. A project applicant is encouraged to
implement established landscape industry sustainable Best Practices for all
landscape maintenance activities.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.170  IRRIGATION AUDIT REPORT.



   (A)   Landscape irrigation audit. All landscape irrigation audits
shall be conducted by a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor.
Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the
landscape or installed the landscape.



   (B)   Irrigation water usage and report. For new construction and
rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as
described in § 153.160.020, the following shall apply:



      (1)   The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit
report with the Certificate of Completion that may include, but is not
limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution
uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow and
preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation
controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure
and any other factors necessary for the accurate programming.



      (2)   The city may require an irrigation water use analysis,
irrigation audits, or irrigation surveys to ensure compliance with the
maximum applied water allowance.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.180  IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY.



   For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average
irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and
0.81 for drip system devices.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.190  RECYCLED WATER.



   (A)   Recycled water irrigation systems. The installation of
recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use
of recycled water.



   (B)   Laws. All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed
and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.



   (C)   Special landscape areas. Landscapes using recycled water are
considered Special Landscape Areas. The ET Adjustment Factor for new and
existing (non-rehabilitated) Special Landscape Areas shall not exceed 1.0.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.192  GRAYWATER SYSTEMS.



   Any proposed graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing
Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable city standards.



(Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.200  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND RAINWATER RETENTION.



   (A)   Stormwater best management practices. Stormwater management
practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges
groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best
management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize
runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are
encouraged.



   (B)   Regional Water Quality Control Board. Project applicants shall
refer to the Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any
applicable stormwater technical requirements.



   (C)   Friable soil. All planted landscape areas are required to have
friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.210  PUBLIC EDUCATION.



   (A)   Statement of intent. Education is a critical component to
promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate
principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save
water is encouraged in the community.



   (B)   Education requirements.



      (1)   All model homes shall be landscaped and shall use signs
and written information to demonstrate the principles of water-efficient
landscapes described in this ordinance.



      (2)   Developers shall provide information to owners of new,
single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation,
management and maintenance of water-efficient landscapes.



      (3)   Signs shall be used to identify all models as an example
of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones,
irrigation equipment and others that contribute to the overall
water-efficient theme.



      (4)   Information shall be provided about designing,
installing, managing and maintaining water-efficient landscapes.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.220  PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPES.



   (A)   Existing landscapes requirements. This section shall apply to
all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are
over one acre in size.



      (1)   For all landscapes that have a water meter, the city
shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation
water use analyses, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate
water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water
use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for
existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing
landscapes shall be calculated as:



   MAWA   =   (0.8) (Eto)(LA)(0.62)



   where:



   MAWA   =   Maximum Applied Water Allowance (gallons per year)



   ETo   =   Reference Evapotranspiration (inches per year)



   0.62   =   Conversion Factor (to gallons)



   0.7      =   ET Adjustment Factor (ETAF)



   LA      =   Landscape Area including SLA (square feet)



   0.3      =   Additional Water Allowance for SLA



   SLA   =   Special Landscape Area (square feet)



      (2)   For all landscapes that do not have a meter, the city
shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation
surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide
recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.



   (B)   Landscape irrigation audits. All landscape irrigation audits
shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.225  PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE.



   Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented
on a landscape plan in order to achieve prescriptive compliance.



   (A)   Submit a Landscape Documentation Package which includes the
following elements:



      (1)   Date.



      (2)   Project applicant.



      (3)   Project location including parcel number.



      (4)   Total landscape area in square feet, including a
breakdown of turf and plant material.



      (5)   Project type (new, rehabilitated, public, private,
home-owner installed).



      (6)   Water supply type (potable, recycled, well) and identify
the local retail water purveyor.



      (7)   Contact information for the project applicant and
property owner.



      (8)   Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to
comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option.”



   (B)   Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four cubic yards per
1,000 square feet to a depth of six inches into landscape area unless
contra-indicated by a soils test).



   (C)   Plant material shall comply with all of the following:



      (1)   For residential areas, install climate adapted plants
that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant
factor 0.3) for 75% of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using
recycled water;



      (2)   For non-residential areas, install climate adapted
plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS
plant factor 0.3) for 100% of the plant area excluding edibles and areas
using recycled water.



      (3)   A minimum three inch layer of mulch shall be applied on
all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is
contraindicated.



   (D)   Turf shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Turf shall not exceed 20% of the landscape area in
residential areas, and there shall be no turf in non-residential areas.



      (2)   Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a
slope of one foot vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal
length;



      (3)   Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet wide,
unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit
vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or
by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.



   (E)   Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:



      (1)   Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must
use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data.



      (2)   Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not
lost programming date in the event the primary power source is interrupted.



      (3)   Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation
system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the
manufacturers recommended pressure range.



      (4)   Manual shut-off valves (such as gate valve, ball valve,
or butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of
connection of the water supply.



      (5)   All irrigation emission devices must meet the
requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014. "Landscape
Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard," All sprinkler heads installed in
the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or
higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.



(Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



§ 153.160.230  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter,
regulations contained in subchapters 153.150, Off-Street Parking and Loading,
and 153.200, Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses, may apply to
landscaping.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4-15)



153.165  TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION 



§ 153.165.010  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   This subchapter establishes regulations and standards to promote the
benefits of a healthy urban forest in the city. Trees are valuable long-term
community assets by, among other things, providing increased shade which
lowers energy needs for cooling, soil stabilization, absorption of
stormwater, carbon sequestration, absorption of particulate matter, habitats
for birds and other animals and general aesthetic benefits. The intent of
this subchapter is as follows.



   (A)   Public trees. Establish standards and measures for preserving
and protecting trees located on public and private property.



   (B)    Mature trees. Establish standards and measures for preserving
and protecting Mature Trees on private property.



   (C)   Tree canopy. Maintain, to the greatest extent possible, a
maximum amount of tree canopy coverage throughout the city.



   (D)   Healthy trees. Maintain trees in a healthy condition through
good arboricultural practices.



   (E)   Protect trees. Prohibit indiscriminate damage and destruction
of trees in the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.020  APPLICABILITY.



   Unless otherwise provided by another provision of this subsection, the
provisions of this subsection shall apply to every public tree, every
required tree and every mature tree located on private property.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.030  TREE ADVISORY BOARD - ESTABLISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Tree Advisory Board established. The Planning Commission is
designated as the city’s Tree Advisory Board.



   (B)   Responsibilities. The Tree Advisory Board shall study the
problems related to tree protection and preservation and determine the needs
of the city related to tree planting and maintenance in public and private
areas, establish and revise as needed the Tree Master Plan as provided in §
153.165.060, and hold discussions of tree-related issues at public meetings.



   (C)   Appeals. Any decisions made by the Tree Officer with regard to
tree maintenance and preservation on private property may be appealed to the
Tree Advisory Board.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.040  TREE DEPARTMENT - ESTABLISHMENT AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   Tree Department designated. The Community Development
Department is designated as the city’s Tree Department. The Tree Officer,
who is designated by Chief Executive Officer, shall implement the functions
of the Tree Department.



   (B)   Responsibilities. The Tree Officer shall:



      (1)   Make determinations on removing a tree from public or
private property based upon a tree report prepared by a certified arborist,
an analysis of the established tree removal criteria and any other relevant
facts;



      (2)   Issue permits and make any determinations specified
under this subchapter; and



      (3)    Prepare the Tree Master Plan for consideration by the
Tree Advisory Board and the City Council.



   (C)   Consultation. All departments, agencies and personnel of the
city shall consult with the Tree Officer prior to engaging in any action
which would require the removal of, or which would otherwise substantially
affect or seriously jeopardize the health of, any public trees.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.050  RESPONSIBILITIES OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS AND CITY.



   (A)   Private property owner responsibilities. It shall be the duty
of the owner or person in possession of each lot in the city to:



      (1)   Accept, protect and provide adequate water to any Public
Tree planted in parkways or other public right-of-way abutting such lots, and
not to interfere with the city’s maintenance and pruning of such trees; and



      (2)   Notify the Tree Officer of any suspected tree hazards or
maintenance needs of any Public Tree on his or her property. An application
for trimming or removal is not required for such notification.



   (B)   City responsibilities. The city shall be responsible for
planting, trimming, pruning, removing and other forms of maintenance of
public trees.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.060  TREE MASTER PLAN.



   (A)   Prepare Tree Master Plan. The Tree Officer or other employee
designated by the Chief Executive Officer, in consultation with the Public
Works Director, shall authorize preparation of a Tree Master Plan. The Tree
Master Plan shall apply to Public Trees and shall include, in general, maps
of streets and public areas in the city upon which there shall be designated
a general plan for the uniform planting of trees, and specifications for the
size and type of such trees permissible within parkways and other public
places within the city. No species other than those included in this list may
be planted in public areas without written permission of the Tree Officer.



   (B)   Administration and implementation. The Tree Department shall
be responsible for administering and implementing the approved Tree Master
Plan, and recommending to the Tree Advisory Board any changes or additions to
the Tree Master Plan.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.070  PUBLIC TREE PLANTING.



   (A)   Planting. Only city personnel or contractors to the city shall
plant trees on public property, including parkways.



   (B)   Approval. All public tree plantings must first be approved by
the Tree Officer as to type of tree



species, location of planting and method of planting.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.165.080  PUBLIC TREE REMOVAL, TRIMMING, MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION.



   (A)   Pruning and removal. All pruning and removal of trees on
public property shall be undertaken only by employees or contractors of the
city.



   (B)   Certified arborist. Persons or firms engaged in the business
of pruning, treating or removing any Public Tree shall be recognized by the
International Society of Arboriculture as a certified arborist. All such
persons or firms shall carry evidence of liability insurance and workmen’s
compensation. No certification shall be required by any public employee doing
such work in the pursuit of his or her public service endeavors.



   (C)   Public tree injury. It shall be unlawful to injure or destroy
any public tree by any means, including, but not limited, to the following:



      (1)   Placement of fences, rocks, gravel, signs, stakes or any
other objects immediately adjacent to a tree, excepting for watering basins
for young trees and objects for the temporary protection of new plantings of
ground cover;



      (2)   Construction of a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel
sidewalk or otherwise filling up the ground area around any such tree with a
closing of less than 42 inches by 42 inches so as to shut off air, light or
water from its roots;



      (3)   The piling of building material and equipment or other
substance and materials around any such tree so as to cause injury thereto;



      (4)   Spraying or pouring any chemical or other deleterious
matter on or around any such tree and the surrounding ground, lawn or
sidewalk;



      (5)   Posting any sign, poster or notice on any such tree, or
by fastening guide wires, cables, ropes, nails, screws or other devices to
any such tree; and/or



      (6)   Causing or encouraging any fire near or around any such
tree.



   (D)   Public tree construction protection. During the construction,
repair, alteration, moving or removal of any building, structure or any other
type of construction in the city, no person in control of such work shall
leave any public tree in the vicinity of such activity without sufficient
guards or protectors to prevent injury to the tree. Protectors shall include,
but not be limited to, chain-link or wood fencing and staking, as determined
by the Tree Officer.



   (E)   Application for tree pruning or removal. A decision on an
application for tree pruning or removal shall be made according to the
standards of this subchapter and shall be subject to the procedures for
appeal and review set forth in § 153.210.150. All applications shall be
reviewed by a certified arborist at the expense of the applicant.



   (F)   Written notice. No noticed public hearing shall be required
for an application under this subchapter unless otherwise required by another
section of this code or state or federal law. The Tree Officer shall give at
least ten days written notice to abutting property owners prior to removal of
any public tree. No notice shall be required if the public tree has been
determined to be exempted from this subchapter pursuant to § 153.165.100. 
In the event of a decision under this subchapter for the removal of five or
more public trees in a given area, the Tree Officer shall also notify the
Tree Advisory Board.



   (G)   Replacement. The city may replace at no cost to the abutting
property owner those Public Trees which necessitate removal and replacement,
as determined by the Tree Officer. This may occur only in cases where the
property owner was not responsible for the conditions and events
necessitating replacement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.165.090  PRIVATE PROPERTY TREE REMOVAL AND TRIMMING.



   (A)   Tree removal permit. No person shall remove a mature tree or
required tree on private property without first obtaining a permit from the
Tree Officer. The Tree Officer shall grant a permit to remove a mature tree
or required tree only if one of the following findings can be made:



      (1)   The mature tree or required tree constitutes a nuisance
or hazard by virtue of its condition, location, species, proximity to
existing structures, walkways or utilities;



      (2)   The removal of the mature tree or required tree is
deemed necessary by a certified arborist to protect the health of other trees
in the vicinity due to disease or infestation affecting the subject tree;



      (3)   The substantial trimming or removal of the mature tree
or required tree is deemed necessary to accommodate solar access pursuant to
the California Solar Shade Control Act of 1979;



      (4)    The substantial trimming or removal of the mature tree
or required tree is necessary to prevent a substantial inconvenience or
financial hardship to the property owner; or



      (5)   A suitable replacement tree in terms of species and
ultimate size will be planted within six months of the permitted removal of
the subject tree.



      The size, location and species of the replacement tree(s) shall
be determined by the Tree Officer with consultation of the applicant and
taking into consideration such factors as the size, location, type of tree,
number of trees on the property and number of trees in the surrounding
neighborhood. The Tree Officer may consider the option of relocating the
subject tree in another location on the subject property.



   (B)   Tree removal decision and appeal. A decision on an application
for removal of a private tree shall be made according to the standards of
this subchapter and shall be subject to the procedures for appeal and review
set forth in § 153.210.150. No noticed public hearing shall be required for
an application under this subchapter unless otherwise required by another
subchapter of this chapter or state or federal law.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.165.100  EXEMPTIONS FROM THIS SUBCHAPTER.



   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to the following.



   (A)   Threat to public property or welfare. The removal or pruning
of any tree which poses an imminent threat to public property or welfare, as
determined by a member of a responding law enforcement agency, the Los
Angeles County Fire Department or the Public Works Director.



   (B)   Normal pruning. Normal and routine trimming or pruning of
trees on private property that does not result in damage or death to a tree
and/or does not result in loss of more 50% of the live foliage and limbs or
root base, and removal of deadwood.



   (C)   Required removal. The removal of any tree on public property
as directed by any county, state or federal agency or insurance provider.



   (D)   Diseased or dead tree. The removal of a diseased or dead tree
on public property as determined by the Tree Officer.



   (E)   Utility tree pruning. Tree pruning necessary to provide
clearance from existing overhead electric lines as mandated by the California
Public Utilities Commission.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.170  SIGN REGULATIONS



§ 153.170.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The intent and purpose of these sign regulations are to:



   (A)   Urban design and safety standards. Implement the city's urban
design and safety standards as set forth in the general plan.



   (B)   City appearance. Maintain and enhance the city's appearance by
regulating the design, character, location, number, type, quality of
materials, size, illumination and maintenance of signs.



   (C)   Pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. Protect and improve
pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety by balancing the need for signs which
facilitate the safe and smooth flow of traffic without an excess of signage
which may distract motorists, overload their capacity to quickly receive
information, visually obstruct traffic signs or otherwise create congestion
and safety hazards.



   (D)   Traffic safety hazards. Eliminate traffic safety hazards to
pedestrians and motorists posed by off-site signs.



   (E)   On-site signage. Generally limit private signage to on-site
locations to protect the aesthetic environment from the visual clutter
associated with the unrestricted proliferation of signs, while providing
channels of communication to the public.



   (F)   Communication. Allow the communication of information for
commercial and noncommercial purposes without regulating the content of
noncommercial messages.



   (G)   Free speech. Respect and protect the right of free speech by
sign display, while reasonably regulating the structure, location and other
non-communicative aspects of signs, generally for the



public health, safety, welfare and specifically to serve the public interests
in traffic and pedestrian safety and community aesthetics.



   (H)   Nearby effects. Minimize the possible adverse effects of signs
on nearby public and private property.



   (I)   Visual quality. Serve the city's interests in maintaining and
enhancing its visual appeal by preventing the degradation of visual quality
which can result from excess signage.



   (J)   Protect investment and quality of life. Protect investments in
property and lifestyle quality made by persons who choose to live, work or do
business in the city.



   (K)   Residential neighborhoods. Defend the peace and tranquility of
residential zones and neighborhoods.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.020  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Compliance. Signs or advertising displays that are erected or
maintained within the city shall comply with the provisions of this
subchapter and any other applicable Federal, state and local statues or laws.



   (B)   Additive requirements. The requirements of this subchapter
shall be applied in addition to any other requirements contained in the
zoning code.



   (C)   Conflicts. In the event of direct and irreconcilable conflict
between any provisions of this subchapter and any other provisions of the
zoning code or this code, the more restrictive requirements shall govern.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.030  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Sign permit required. Unless otherwise exempted by §
153.170.040, a sign permit shall be required prior to the placement,
construction or physical alteration of the size, height or location of any
sign or advertising display in the city. A sign permit may be obtained from
the planning division pursuant to the provisions of §§ 153.210 et seq.,
Administrative Procedures.



   (B)   Variance. Signs that do not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter shall not be permitted unless a variance has been granted
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 153.210 et seq., Administrative Procedures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.040  EXEMPT SIGNS.



   (A)   Applicability. Unless otherwise specified, the signs listed in
this subchapter are categorically exempt from the permit requirement. The
signs listed in this section are subject to compliance with all other
provisions of this subchapter and other applicable codes, regulations or
rules.



   (B)   Restrictions on illumination. All exempt signs shall be
non-illuminated, externally illuminated, or internally illuminated.



   (C)   Exempt signs. The following categories of signs do not require
a sign permit:



      (1)   Non-residential signs. On non-residential property:



         (a)   Up to 20 flags or pennants with a combined area of
no more than 80 square feet on a staff or pole of no longer than 20 feet,
however, no individual flag or pennant may exceed 15 square feet in area;



         (b)   Up to 15 permanent signs with a combined area of
no more than 45 square feet and a



height of no more than eight feet, however, no individual sign may exceed 15
square feet in area;



         (c)   Up to four temporary window signs with a combined
area of no more than 24 square feet, however, no individual sign may exceed
12 square feet in area and no more than 40% of the area of any given window
may be covered by window signs;



         (d)   Up to eight other temporary signs with a combined
area of no more than 30 square feet and a height of no more than four feet,
however, no individual sign may exceed 15 square feet in area. Size limits
for window signs with transparent backgrounds (instead of opaque backgrounds)
placed on glass doors are doubled; and



         (e)   Where properties include multiple tenants, each
tenant may display two flags of no more than 12 square feet, and temporary or
permanent signs with a combined area of no more than nine square feet, in
addition to the non-residential exemption provided above.



   (D)   Residential signs.



      (1)   On residential property:



         (a)   Up to three flags or pennants of up to ten square
feet on a staff or pole of no longer than eight feet;



         (b)   Up to three permanent signs with a combined area
of no more than ten square feet and a height of no more than four feet;



         (c)   Up to six temporary window signs with a combined
area of no more than nine square feet, except that no more than 50% of the
area of any given window may be covered by window signs; and



         (d)   Up to four other temporary signs with a combined
area of no more than ten square feet and a height of no more than three feet.



         (e)   Where residential properties include multiple
dwelling units, each dwelling unit may display two flags of no more than ten
square feet, and temporary or permanent signs with a combined area of no more
than six square feet, in addition to the basic residential exemption provided
above.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.050  PROHIBITED SIGNS.



   The following signs are prohibited on any property within the city:



   (A)   Abandoned signs.



   (B)   Animated signs.



   (C)   Inflatable/balloon signs.



   (D)   Roof signs.



   (E)   Murals.



   (F)   Can (box) signs.



   (G)   Off-site signs (billboards).



   (H)   Off-site signs. Off-site identification signs, except
government and civic signs as provided in this subchapter.



   (I)   Portable signs, including A-frame, sandwich board signs, and
vehicle-mounted signs.



   (J)   Cross-visibility area. Any sign located within a required
clear cross-visibility area.



   (K)   Permission not granted. Signs erected without the permission
of the owner of the property on which the sign is located.



   (L)   Signs in the public right-of-way. Signs within or projecting
over a public right-of-way.



   (M)   Imitation traffic signs. Signs which purport to be, are an
imitation of, or resemble official traffic warning devices or signs, that by
color, location or lighting may confuse or disorient vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, impede the flow of traffic or create a traffic hazard, excluding
authorized on-site directional signs.



   (N)   Painted signs. Signs painted directly on an exterior wall,
fence, fascia or parapet.



   (O)   Signs attached to utility poles. Signs attached to utility
poles, unless specifically approved by the utility company in writing.



   (P)   Signs attached other features. Signs attached to trees,
fences, bridges or light poles.



   (Q)   Vehicle signs. Vehicle signs, where the primary purpose or use
of the vehicle is the display of advertising material. This does not apply to
signs maintained on vehicles when such advertising is incidental to the
primary purpose for which the vehicle is being used.



   (R)   Disrepair. Any sign that is in disrepair.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.170.060  TEMPORARY SIGNS.



   (A)   Permitted temporary signs. In addition to exempt temporary
signs pursuant to § 153.170.040(C), upon application for and approval of a
permit the following types of temporary signs may be displayed on the site of
any non-residential property, provided they comply with applicable standards
provided in division (B) below:



      (1)   A banner not exceeding 35 square feet.



      (2)   A single-pole flag with ground spikes not exceeding 35
square feet.



   (B)   Standard for temporary signs. Such temporary signs under
division (A) above shall comply with the following standards:



      (1)   Maximum number. A maximum of one banner and one
single-pole flag permitted under this section may be displayed for each
non-residential property at any given time.



      (2)   Maximum duration. Each temporary sign may be displayed
for a maximum of 30 consecutive days. Temporary signs may be displayed up to
four nonconsecutive times within a 12-month period.



      (3)   Location and attachment. Temporary banner signs shall be
attached to the main building wall or fence and shall not extend above the
roofline or height of the wall or fence on which they are located.



      (4)   Balloons. Balloons shall not be used in conjunction with
any temporary sign.



      (5)   Attachment and illumination. Temporary banner signs
shall not be freestanding or illuminated.



      (6)   Safety and maintenance. Temporary signs shall be kept in
a safe and presentable condition.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1371, passed 4-15-15; Am. Ord. 1397,
passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.070  GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS.



   All signs, including exempt and temporary signs, located within all
zones shall comply with the following regulations:



   (A)   Sign lettering and numbering.



      (1)   To facilitate emergency response by public safety
personnel, the sign nearest to the public entrance of a business which
utilizes any non-Roman alphabet letters, characters and/or symbols shall also
contain a general description of the business and other entities occupying
the building written in English. The English language portion of the sign
shall be readable from the public right-of-way.



      (2)   In all cases where a sign or other zoning permit is
required by this chapter or other law, the applicant shall submit to the city
a certification, issued under penalty of perjury under the laws of the State
of California, containing an English language translation of all non-Roman
alphabet letters, characters and symbols proposed to be displayed on the
sign. An application for such permit shall not be deemed complete until the
applicant has provided such certification.



   (B)   Sign lighting and illumination.



      (1)   Unless otherwise specified for exempt and temporary
signs, signs may be non-illuminated or internally illuminated. If internally
illuminated, illumination of individual letters and logos is preferred. The
Approving Authority of the sign permit may authorize external illumination.



      (2)   All signs shall be arranged, operated, shielded and
maintained to prevent any glare, reflection, nuisance, inconvenience or
hazardous interference of any kind to abutting or adjacent properties,
streets and walkways.



   (C)   Sign location. No internally illuminated sign placed on any
commercial or industrially zoned property shall be located within 50 feet of
the lot line, if such line is shared with any residentially zoned lot, and if
the sign face area is oriented toward the residentially zoned lot.



   (D)   Sign aesthetics.



      (1)   All newly erected signs shall comply with the sign
design guidelines manual.



      (2)   All permanent signs located within any zone shall be
compatible to the associated structure's architecture and design features.



      (3)   All permanent signs located on commercial and industrial
structures shall be integrated within structure's architecture.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.080  SIGNS REGULATIONS BY ZONE.



   Table 153.170.080 identifies the types of signs permitted by zone
district and the development standards applicable to such signs. In addition
to the requirements set forth in Table 153.170.080, the following criteria
shall apply:



   (A)   Freestanding signs.



      (1)   As indicated in Table 153.170.080, freestanding signs
shall be permitted only in the FC, C-2 and I-C zones that have freeway
frontage.



      (2)   The base of all freestanding signs shall be landscaped
at the time of sign installation such that the base is fully obscured by
landscaping to a minimum height of six feet within three years of landscape
installation. Such landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and healthy
condition at all times.



   (B)   Monument signs. Monument signs may be located in planter
medians abutting a driveway or within the project driveway.



Table 153.170.080



 




Sign Regulations by Zone




Zone

 

Sign Type

 

Maximum Number

 

Maximum Sign Area

 

Maximum Height

 

Notes



R-G and R-3
 

Monument

 

1

 

24 sf

 

4 ft

 
 



Wall

 

1

 

36 sf

 

4 ft

 
 


C-1,
MU-2
 

Monument

 

1 per frontage

 

32 sf

 

6 ft

 
 



Wall

 

1 or more

 

50 sf

 

4 ft

 
 


C-2,
F-C,
I-C,
MU-1 withou t freewa y fronta ge
 

Monument

 

1 per frontage

 

64 sf

 

12 ft

 
 



Wall

 

1 or more

 

2 sf of sign area per linear foot of primary building frontage

 

6 ft

 
 



Secondary wall

 

1 or more

 

1 sf of sign area per linear foot of primary building frontage

 

4 ft

 
 


C-2, F-C, I-C, with freeway frontage
 

Freestandi ng

 

1

 

1 sf of sign area per 1 linear foot of street frontage

 

80 ft

 
1. A maximum of 1 freestanding sign is permitted for lots with less than 800
linear feet of street frontage. One additional freestanding sign is permitted
for lots with more than 800 linear feet of street frontage. For this purpose,
a commercial center is considered a single lot.

2. Additional sign face area for monument signs may be granted in lieu of use
of freestanding signs, per criteria established by the Director of Community
Development.


I
 

Monument

 

1

 

40 sf

 

8 ft

 
 



Wall

 

1 or more

 

1 sf of sign area for each linear foot of primary building frontage

 

6 ft

 
 




 



   (C)   Wall signs.



      (1)   A maximum of three wall signs shall be permitted for
each wall of a commercial unit that contains a main entrance or is adjacent
to a street.



      (2)   A maximum of one wall sign shall be permitted for each
wall of a commercial unit that does not contain a main entrance.



      (3)   Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from
the building wall.



      (4)   Sign height shall be measured from the bottom to the top
of the sign.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1371, passed 4-15-15; Am. Ord. 1397,
passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.090  SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES.



   In addition to other standards set forth in this subchapter, the
following land uses are subject to the following regulations:



   (A)   Service stations.



      (1)   Each service station may maintain a maximum of four
canopy signs, each having no more than 50 square feet of sign face area.



      (2)   Each service station may maintain one permanently
installed sign not to exceed 40 square feet in area.



      (3)   Each service station may maintain a maximum of two
permanently installed or portable signs not exceeding 20 square feet in area.



   (B)   Automobile dealerships.



      (1)   Each automobile dealership may display banners and
pennants with a total area not to exceed 15% of the square footage of the lot
upon which they are located.



      (2)   Each automobile dealership may display a maximum of 20
banners attached to freestanding light standards. Each banner shall not
exceed 50 square feet of area.



      (3)   Each automobile dealership may display one pennant for
every 2,500 square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of 12 such pennants.
Each pennant shall not exceed 20 square feet in area.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1371, passed 4-15-15; Am. Ord. 1397,
passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 11-15-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.170.100  SIGN CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Compliance with codes and development standards. All signs
shall comply with the appropriate provisions of the state building code, as
adopted by the city, relative to design, construction, structural integrity,
connections and safety. Signs shall also comply with the provisions of the
applicable electrical code and the development standards.



   (B)   Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a good
structural condition at all times and be kept neatly painted, including all
metal parts and supports that are not made of a rust resistant material. Any
crack, broken surface, malfunction, missing sign copy or other damaged
portion shall be repaired or replaced.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.170.110  OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS.



   In addition to the requirements contained in this subchapter,
regulations contained in this chapter may apply to signage in the following
sections:



   153.210.090   General application processing procedures



   153.210.265   Time for determination



   153.220.200   S definitions.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1397, passed 4-5-17; Am. Ord. 1402,
passed 11-15-17)



153.180  WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES



§ 153.180.010  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions for terms used in this subchapter are contained in
subchapter 153.200 (Definitions); see WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES and
related terms.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.020  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   These provisions are intended to establish criteria for the
siting, design, modifications and maintenance of wireless communications
facilities within the city as specifically set forth herein and in standards
that may be enacted by resolution pursuant to this subchapter.



   (B)   These provisions are further intended to implement the land
use regulation of telecommunications facilities as permitted pursuant to the
1996 Federal Telecommunications Act. As such, these provisions are not
intended to unduly restrict or unreasonably interfere with the development of
the competitive wireless communications marketplace within the city.



   (C)   The standards and guidelines established for antennas, towers,
and/or wireless communications facilities in this subchapter are intended to
promote the following goals:



      (1)   Ensure the health, safety and general welfare of the
community while enabling the installation of antennas to serve the city’s
residents and business community;



      (2)   Ensure a communications network that will serve an
effective role in the city’s emergency response system and generally
provide full service coverage for personal wireless communications services;



      (3)   Protect the visual character of the city through careful
design, siting, landscaping, and innovative camouflaging techniques for
antennas;



      (4)   Encourage the installation of new towers and antennas in
the Commercial and Industrial zones;



      (5)   Limit the proliferation of new towers by permitting the
construction of new towers only after all other reasonable opportunities have
been exhausted and to encourage the co-location of antennas so as to minimize
adverse visual impacts; and



      (6)   Provide for the uniform application of standards and
guidelines for the siting, design, modification and maintenance of
communications facilities as allowed under state law and the 1996
Telecommunications Act, as may be amended.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.030  EXEMPT FACILITIES.



   The following types of noncommercial, receive-only wireless
communications facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this
subchapter.



   (A)   Common skeletal-type radio and television antenna that are:



      (1)   Used to receive UHF, VHF, AM and FM signals of off-air
broadcasts from radio and television stations;



      (2)   Ground-mounted or roof-mounted; and



      (3)   Not higher than ten feet above the roof ridgeline.



   (B)   As long as exempted by federal law, satellite earth stations
antennas, which are designed to receive broadcast signals directly from
orbiting satellites, are exempt from this subchapter as follows unless
otherwise stated herein:



      (1)   In residential zoning districts, satellite earth
stations antennas that are one meter or less in diameter;



      (2)   In commercial and industrial zones, satellite earth
stations antennas that are two meters or less in diameter; and



      (3)   When technically feasible, exempt satellite earth
stations antennas shall not be placed in a front yard area, at the front of
the building or home which the antenna serves, or in any other location
visible from the public right-of-way.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.040  APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Exempt wireless communications facilities shall not require
city review/approval.



   (B)   The following approval processes are established for all
wireless communications facilities on private property, where permitted by
Table 153.180.050.



      (1)   Wireless communications facilities subject to design
review.  Wireless communications facilities that meet all of the following
criteria shall be subject to design review in compliance with city standards
and any applicable specific plan or design guidelines.  The design review
shall be either approved, conditionally approved or denied by the Director,
which decision shall be final unless appealed to the Commission in accordance
with § 153.210.150 (Appeals).



         (a)   Wireless communications facilities not located
within a residential zoning district nor on a property used for residential
purposes.



         (b)   Wireless communications facilities not requiring
the construction of a new tower or other supporting structure.



         (c)   Wireless communications facilities incorporating a
stealth design in which wireless communications facilities are:



            i.   Flush-mounted on a existing structure and
painted or otherwise concealed; or



            ii.   Incorporated into a design element (e.g.,
identification monument, screened by an architectural treatment such as a
parapet, or sign) and not visible from nearby properties or the right-of-way.



         (d)   Wireless communications facilities that comply
with all applicable development criteria and performance standards contained
in this subchapter and any applicable specific plans.



         (e)   All related equipment, including  shelters,
vaults, storage sheds or buildings, fencing or other associated devices are
underground or otherwise not visible from nearby properties or the public
right-of-way.



      (3)   Wireless communications facilities requiring a
conditional use permit.  Wireless communications facilities that are not
exempt or do not meet the criteria of division (B)(1) of this section shall
be subject to a conditional use permit in compliance with standards herein
and part 9 of subchapter 153.210, Conditional User Permits. Reasonable
conditions may be imposed to protect nearby properties and the public health,
safety and general welfare. Reasonable conditions shall include, but not be
limited to, requiring the construction of walls, fencing, screening, warning
signs, maintenance, as well as the imposition of other conditions. 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.050  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   Table 153.180.050 identifies the general standards applicable to
wireless communications facilities located on private properties in the
city.  Section 153.030.030 of this code shall govern zoning of all property
including the right-of-way.



Table 153.180.050



 


Antenna Development Standards




Development Standards

 

Residential, Mixed Use, and Open Space Zones

 

Commercial and Industrial Zones



Distance from any property line 
 

10 feet 

 

5 feet 



Distance from other structures 
 

6 feet 

 

6 feet



Minimum screening height for equipment shelter or similar ground-mounted
devices
 

6 feet 

 

6 feet



Allowed setback location 
 

Rear setback only

 

Rear or side setback



Maximum height 
 

30 feet.
See also section 153.180.080.

 
60 feet, unless attached to an existing legal conforming structure, then the
maximum height allowed shall be no more than 10 feet above said structure and
antenna shall be required to be fully stealthed.  See also section
153.180.080.



 



 


Development Standards

 

Residential, Mixed Use, and Open Space Zones

 

Commercial and Industrial Zones



Maximum number of antennas or antenna arrays per parcel (including exempt
antennas)a
 

2

 

3



Roof-mounted antennas
 
Prohibited unless  an exception is granted pursuant to section 153.180.100 
and any applicable permit
 
Allowed if mounted on flat portion of roof with parapets or other screening
that matches architectural features of structure


Wireless communications facilitiesb
 
Prohibited without  an exception granted pursuant to section 153.180.100 
and a conditional use permit and any other applicable permit
 

Conditional use permit required




Maximum number of free-standing towers

 

0

 

1




 



(a)   Any proposed co-located antennas that meet the criteria of Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 65850.6 and 65964 shall be permitted as provided therein.



(b)   Any permitted wireless communications facilities shall comply with
the minimum setbacks required for the applicable residential zoning district
unless fully stealthed and attached to or on an existing legal conforming
structure, and shall be 500 feet from another free-standing wireless
telecommunications facility. 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.060  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   The following regulations shall apply to the establishment,
installation and operation of antennas including wireless communications
facilities in all zoning districts.



   (A)   Compliance with building and electrical codes. Wireless
communications facilities shall be installed and maintained in compliance
with the requirements of the city’s building code and electrical code.
Installers shall obtain a building permit and an electrical permit before
installation. 



   (B)   Advertising prohibited.  Advertising material shall not be
allowed on wireless communications facilities or on any antennas.



   (C)   Traffic Signals. Wireless communications facilities shall not
be permitted to be installed on traffic signals within the city unless
permitted by the provisions of § 153.030.030 of this code.



   (D)   Undergrounding. Electrical wiring associated with an wireless
communications facilities shall be buried underground or hidden in a manner
acceptable to the community development director or his or her designee.  To
the extent technologically feasible, all vaults, equipment, shelters,
structures, or any other device related to or required for use of an antenna,
related structure or wireless communications facility shall be underground
where all other utilities are required to be underground. Where
technologically feasible, the use of microwave dishes shall be prohibited and
underground lines utilized.



   (E)   Noise.  No equipment shall be operated so as to increase the
noise in the vicinity of the equipment in excess of five decibels, other than
in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator or monthly
testing of said generator if the testing lasts no longer than 15 minutes. 
In all emergency situations, the city shall be immediately notified of the
use of a backup generator and, on the next city business day, the operator
shall secure all required permits and approvals necessary for the operation
of the generator. 



   (F)   Projections and anchoring in setback areas. No antenna array
may extend beyond any property lines or into a front setback area. Guy wires
may be attached to the structure but shall not be anchored within a front
setback area.  No guy wires shall be utilized in the public right-of-way
unless alternate designs are infeasible and approved by the Public Works
Director. 



   (G)   Design considerations. The wireless communications facilities,
including guy wires, supporting structures, and accessory equipment, shall be
located and designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding
properties and from public streets. The materials used in constructing the
antenna shall not be unnecessarily bright, shiny, garish, or reflective.
Cellular, PCS and other wireless communications facilities shall be designed
to be compatible with the surrounding physical environment by blending with
the existing architecture and landscaping and by being as unobtrusive as
possible.



   (H)   Specific plans. All wireless communications facilities shall
comply with any applicable and adopted specific plan.



   (I)   Redevelopment plans.  All wireless communications facilities
shall comply with any applicable and adopted redevelopment plan. In addition,
all proposed antennas in a redevelopment plan area shall be reviewed and
approved by the Director.



   (J)   Equipment shelter and landscaping.  All ground mounted
antennas shall be screened by walls, fences, trellises or landscaping at
least six feet in height so as to completely screen, camouflage and/or
obscure visibility of the equipment shelter or any other ground mounted
equipment, from public view. The equipment shelter shall be designed so as to
be harmonious with and blend with the natural features, and be compatible
with buildings and structures surrounding such structure.  In addition and
when applicable, landscaping shall be of a type and variety, and installed at
sufficient size, to be capable of growing within one year so as to screen and
obscure the visibility or camouflages the antenna.  Irrigation shall also be
installed when needed to maintain landscaping.  No chain link fence shall be
permitted. 



   (K)   Aesthetically compatible. All wireless communications
facilities and associated equipment shall be aesthetically compatible with
surrounding uses and shall be designed and or located so as to avoid any
adverse aesthetic impacts arising from the proposed use. The antennas,
supporting structure and equipment shall be a color that blends the antennas
and associated equipment with the natural setting and built environment and
helps camouflage the antennas.



   (L)   Electrical requirements. Every wireless communications
facility shall be adequately grounded with an adequate ground wire for
protection against a direct strike of lightning. Ground wires shall be of the
type approved by the latest edition of the electrical code for grounding
masts and lightning arrestors and shall be installed in a mechanical manner,
with as few bends as possible, maintaining a clearance of at least two inches
from combustible materials. Lightning arrestors shall be used that are
approved as safe by the Underwriter’s Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of
the line shall be adequately protected with proper arrestors to remove static
charges accumulated on the line. When lead-in conductors of polyethylene
ribbon-type are used, lightning arrestors shall be installed in each
conductor. When coaxial cable or shielded twin lead is used for lead-in,
suitable protection may be provided without lightning arrestors by grounding
the exterior metal sheath.



   (M)   Performance certification. For all wireless communications
facilities, a certification shall be required to be submitted to the
Director, in accordance with the requirements of § 153.180.070(A)(3), and
every  three years thereafter, at the operator’s cost, which provides that
said facilities radio frequency emission levels meet Federal Communications
Commission requirements.



   (N)   Terms of lease agreements.  Co-location of cellular, PCS and
other wireless communications facilities shall be encouraged. Lease
agreements shall not include exclusive rights that would prohibit co-location
where it is technically feasible.



   (O)   Maintenance.  No wireless communications facility, equipment
shelter, tower or related structure or device shall be permitted to fall into
disrepair or maintained in manner that is unsightly or interferes with the
reasonable enjoyment of adjacent property owners.  All such structures and
devices shall be continually maintained to prevent rust, chipped or peeling
paint.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 153.180.070  REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS.



   (A)   Application requirements for design review.



      (1)   Radius map. A radius map and a certified list of the
names and addresses of all property owners within 300 feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property involved, as shown on the latest assessment roll
of the county assessor.



      (2)   Site plan.  A site plan shall consist of elevation
drawings indicating the height, diameter, color, setbacks, foundation
details, landscaping, method of screening, and color photo simulations
showing the before and after effects of the proposed facility on the subject
site. Existing poles, towers, and/or antennas shall also be shown.  No plans
shall include depictions of future wireless communications facilities, nor
shall future wireless communications facilities be approved.



      (3)   RF emissions report. The report shall be signed by a
radio frequency engineer and prepared pursuant to Federal Communications
Commission, Office of Engineering & Technology, Bulletin 65 or any other
applicable guidelines or regulations, stating the maximum (EMF/RF) radiation
to be emitted by the proposed facility and whether those emissions conform to
safety standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission.  The
report shall take into account all other facilities within 2,000 feet, both
existing and known future facilities, the cumulative effects of co-located
facilities and existing nearby buildings and structures, and shall be written
in plain English.  This report shall be available to the public. 



      (4)   Property owner approvals.  Where the Wireless
communications facility is located on property owned by someone other than
the applicant, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of
the property has granted an easement or entered into a long-term lease for
the proposed facility which provides vehicular or other necessary access to
the facility. A letter of intent or affidavit, in a form approved by the city
attorney, shall be submitted to meet the requirement of this subsection.



      (5)   Code compliance. No wireless communications facility
shall be installed until such time as the property is brought into compliance
with this code.



      (6)   Wind load analysis. Analysis of the wind loads shall be
required, as governed by the most recently adopted Building Code.  Based on
the results of the analysis, the building official may impose additional
conditions to address safety concerns. 



      (7)   Performance bond. A faithful performance bond shall be
required prior to the issuance of building permits to ensure the removal of
abandoned wireless communications facilities.



      (8)   Applications. The applicant shall submit all other
information and documents required by the city’s application for antennas.
In addition, the applicant shall submit a business license application or
application for encroachment permit, when applicable.



   (B)   Application requirements for conditional use permit.



      (1)   Applicants shall be required to comply with part 9 of §
153.210, Conditional Use Permits. Any decision to deny a request to place,
construct or modify a wireless telecommunications antenna and/or tower shall
be in writing and supported by evidence contained in a written record of the
proceedings of the planning commission.



      (2)   Applicants shall also be required to comply with the
following.



         (a)   Maps and significant gaps.  Each applicant shall
provide a map showing the area within the city that will be serviced by the
proposed wireless communications facility and a statement as to the nature of
the service to be provided. In the event that the applicant seeks to fill a
gap in service, the applicant shall submit a statement in writing providing
a  definition of  the term “significant gap” as it applies to the
proposed facility; identifying the size of the area, in units of square
miles, of the claimed significant gap; a map with the geographic boundary of
the claimed significant gap area; and a map showing all of applicant’s
existing communications facilities in the city  within a reasonable distance
of the claimed significant gap.



         (b)   Alternative site analysis. Any applicant seeking
to install a new wireless communications facility shall identify all
reasonable, technically feasible, alternative locations, including facilities
which could be used for co-location.  The analysis shall also explain the
rationale for selecting the proposed site.  For all feasible co-location
sites, the applicant shall provide evidence of written contact with all
wireless service providers or tower owners within a quarter mile of the
proposed communications facility, unless a smaller radius is technological
justified by the applicant.  The contacted tower owner or service provider
shall be requested to respond in writing to the inquiry within 30 days.  The
applicant’s letter(s) as well as response(s), or a statement from the
applicant detailing all responses received, shall be included with the
application as a means of demonstrating the need for a new free-standing
tower.



         (c)   Preferred zones. The applicant shall demonstrate,
with substantial evidence, that he or she has exhausted all reasonable
efforts to locate a site in a commercial or industrial zone and/or it is not
feasible to install the proposed facility on a site in such zones. 



         (d)   Height representation. When a new free-standing
tower is proposed, a balloon or other physical representation of the maximum
height of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility shall be provided
at the project location for a minimum of one week prior to any required
public hearing for the facility to enable the Commission to assess the
aesthetic impacts of the proposed antenna height on the surrounding land uses
and public rights-of-way. This requirement may be waived by Director whenever
deemed appropriate.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.080  SATELLITE ANTENNAS, AMATEUR RADIO COMMUNICATION FACILITIES,
AND CITIZEN BAND (CB) RADIO ANTENNAS.



   Non-exempt satellite earth stations antennas, amateur (noncommercial)
radio communication facilities, and citizen band radio antennas shall be
located, constructed, installed and maintained in the following manner.



   (A)   Satellite earth stations antennas. Satellite antennas,
including portable units and dish antennas, shall be designed, installed and
maintained in compliance with the Federal Communications Commission and the
California Public Utilities Commission as follows:



      (1)   Antennas shall not be located within required front or
side yard setback areas. In addition, no portion of an antenna shall extend
beyond the property lines;



      (2)   The antennas and supporting structure shall be painted a
single, neutral, nonglossy color (e.g., earth-tones, gray, black, and the
like) and, to the extent possible, shall be compatible with the appearance
and character of the surrounding neighborhood;



      (3)   Electrical and antenna wiring shall be placed
underground where technologically feasible;



      (4)   In residential zoning districts, antennas shall be
subject to the following standards:



         (a)   Dish antennas larger than one meter shall not be
placed on or attached to residential structures; and



         (b)   The antennas shall be used for private,
noncommercial, purposes only; and



      (5)   In nonresidential zoning districts, antennas may be roof
or ground-mounted and shall be screened from view from public streets.



   (B)   Single pole/tower amateur radio communication facilities. 
Single pole/tower amateur radio communication facilities shall be designed,
constructed, installed and maintained in the following manner:



      (1)   The maximum overall height shall not exceed 35 feet,
measured from finished grade. Antennas exceeding 35 feet in height may be
approved provided that the antenna is of the retractable variety, that the
antenna is retractable to below 35 feet, and the applicant executes an
agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, stating that the antenna
will only be extended during actual use of the antenna;



      (2)   Where a parcel has one pole/tower structure greater than
40 feet, measured from finished grade, in overall height (including
antennas), including one permitted pursuant to division (B)(1) of this
section, only one additional pole/tower structure shall be allowed with an
overall height not to exceed thirty-five feet measured from finished grade
(including antennas);



      (3)   The pole/tower and/or antennas may be roof or
ground-mounted;



      (4)   The pole/tower and/or antennas may not be located in any
required front or side yard setback areas;



      (5)   The pole/tower and/or antennas shall be located at least
five feet from the rear lot line and at least 15 feet from any street side
property line;



      (6)   The pole/tower and/or antennas shall not project or
overhang into areas in which they are not allowed to locate;



      (7)   The pole/tower and/or antennas shall be a natural metal
finish or painted a single, neutral, nonglossy color (e.g., earth-tones,
gray, black, and the like) and, to the extent possible, compatible with the
appearance and character of the surrounding neighborhood;



      (8)   The pole/tower and/or antennas shall be used for
private, noncommercial, purposes only; and



      (9)   Operators shall comply with all applicable regulations,
specifically those regulations related to radio interference with electronic
devices as set forth by the Federal Communications Commission.



   (C)   Citizen band (CB) radio.  Citizen band radio antennas shall
be designed, constructed, installed and maintained in the following manner
except for antennas mounted on vehicles or to hand-held units.



      (1)   Standards.



         (a)   Citizen band radio antennas shall not exceed 35
feet in overall height measured from finished grade.



         (b)   Citizen band radio antennas shall comply with
requirements provided in divisions (B)(4) through (9) of this section.



      (2)   Prohibition of certain citizen band radios and
activities. It shall be a violation of this subchapter to use citizen band
radio equipment not authorized by the Federal Communications Commission or to
use such equipment in a manner that violates any Federal Communications
Commission regulation.



      (3)   Exempt stations.  A station that is licensed by the
Federal Communications Commission pursuant to section 301 of the
Communications Act of 1934 in any radio service for the operation at issue
shall not be subject to this division. Any citizen’s band radio equipment
on board a “commercial motor vehicle”, as defined in 49 U.S.C. § 31101
shall require probable cause to find that the commercial motor vehicle or the
individual operating the vehicle is in violation of Federal Communications
Commission citizens band radio regulations.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.090  RESERVED.



§ 153.180.100  EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Criteria for granting exceptions.



      (1)   An exception to specific requirements of this subchapter
may be issued for a wireless communications facility if it meets all of the
following applicable standards:



         (a)   With regard to siting, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the facility and/or antenna must be located and designed as
proposed to service the applicant’s service area. The applicant shall
submit an explanation and supporting engineering data proving that a tower or
antenna as proposed is technologically necessary;



         (b)   If seeking an exception from required height
standards, the applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height is
designed at the minimum height necessary and shall specifically include an
analysis comparing the operation of the facility at its proposed height with
its operation at the maximum height permitted herein.  The applicant shall
also address whether the additional height would be required if the facility
were located at a different site. The purpose of this analysis is to ensure
that additional height is permitted only when technically necessary for the
provision of services;



         (c)   Locating the antenna in conformance with the
specifications of this subchapter would obstruct the antenna’s reception
window or otherwise excessively interfere with reception, and the obstruction
or interference involves factors beyond the applicant’s control;



         (d)   The exception would not create a significant
visual impact;



         (e)   Granting the exception shall conform to the spirit
and intent of this code;



         (f)   The exception request is consistent with the
city’s general plan; and



         (g)   Granting the exception will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to properties or improvements
in the vicinity.



   (B)   Revocation of exceptions.  Any exception may be revoked if
the owner and/or operator fails to comply with the conditions imposed.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.110  NONCONFORMING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   (A)   Illegally established facilities.  Any wireless
communications facility constructed or erected in violation of this chapter
or any prior law, ordinance or regulation shall be subject to immediate
abatement.



   (B)   Nonconforming wireless communications facilities.



      (1)   All wireless communications facilities, in any zone,
lawfully constructed and erected prior to the effective date of this
subchapter, which do not conform to the requirements of the provisions of
this subchapter for the particular zoning district in which they are located,
shall be accepted as nonconforming uses for a period of five years from the
effective date of this subchapter. Thereafter, the wireless communications
facilities shall be subject to abatement as set forth below via modification
to comply with the standards of this subchapter. Any modifications shall be
subject to review by the Director, who shall assess the modification and its
compliance with this subchapter or any other applicable section of this code.
All decisions concerning any modification review conducted by the Director
shall be final, unless appealed to the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of § 153.210.150. 



      (2)   When modification is insufficient to meet the
requirements of this subchapter, wirleless communications facilities shall be
subject to abatement via relocation or removal.



   (C)   Notice of nonconforming wireless communications facilities.



      (1)   Upon the determination of the Director that the
provisions of this subchapter apply to a given parcel of land on which a
wireless communications facility is located, the Director shall send a notice
thereof by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, or other
method providing verification of delivery, to the owner thereof as shown on
the last equalized assessment roll, and shall cause such property to be
posted with a similar notice.



      (2)   The notice provided for in this section shall state that
the property and wireless communications facility in question is a
nonconformity, shall state the date of abatement established in subsection B
of this section, and shall state that an administrative hearing before the
Commission may be requested within 15 days.



   (D)   Hearing.



      (1)   If a hearing before the Commission is requested, the
hearing procedures established in § 153.200.080 shall apply.



      (2)   At the close of the hearing, the Commission shall find
and determine whether the nonconformity should be abated and all facts in
support thereof, whether the owner of the property can amortize his/her
investment in the term for abatement provided in subsection B of this
section, and if not, what term for abatement should be provided.



      (3)    The decision of the Commission and the findings in
support thereof shall be in the form of a written order and shall be served
upon the property owner personally or by United States certified mail, return
receipt requested, or other method providing verification of delivery, within
ten days after the decision is rendered.



      (4)   The decision of the Commission may be appealed to the
Council pursuant to § 153.200.090.



   (E)   Extension of time.



      (1)   The Commission, or Council on appeal, shall grant an
extension of the time for abatement of nonconformity where it finds that an
unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on the property owner.



      (2)   The Commission, or Council on appeal, shall consider the
following factors, among others, in determining whether to grant an extension
of time and the length of the term:



         (a)   The nature of the use;



         (b)   The amount of the owner’s investment in
improvements;



         (c)   The convertibility of improvements to permitted
uses;



         (d)   The character of the neighborhood;



         (e)   The detriment, if any, caused to the neighborhood
by continuance of the nonconforming use; and



         (f)   The amount of time needed to amortize the
investment.



   (E)   Proof of amortization. The Commission, or Council on appeal,
shall base its decision as to the length of the permitted amortization period
on any competent evidence presented, including, but not limited to, the
depreciation schedule attached to the owner’s latest federal income tax
return.



   (F)   Relocation. Where the Commission finds that a nonconforming
wireless communications facility, either in its present condition or as
modified, can be used in compliance with the standards set forth in this
subchapter for the zoning district in which it is located, the nonconforming
facility may be granted an extension sufficient to permit it to relocate on
the site wherein such use is permitted and which has substantially equivalent
utility for the use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.180.120  ABANDONMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



   (A)   When facility considered abandoned. The operator or owner of a
communications facility or other antenna shall be required to remove all
unused or abandoned equipment, antennas, poles, and/or towers if the facility
has not been operational for a consecutive six-month period or a total of 12
months over a consecutive 36-month period. A facility is considered abandoned
if it no longer provides communication services. The removal shall be in
compliance with proper health and safety requirements and shall occur no
later than 30 days following the end of the applicable cessation period.



   (B)   Removal by owner/operator.  A written notice of the
determination of abandonment shall be sent or delivered to the operator or
owner of the facility by the Director. The operator shall have 30 days to
remove the facility or provide the Director with evidence that the use has
not been discontinued. The Director shall review the evidence and shall
determine whether or not the facility is abandoned. Facilities not removed
within the required 30-day period shall be in violation of this section,
shall constitute a public nuisance, and operators or owners of the facility
and the owners of the property shall be jointly subject to penalties for
violations under the enforcement and penalty provisions of the Baldwin Park
Municipal Code.



   (C)   Removal by city.  In the event that a wireless communications
facility is not removed within 90 days after the applicable cessation period
ends, as described in divisions (A) and (B) of this section, the city may
remove the facility and shall bill the antenna owner or property owner for
all costs including any administrative and legal costs incurred in connection
with the removal. Once all costs have been paid by the owner, any bond posted
for removal shall be released.  The city does not waive any legal rights to
seek repayment for removal costs pursuant to a bond posted, nor to bring an
action for repayment of costs.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.190  TRIP REDUCTION AND TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT



§ 153.190.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish provisions that
encourage the efficient use of the city’s existing and planned
transportation infrastructure, maintain or improve traffic levels of service
and lower motor vehicle emissions. The policy of the city is to minimize the
number of peak period vehicle trips generated by additional development,
promote the use of alternative transportation, improve air quality and
participate in regional and countywide efforts to improve transportation
demand management.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.190.020  APPLICABILITY.



   Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make
provision from, as a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation
demand management and trip reduction measures. This subchapter shall not
apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed
“complete” by the city pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code § 65943, or for
which a notice of preparation for a draft environment impact report has been
circulated, or for which an application for a building permit has been
received, prior to April 16, 1993.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.190.030  REVIEW OF TRANSIT IMPACTS.



   (A)   Consult with fixed-route transit operators. Prior to approval
of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EIR)
will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental
Quality Act (CEQA), or based on a local determination, regional and municipal
fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be
identified and consulted. The “Transit Impact Review Worksheet,”
contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual, or
similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the
provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a notice of preparation
(NOP) for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be
given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify
recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as
a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize
automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation
measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft
EIR prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be
monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.



   (B)   Phased development projects. Phased development projects,
development projects subject to a development agreement or development
projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long
as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the
discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially
the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.190.040  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   (A)   Nonresidential development of 25,000 square feet or greater.
Nonresidential development containing 25,000 square feet or more of gross
leasable floor area shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the
city:



      (1)   A bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying
transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are
likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited
to, the following:



         (a)   Current maps, routes and schedules for public
transit routes serving the site;



         (b)   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation
information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local
transit operators;



         (c)   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by
commuter-oriented organizations;



         (d)   Bicycle route and facility information, including
regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information; and



         (e)   A listing of facilities available for carpoolers,
vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.



   (B)   Nonresidential development of 50,000 square feet or greater.
Nonresidential development containing 50,000 square feet or more of gross
leasable floor area shall comply with division (A) of this section and shall
provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:



      (1)   Not less than 10% of employee parking areas shall be
located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be
reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing
handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool
parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for a
building permit to the satisfaction of the city. A statement that
preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a
description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the
required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as
demand warrants, provided that at all times at least one space for projects
of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet and two spaces for projects over
100,000 square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles;



      (2)   Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must
be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a
minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet, two inches shall be
provided for those spaces and access ways to be used by such vehicles.
Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in
vanpool parking areas; and



      (3)   Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be
provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet of
nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional 50,000 square
feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction
of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle
parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker, accessible
only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from
inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provisions of
racks, lockers or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city.



   (C)   Nonresidential development of 100,000 square feet or greater.
Nonresidential development containing 100,000 square feet or more of gross
leasable floor area shall comply with divisions (A) and (B) of this section,
and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the
city:



      (1)   A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool
vehicles may deliver or board their passengers;



      (2)   Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct
and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each
building in the development;



      (3)   If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the
project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult
with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements.
When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be
designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit
stations/stops;



      (4)   Safe and convenient access from the external circulation
system to bicycle parking facilities onsite.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.190.050  MAINTENANCE.



   All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall
be maintained in a state of good repair.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.190.060  MONITORING.



   The provisions of this subchapter shall be included as conditions of
approval for all developments which require discretionary approvals.
Monitoring to ensure compliance with this subchapter shall occur prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.200  NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES



§ 153.200.010  APPLICATION.



   Except as otherwise set forth in this subchapter, the regulations set
out in this subchapter shall apply to each nonconforming use, building or
structure located in the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.020  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OWNER.  The owner or owners of the fee interest in the property to
which an order relates, and the trustee and owner or owners of any beneficial
interest under a trust deed relating to such property, and a tenant under a
written recorded lease, as such interests are shown by a title search
conducted by a qualified title company.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.030  CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   Each and every nonconforming use, building or structure may be
continuously utilized and maintained, subject to the provisions of this
subchapter; provided, that no alteration, addition or enlargement as to any
such use, building or structure shall be permitted, except as otherwise
expressly provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.040  NONCONFORMITY.



   (A)   Limitation on other uses.  Except otherwise as expressly
provided in this subchapter, so long as a nonconforming use, building or
structure exists upon any lot, no new use, building or structure may be
established, located or constructed on such lot.



   (B)   Change of use.



      (1)   General.  Except as otherwise expressly prohibited in
this chapter, a nonconforming use may be replaced by another nonconforming
use; provided such new nonconforming use does not result in an expansion or
enlargement of the degree or intensity of nonconformity.  A determination of
the Director made pursuant to this division shall be subject to review as
provided in § 153.210.



      (2)   Commercial and industrial zones. Where a use located on
any lot classified in any zone, other than a residential zone, is
nonconforming by reason of a lack of off-street parking facilities, that use
may be succeeded by another use, subject to the provisions of division (A)
above; provided that the new use does not require, pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter, off-street parking facilities in excess of that required for
the replaced use.



      (3)   F-C and I-C Zones.  Any use located on a lot classified
in an F-C or I-C zone, which was lawfully established prior to July 14, 1986,
which use became nonconforming as a result of the reclassification of the lot
upon which located to the F-C or I-C zones, may be replaced with any use
which is a principal use expressly allowed as such in the I-C zone, provided
there is no expansion of the use, building or structure.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.050  ABANDONMENT, CHANGE OR INCREASE IN USE.



   Whenever any of the following facts are found to exist with reference
to a nonconforming use, building or structure, the same shall be forthwith
abated and usage thereof shall be terminated:



   (A)   Abandonment.  Abandonment or termination of the usage of a
nonconforming use, building or structure: there shall exist a rebuttable
presumption of an intent by the owner thereof to permanently abandon the
nonconforming status thereof, whenever the utilization of a nonconforming
use, building or structure has been discontinued, for any reason, for a
period of 6 consecutive months or more.



   (B)   Change in use.



      (1)   A change from a nonconforming use to another
nonconforming use, except as expressly provided in this subchapter; and



      (2)   A change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use.



   (C)   Increase in use. An increase or enlargement of the area, space
or volume of the building, structure or land occupied by or devoted to such
nonconforming use, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.060  EXPIRATION OF TIME.



   Nonconforming buildings, uses and structures shall be abated and usage
thereof shall be terminated upon the expiration of the periods of time
indicated in this section.  The periods of time shall be deemed to commence
to run as of the date that such use, building or structure first became
nonconforming by reason of the application thereto of the zoning regulations
of the city:



   (A)    Where the lot is unimproved, including, but not limited to,
areas used for vehicular off-street parking facilities, one year.



   (B)   Where the lot is unimproved, except for structures of a type
for which the building code does not require a building permit, three years.



   (C)   Where the lot is unimproved except for buildings or structures
which contain less than 100 square feet of gross floor area, three years.



   (D)   Nonconforming outdoor advertising signs and structures, three
years.



   (E)   A nonconforming use, 20 years.



   (F)   A nonconforming use of a trailer park, five years.



   (G)   Nonconforming buildings and structures other than those
referred to in divisions (B), (C), (D), (F) and (H) of this section, shall be
abated, and the usage thereof terminated, within the periods of time as set
forth in this subchapter, based on the type of construction thereof as
defined in the building regulations of the city, as follows:



      (1)   Type IV and Type V buildings (light incombustible frame
and wood frame), 35 years;



      (2)   Type III buildings (heavy timber construction and
ordinary masonry), 40 years; and



      (3)   Type I and Type II buildings (fire-resistive), 50 years.



   (H)   A nonconforming use of a contractor or construction office,
shop or yard, two years.



   (I)   The nonconforming maintenance of animals, fish, or fowl, two
years.



   (J)   The nonconforming use of a game arcade or game machine, two
years.



   (K)   An adult business use, two years.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.070  ORDERS OF ABATEMENT.



   Where any one of the facts set forth in § 153.200.050(A) or (B) are
found to exist by the Director or where the Director finds that, as to any
use, building or structure, the applicable time set forth in § 153.200.060
has expired as to such use, building or structure, the Director shall issue a
written order of abatement, hereinafter referred to as the “order,” and
give notice thereof to the owners and/or persons in possession thereof. Each
order shall contain a description of the property affected, the factual basis
for the issuance of such order, the method of abatement, and the time within
which such abatement shall occur. The order shall be deemed final and
conclusive, as of the date of the giving of notice of the issuance thereof,
in the absence of an appeal, timely filed and perfected as provided in this
subchapter.  The owner and/or person in possession of the property to which
an order relates shall comply with the order, as of the date the order
becomes final.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.080  APPEALS FROM DECISION OF DIRECTOR.



   (A)   An order shall be, for all purposes, final and conclusive,
unless within not to exceed 30 days after the giving of notice of the
issuance of such order by the Director, an appeal is filed as provided in
this subchapter contemporaneously with the payment of a filing and processing
fee in a sum set by resolution of the City Council.



   (B)   All appeals from decisions of the Director shall be filed with
the secretary of the Planning Commission appealing the decision of the
Director to the Planning Commission with regard to the issuance of an order.



   (C)   The Secretary of the Commission, upon receipt of such a timely
filed appeal, shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the Planning
Commission and shall cause notice of the time and place thereof to be given
as specified in this subchapter.



   (D)   Based upon the evidence presented at such de novo hearing, the
Commission shall determine whether the use, building and/or structure has
lost its nonconforming status pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (E)   In the absence of the perfecting of an appeal, as provided in
this subchapter, appealing the decision of the Commission to the City
Council, the Commission’s decision shall be final and conclusive as of the
30th day following the date of the adoption of the decision by the Commission.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.090  APPEALS FROM COMMISSION’S DECISIONS.



   (A)   A written appeal appealing the Commission’s decision to the
City Council, must be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days of giving
notice of the Commission’s decision with respect to such order.



   (B)   The City Clerk, upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, shall
set the matter for a de novo hearing before the City Council and shall give
notice of the time and place thereof, as specified in this subchapter.



   (C)   Based upon the evidence presented at such de novo hearing, the
City Council shall determine whether the use, building and/or structure has
lost its nonconforming status pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.



   (D)   The decision of the City Council shall be final and conclusive.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.100  NOTICE OF DECISION.



   (A)   By Director.  Upon issuance of an order by the Director, the
Director shall give notice thereof by depositing a copy of such order in the
course of transmission of the United States Postal Service, addressed to the
owner and/or persons in possession of the property to which the order
relates, postage prepaid, addressed at such person’s last known address. 
Alternatively, the Director may personally serve such persons with copies of
the order.



   (B)   By Commission.  Upon the adoption by the Commission of a
decision with reference to an order, the secretary of the Commission shall
forthwith give written notice of the same. The notice of such decision shall
be given in the same manner as set forth in division (A) above.



   (C)   By Council. Upon the adoption by the Council of a decision
relating to an order, the City Clerk shall, forthwith, give written notice of
the same.  The notice of such decision shall be given in the same manner as
set forth in division (A).



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.110  EFFECTIVE DATE OF NOTICE.



   The notices required under this subchapter shall be deemed to have been
given as of the date of personal service or two consecutive days after the
date of deposit of such notice in the course of transmission of the United
States Postal Service.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.120  PERFECTING APPEALS.



   The owner of property to which an order relates, or his or her
authorized agent, shall be qualified to file an appeal from a decision by the
Director and/or the Commission relating to an order. No such appeal shall be
effective for any purpose unless the same is filed within the times permitted
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter. In addition, no such appeal
shall be valid for any purpose unless, contemporaneously with the filing of
such an appeal, an appellate filing and processing fee in a sum set by
resolution of the City Council is paid to the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.130  CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.



   (A)   Hearing procedures.



      (1)   At all hearings held pursuant to this subchapter, before
either the Planning Commission or the City Council, any interested person
shall be heard, and applicable staff reports relating to such matter shall be
considered.



      (2)   In proceedings pursuant to § 153.200.060 to abate a
nonconforming use, building or structure, the Commission and/or Council shall
determine whether the applicable prima facie period, as set forth in §
153.200.060, is appropriate as applied to the facts of that case. In making
such determination, the Commission and/or Council shall consider the date the
buildings or structures were constructed, the original costs thereof, whether
such original cost has been, or could have been, recovered by the owner under
generally accepted accounting practices, and whether it is feasible to
relocate such building or structures.



   (B)   Authority to extend abatement. The Commission and/or Council
may extend the prima facie periods of abatement, as set forth in §
153.200.060, in order to establish a reasonable period of abatement, based
upon the facts presented at the hearing.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.140  REPAIR; MAINTENANCE.



   The ordinary repair and maintenance of a nonconforming building or
structure shall be permitted if the cost thereof does not exceed, in any
consecutive 12-month period, an amount equal to one-half or more of the then
established assessed value of the building or structure.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.150  EMINENT DOMAIN; PUBLIC ACQUISITION.



   (A)   Repair; public acquisition. The repair, reconstruction or
remodeling of any nonconforming building or structure shall be permitted
where a part of such building or structure is taken for any public use by
condemnation, dedication or purchase by an agency having the power of eminent
domain.  Such reconstruction, remodeling or repair shall be limited to that
necessary to render the building or structure safe for continued use.  Such
repair, reconstruction or remodeling shall not have the effect of extending
the period of abatement relating to such nonconforming building or structure.



   (B)   Acquisition causing nonconformity. No building, structure or
use shall be deemed to be nonconforming, where such nonconformity is caused,
exclusively, by public acquisition, by condemnation, dedication, purchase or
other form of public acquisition, of a portion of the building, structure or
the lot upon which such is located.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.160  PERMITTED REPAIR AND/OR MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   Nothing in this subchapter shall be deemed to prevent the repair,
rehabilitation and reconstruction (hereinafter referred to as work) as to a
nonconforming building or structure, under any of the following conditions.



   (A)   Elimination of nonconformity.  Such work shall be permitted
in order to render the use, building or structure in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, except that the conversion of an existing
residential structure or use to a nonresidential use permitted in the zone in
which the lot upon which such building or structure is located, shall not be
allowed unless and until a conditional use permit pursuant to the provisions
of §§ 153.210et seq. is first obtained.



   (B)   Compliance with laws.  Such work shall be permitted in order
to comply with any laws, including, but not limited to, the zoning
regulations set forth in this chapter as amended.



   (C)   Partial destruction. Where any nonconforming building or
structure is damaged or partially destroyed by any casualty, the same may be
restored to the condition in which it existed immediately prior to the
occurrence of such casualty; provided, that the aggregate total cost of the
necessary work does not exceed a sum equal to one-half of the then assessed
value of the building or structure; provided, that all such work shall be
completed within a period of 12 consecutive calendar months from and after
the date of the occurrence of the casualty.  Sureties may be required by the
Director to assure timeliness of such work.



   (D)   Nonconformity; existing yard areas. Such work shall be
permitted as to any existing building or structure which is nonconforming by
reason of substandard yard areas.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.170  EFFECT OF WORK.



   Accomplishment of any work permitted pursuant to this subchapter shall
not be deemed, regardless of cost, to extend the abatement period of the
nonconforming use, building or structure to which the same relates.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.180  EXEMPTIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Public utilities exempted.  The provisions of this subchapter
concerning the required abatement of nonconforming buildings, structures
and/or uses, and the reconstruction of nonconforming buildings and structures
partially destroyed, shall not apply to public utility buildings and
structures when such buildings and structures pertain directly to the
rendering of the service by a utility, such as steam electric generation
stations, electric distribution and transmission substations, communication
equipment building, water wells and pumps, gas storage, metering and valve
control stations; nor shall any provision of this subchapter be construed or
applied so as to prevent the expansion, modernization or replacement of such
public utility buildings, structures, equipment and features, as are used
directly for the delivery of or distribution of the service; provided, that
this section shall not exempt such uses from the provisions hereof covering
nonconformity of such buildings, structures or uses not immediately related
to the direct service to consumers, such as warehouses, storage yards and the
like.



   (B)   Mixed uses.  Where uses, buildings and/or structures are
located on a C or I zoned lot, or a combination of such lots which form a
single complex under common ownership, or a portion of such uses, buildings
and/or structures located thereon, are nonconforming solely by reason of the
fact that one or more of the uses are not permitted uses in the zone, no
additional use, building or structure shall be permitted on such lot or lots,
unless all of the requirements of provisions of this chapter are met as to
any such additional use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.190  MINOR ADDITIONS TO DWELLINGS IN R-1 ZONE.



   (A)   Nonconforming parking. Where a single-family residence is
located on any residentially zoned lot, and such use is nonconforming by
reason of inadequate parking, that residence may be enlarged to a maximum
addition of 600 square feet of floor area without the provision of conforming
parking.



   (B)   Accessory building. The construction of any accessory building
or structure allowed pursuant to the zoning regulations applicable to the R-1
zone under this chapter shall also be permitted on any such lot.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.200.200  CONSISTENCY WITH GENERAL PLAN REQUIRED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding anything else contained in this code or any
rule or regulation of the city, but subject to the non-conforming use
provisions of this subchapter, no permit of any kind shall be issued by or on
behalf of the city for any use, building, structure, or business which is not
consistent with the city’s General Plan, as adopted on November 20, 2002.



   (B)   Subject to the referral authority set forth in §
153.210.020(B) and the appeal process set forth in § 153.210.150, the
determination of consistency between the city’s General Plan and the
city’s issuance of any permit for any use, building, structure, or business
shall be made by the Zoning Administrator.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.210  ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES



Part 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 153.210.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The purposes of the provisions set forth in this subchapter, are as
follows:



   (A)   Discretionary permits and actions. Establish the overall
structure for the review and action of discretionary permits and actions.



   (B)   Responsible Approving Authority. Designate the responsible
Approving Authority for the review of such permits and actions.



   (C)   Application process. Outline the application processing
procedures for such permits and actions.



   (D)   Noticing and hearing requirements. Establish the noticing and
public hearing requirements for such permits and actions.



   (E)   Time limits and implementation. Identify the time limits and
implementation requirements of such permits and actions.



   (F)   Permit modification and revocation. Outline the permit
modification and revocation restrictions.



   (G)   Appeals. Identify the procedures for filing and processing an
appeal.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.020  DESIGNATED APPROVING AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Approving authorities. The Approving Authority, as designated
in Table 153.210.020, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny
applications based upon evidence presented by the applicant, by making the
applicable findings required for a particular permit or approval in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and other laws and
regulations. The table identifies both recommending (R) and final (F)
authorities for each application. An action of the Approving Authority may be
appealed to the appeal (A) authority, pursuant to procedures set forth in §
153.210.150.



   (B)   Referral authority. The Zoning Administrator may forward an
application for an administrative adjustment, zone variance, conditional use
permit, and modification or revocation thereof to the secretary of the
Planning Commission in order to set the matter for a hearing before the
Planning Commission.



TABLE 153.210.020



 


Designated Approving Authority

 
R
F
A
 
Recommending Authority
Final Action Authority
Appeal Authority




Type of Permit or Action
 
Approving Authority


Design Review Committee
 
Historic Resources Advisory Committee
 
City Planner
 
Zoning Administrator
 
Director of Public Works
 
Planning Commission
 
City Council(1)


Design review
 

F

 



 



 



 



 

A

 

A



Zoning clearance
 



 



 

F

 

A

 



 

A

 

A



Sign permit
 



 



 

F

 

A

 



 

A

 

A



Zoning code interpretation
 



 



 

R

 

F

 



 

A

 

A



Administrative adjustment
 



 



 



 

F

 



 

A

 

A



Reasonable accommodation
 



 



 

F

 

A

 



 

A

 

A



Variance
 



 



 

R

 



 



 

F

 

A



Conditional use permit
 



 



 

R

 



 



 

F

 

A



Historic designation
 



 

R

 



 



 



 



 

F



Historic structure work permit
 



 

F

 



 



 



 



 

A



Historic structure
 



 



 



 



 



 



 





Demolition permit
 



 

F

 



 



 



 



 

A





 



 




Type of Permit or Action

 

Approving Authority




Design Review Committee

 

Historic Resources Advisory Committee

 

City Planner

 

Zoning Administrator

 

Director of Public Works

 

Planning Commission

 

City Council(1)



Specific plan
 



 



 



 



 



 

R

 

F



Zoning code text or zoning map amendment
 



 



 



 



 



 

R

 

F



General plan amendment
 



 



 



 



 



 

R

 

F



Development agreement
 



 



 



 



 



 

R

 

F



Downtown overlay
 



 



 

R

 



 



 

F

 

A



Planned development overlay development plan
 



 



 

R

 



 



 

F

 

A



Tree pruning/removal permit
 



 



 

F

 



 



 

A

 

A





 



Notes: (1) Decisions of the City Council may not be appealed



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.030  EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   The following activities and uses of land or structures are exempt from
the land use and development permit requirements of this chapter. However,
activities and uses shall comply with all other relevant provisions of this
chapter.



   (A)   Interior alterations. Interior alterations that do not
increase the gross floor area within the structure, or change or expand the
permitted use of the structure.



   (B)   Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if the work
does not change the approved land use of the site, add to, enlarge or expand
the area occupied by the floor area of the structure or significantly change
the exterior structure and design of the original construction.



   (C)   Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by a public utility or public agency of underground or overhead
utilities intended to service existing or nearby approved developments (e.g.,
water, gas, electric or telecommunication supply or disposal systems,
including wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar facilities
and equipment), but not including new transmission lines and structures.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.040  ADDITIONAL REQUIRED PERMITS.



   A land use that complies with the requirements of this chapter shall
also comply with the permit requirements of other provisions of this code and
any applicable permit requirements of other agencies before construction or
use of the property is commenced.  These may include building, grading or
other construction permits; a business license; subdivision approval; or any
other applicable county, regional, state or federal regulations.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.050  BURDEN OF PROOF.



   The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the
required finding for any permit is the responsibility of the applicant.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.060  PRECEDENCE.



   Each permit shall be evaluated on a case-specific basis. Therefore,
granting of a prior permit does not create a precedent and may not provide
justification for granting a new permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.070  CONCURRENT PROCESSING OF PERMITS.



   When a proposed project requires more than one permit application with
more than one Approving Authority, all project permits shall be processed
concurrently at the applicant’s own risk as interrelated permits for a
project and shall not be bifurcated. The highest designated Approving
Authority for all requested permits shall take final action on all permits.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.080  APPLICATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Application forms. The Planning Division will provide all
application forms.



   (B)   Application submittal. All applications for land use and
development permits and actions shall be submitted to City Planner on a city
application form, together with all fees, plans, maps, data, diagrams,
photographs and any other required information to provide the Approving
Authorities with adequate information on which to base decisions.



   (C)   Appeals to City Council. Notwithstanding subsection B above,
appeals to the City Council shall be filed with the City Clerk.



   (D)   Authorized to complete application. The owner, lessee or
authorized agent of the property, or a plaintiff in an action of eminent
domain, shall complete the application. Any authorized agent shall be
formally delegated in writing by the property owner.



   (E)   Application package. Applications will not be accepted by the
Planning Division without the required signed application forms, permit fees
and required application package.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.090  GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURES.



   These procedures are applicable to applications for all land use and
development permits and actions. Unique processing procedures are provided
with the individual permit regulations in Parts 2 through 16 of this
subchapter.



   (A)   Application reviewed for completeness. All applications filed
with the Planning Division shall be initially reviewed for application
completeness. The City Planner shall determine whether or not the application
is complete and shall notify the applicant in writing of the determination
that:



      (1)   All the submittal requirements have been satisfied and
that the application has been accepted as complete; or



      (2)   Specific information is still necessary to complete the
application. For administrative permits and actions, and for sign permits,
the applicant shall be notified within seven days and for all other permits
and actions, the applicant shall be notified within 30 days.



   (B)   California Environmental Quality Act. After acceptance of a
complete application, the project shall be reviewed in accordance with the
environmental review procedures of the California Environmental Quality Act
(Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 21000 et seq.).



   (C)   Review and comment. Application materials shall be circulated
to other city departments and agencies for review and comment as determined
necessary or appropriate by the City Planner. Planning Division staff shall
be responsible for requesting and incorporating comments into project
modifications or conditions of approval to ensure conformance with all
provisions of this code and other adopted policies and plans.



   (D)   Written report. The Recommending or Approving Authority, as
designated in Table 153.210.020, shall prepare a written report that includes
recommendation on the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the
application, taking into account all supplemental application information,
provisions of this chapter, other applicable provisions of this code, the
General Plan and applicable state law.



   (E)   Written notice of decision. Within ten days from the final
action on an application, the Approving Authority shall send written notice
of decision to the project applicant and other affected parties. The notice
of decision shall identify the specific action of the Approving Authority,
including the date of action, applicable conditions, basis for determination
and appeal period if applicable.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.210.100  NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING REGULATIONS.



   Public hearings shall be required for all quasi-judicial permits and
legislative actions. The hearing shall be held before the designated
Approving Authority and shall be noticed in accordance with the following
provisions:



   (A)   Public notice. The Approving Authority shall give a public
notice not less than ten days before the scheduled date of a hearing.



   (B)   Notice content. The notice shall state the date, time and
place of the hearing; identify the hearing body; provide a general
explanation of the matter to be considered; and provide a general description
of the property (text or diagram), if any, which is the subject of the
hearing.



   (C)   Notice distribution. Notice of the public hearing shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the owners and tenants of property within a
radius of 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of the property involved in the
application, using for this purpose the last known name and address of such
owners as shown upon current tax assessors records. If the number of owners
and tenants to whom notices would be mailed or delivered is greater than 500,
notice may be given by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth
page in a newspaper of general circulation in the city in lieu of the
above-required mailed or delivered notice.



   (D)   Notice mailing. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the owner of the subject property or the owner’s
authorized agent, and to each local agency expected to provide water, sewer
systems, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to
the proposed project.



   (E)   Mailing list. Any person who requests inclusion on a mailing
list for notice of hearing for development projects shall submit such request
in writing to the City Clerk. The city may impose a reasonable fee for the
purpose of recovering the cost of such notification.



   (F)   Failure to receive notice. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
65093, failure of any person or entity to receive notice required by law of
any hearing shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the
actions of a designated Approving Authority for which the notice was given.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.110  PUBLIC HEARING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Public hearings held. Public hearings shall be held at the
date, time and place that appear on the notice given for the hearing. The
designated Approving Authority shall conduct the public hearing and hear
testimony.



   (B)   Minutes. Summary minutes shall be prepared and made part of
the permanent file of the case.



   (C)   Continuation. Any hearing may be continued, and further public
notice shall not be required unless the hearing is not continued to a
specific date and time.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.120  PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION AND TIME LIMITS.



   (A)   Permit action effective. Generally, any action to approve,
conditionally approve or deny a permit shall be effective on the twentieth
calendar day after the date of action, immediately following expiration of
the appeal period.



   (B)   Legislative action effective. Legislative actions of the City
Council normally become effective 30 days from the date of final action and
may not be appealed. Therefore, administrative and quasi-judicial permits
that are processed in conjunction with, or that are contingent upon, a
legislative action shall not be acted upon until the effective date of the
required legislative action.



   (C)   Other approvals. The approval of a land use or development
permit authorizes the applicant to proceed with the proposed project upon the
effective date of the permit, subject to all conditions or restrictions
imposed by the Approving Authority. However, all other permits, licenses,
certificates and other grants of approval to which the proposed development
project is subject must be secured before the development or use may commence.



   (D)   Permit expiration. Unless conditions of approval or other
provisions of this chapter establish a different time limit, any permit or
approval not exercised within six months from the date of final approval
shall expire and become null and void and a new application shall be filed
with all requisite fees.



   (E)   Transfer of permits and approvals. Land use and development
permits and approvals shall be transferable upon a change of ownership of the
site, business, service, use or structures, provided that the use and
conditions of the original permit or approval are fully complied with, and
further provided that the project is not modified, enlarged or expanded.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.130  PERMIT MODIFICATION.



   (A)   Permit modification or amendment. Any person holding a permit
granted under this subchapter may request a modification or amendment to the
permit if it is found that such modification is necessary to protect the
public peace, health and safety. The modification of a permit may apply to
the terms of the permit itself, project design or the waiver or alteration of
conditions imposed when the permit was granted.



   (B)   Permit modification application. If the proposed modification
fulfills any of the following criteria, the property owner shall submit a
permit modification application for consideration and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.



      (1)   Criteria established in § 153.210.280.



      (2)   A maximum 10% change in the building floor area, not to
exceed 2,000 square feet.



      (3)   A maximum 2% decrease in landscaped area.



      (4)   No changes in the lot area, parking layout or hours of
operation.



      (5)   A deletion of maximum one design element or substitution
of one building material where such element or building material was not
required by the Zoning Code or Design Review Committee.



   (C)   Permit modification public hearing. If the proposed
modification exceeds any of the above mentioned criteria, a public hearing is
required for action to modify the permit. The original Approving Authority
for the subject permit shall hold the hearing. The hearing shall be noticed
in the same manner required for the granting of the original permit.



   (D)   Findings. A permit modification may be granted only when the
Approving Authority makes all findings required for the original approval in
addition to the finding that changed circumstances sufficiently justify
modification of the approval.



   (E)   Appeals. An action on a modification may be appealed in
accordance with the provisions of § 153.210.150.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.140  PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   Permit revocation. A permit may be revoked upon a finding of
any of the following:



      (1)   The permit was obtained or extended by false, misleading
or incomplete information;



      (2)   The use or development for which such approval was
granted has ceased to exist by voluntary abandonment;



      (3)   One or more of the conditions upon which the permit was
approved have been violated, or have not been complied with;



      (4)   The use or development has violated another ordinance or
law; or



      (5)   The use or development is being conducted in a manner
detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare, or such use or development
constitutes a nuisance in accordance with this chapter.



   (B)   Revocation initiation. The revocation of a permit may be
initiated by any of the city departments. The responsible department shall
specify in writing to the permittee the basis upon which the action to revoke
the permit is to be evaluated.



   (C)   Permit revocation public hearing. A public hearing is required
for any action to revoke a permit. The original Approving Authority for the
subject permit shall hold the hearing. The hearing shall be noticed in the
same manner required for the granting of the original permit. At its
discretion, the designated Approving Authority may revoke the permit, refuse
to revoke the permit or modify or delete conditions of approval or add new
conditions of approval in order to address the issues raised by the
revocation hearing. 



   (D)   Appeals. An action on a revocation may be appealed in
accordance with the provisions of § 153.210.150.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.150  APPEALS.



   (A)   Interpretation or action appeals. Any person dissatisfied with
an interpretation or action of the Approving Authority may appeal such action
to the Appeal Authority, as designated in Table 153.210.020. Actions made by
the City Council are not subject to appeal. For actions not listed in the
table, the Appeal Authority is as follows.



      (1)   The Design Review committee’s decision may be appealed
to the Planning Commission.



      (2)   The City Planner’s decisions may be appealed to the
Zoning Administrator.



      (3)   The Zoning Administrator’s decisions may be appealed
to the Planning Commission.



      (4)   The Planning Commission’s decisions may be appealed to
the City Council.



   (B)   Appeal filing. Appeals shall be filed within ten days
following the date of determination or action for which an appeal is made and
shall be accompanied by a filing and processing fee, as determined by
resolution of the City Council. All appeals shall be in writing, identifying
the action being appealed, specifically stating the basis or grounds of the
appeal, and shall be submitted to the following entity:



      (1)   Submit the appeal and required fee to the City Planner
if the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission is the Appeal Authority.



      (2)   Submit the appeal and required fee to the City Clerk if
the City Council is the Appeal Authority.



   (C)   Appeal hearings. Unless otherwise agreed upon by the person
filing the appeal and the applicant, appeal hearings shall be conducted
within 45 days from the date of the appeal application being complete. Notice
of hearing for the appeal shall be provided pursuant to noticing requirements
outlined in § 153.210.100.



   (D)   Public hearing attendance. The person filing the appeal must
be present at the public hearing.



   (E)   Appeal actions. Each appeal shall be considered de novo (new),
and the Appeal Authority may reverse, modify or affirm the decision in whole
or in part based on evidence presented at the hearing and applicable staff
reports. In taking its action on an appeal, the Appeal Authority shall state
the basis for its action. The Appeal Authority may modify, delete or add
conditions, as it deems necessary. The Appeal Authority may also refer the
matter back to the original Approving Authority for further action. 



   (F)   Written notice of decision. Following the process, the Appeal
Authority shall provide written notice of the decision to the person filing
the appeal and other persons requesting the notice.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 2.  DESIGN REVIEW



§ 153.210.160  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The design review process is established to improve the general
standards and orderly development of the city through review of the design,
layout and other features of proposed developments and their environs prior
to submission of plans to the Building Division for plan check. The Baldwin
Park Design Guidelines Manual establishes standards and policies that will
promote and enhance good design, site relationships and other aesthetic
considerations in the city. The primary objective of the Design Guidelines is
to provide for functional site planning, integrate architectural elements
within a project and within streetscapes, protect privacy and ensure the
provision of high-quality projects.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.170  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Design review clearance. Design review clearance must be
obtained prior to the issuance of any permit for the construction of any
building or structure.  Design review is required for the following:



      (1)   All new construction or exterior alteration of any
existing building or structure in the R-G, R-3, C-1, C-2, F-C, I-C, I, OS,
MU-1 and MU-2 zones;



      (2)   All new construction or exterior alteration of any
existing building or structure in the R-1-7,500 or R-1 zones which also
requires a conditional use permit, administrative adjustment or a variance;



      (3)   All new construction or exterior alteration of any
existing building or structure in the R-1-7,500 or R-1 zones that involves
200 square feet or more of floor area or will extend the structure to a
second floor;



      (4)   All new construction of five or more single-family
dwelling units as part of a subdivision map;



      (5)   All new construction or exterior alteration of any
existing sign which exceeds 40 feet in height or 300 square feet in sign
area; and



      (6)   All new construction or alteration of any wireless
communication facility on private property, including city owned property not
located within the public right-of-way.



   (B)   Design review required for discretionary permits. For any
development project or action requiring the issuance of a discretionary
permit pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, design review shall be
conducted in conjunction with staff-level review of such permit. The
recommendations of the Design Review Committee that is composed of the
Director of Community Development, the City Engineer, a representative from
the Police Department, a representative from the Fire Department and the City
Planner as the chairperson shall be forwarded to the Approving Authority for
consideration with the associated development application. Following final
Approving Authority action on the application and prior to the issuance of
building permits for any approved application, the Design Review Committee
shall reserve the authority to ensure final design plans substantially
conform to the conditions imposed by the Approving Authority.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.180  DETERMINATION.



   Design review clearance shall be granted, or conditionally granted or
denied when the Design Review Committee finds the proposed use, development
or structure to comply with all applicable provisions of the Design
Guidelines are compatible with the design of adjacent land uses, and possess
acceptable architectural design and aesthetic quality.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.190  RECORD OF REVIEW.



   The authorized signature of the Director of Community Development on a
designated form, or a stamp approval on a set of plans, shall signify
approval of design review.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 3.  ZONING CLEARANCE



§ 153.210.200  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The zoning clearance process is an administrative review undertaken by
the City Planner that ensures that all proposed new and modified uses and
structures that do not require any discretionary actions or approvals
otherwise comply with applicable provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.210  APPLICABILITY.



   An administrative zoning clearance is required for any structure or use
that requires a building permit or business license.  No building permit or
business license shall be granted until zoning clearance approval has been
issued.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.220  DETERMINATION.



   Zoning clearance shall be granted only when the City Planner finds the
proposed use or development to be in conformance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and other applicable city documents. The City
Planner may modify plans in whole or in part, apply conditions of approval or
require guarantees to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.230  RECORD OF CLEARANCE.



   The authorized signature of the City Planner on a designated form, or a
stamp approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval of zoning clearance.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 4.  SIGN PERMIT



§ 153.210.240  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The sign permit process is an administrative review undertaken by the
City Planner that ensures all proposed new and modified signs comply with
applicable provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.250  APPLICABILITY.



   A sign permit is required prior to placing, erecting, constructing or
physically altering the size, height or location of any permitted sign or
advertising display in the city, except for those signs provided in §
153.170.040.  A sign permit is required prior to physically altering the
sign face of any permitted sign or advertising display in the city, except
for those signs provided in § 153.170.040. No building permit for any sign
shall be issued and no sign placement or alterations shall be undertaken
until a sign permit has been issued.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.260  DETERMINATION.



   A sign permit shall be granted when the City Planner finds the proposed
sign to be in conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, the
Sign Design Guidelines and other applicable regulations. The City Planner may
apply conditions of approval to ensure compliance.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.265  TIME FOR DETERMINATION.



   (A)   Temporary signs. Permit applications for temporary signs shall
be determined within 21 days of application submission unless the City
Planner designates the application as one of extraordinary complexity or
difficulty, in which case notification of such designation shall be mailed to
the applicant within 14 days of application submission. All applications
shall be determined within 42 days of application submission. Notice of any
determination shall be mailed within two business days after the
determination is made (excluding Fridays when city offices are closed).



   (B)   Permanent signs.



      (1)   Permit applications for permanent signs shall be
determined within 63 days unless the City Planner designates the application
as one of extraordinary complexity or difficulty, in which case notification
of such designation shall be mailed to the applicant within 35 days of
application submission. All applications shall be determined within 91 days
of application submission.



      (2)   Notice of any determination shall be mailed within two
business days after the determination is made (excluding Fridays when city
offices are closed).



   (C)   Mixed applications. Applications seeking a permit for both
temporary and permanent signs will be treated as applications for permanent
sign permits; but the City Planner shall have discretion to make a partial
determination as to the portion of an application concerning temporary signs
at any time before a final determination is made for the whole application.



(Ord. 1402, passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.210.270  RECORD OF PERMIT.



   The authorized signature of the City Planner on a designated form shall
signify approval of a sign permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 5.  TEMPORARY USE PERMIT



§ 153.210.280  REFERENCE.



   The temporary use permit process is an administrative review undertaken
by the City Manager that ensures that all specific, limited-term uses comply
with applicable provisions of this code. Chapter 110 of this code outlines
applicable activities, fees, exemptions, issuance and denial and application
procedures for temporary use permits.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 6.  ZONING CODE INTERPRETATION



§ 153.210.320  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The zoning code interpretation process establishes a means to clarify
any ambiguity in the regulations of this chapter and to ensure consistent
interpretation and application of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator has
the authority to interpret the Zoning code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.330  DETERMINATION.



   A zoning code interpretation shall be determined after the Zoning
Administrator reviews the pertinent facts and establishes the intent of the
particular provision. Once the Zoning Administrator has identified the
ambiguity and considered relevant information, an official interpretation
shall be established in writing and shall cite the interpreted provisions,
together with an explanation of the meaning or applicability of the provision
in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for
interpretation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.340  RECORD OF INTERPRETATION.



   The written interpretation shall signify record of interpretation. The
Zoning Administrator shall maintain all recorded interpretations and a copy
shall be provided to applicable city departments within 30 days of the
determination.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 7.  ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT



§ 153.210.350  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   California Gov’t Code § 65906 establishes the authority of the city
to grant exception to the development standards and provisions of this
chapter in cases where, because of special circumstances applicable to the
property, the strict application of this code deprives such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical land
use zoning districts. The administrative adjustment permits limited
exceptions to certain development standards to be granted.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.360  APPLICABILITY.



   An administrative adjustment application shall be filed by a property
owner or authorized agent of the property owner whenever any one of the
following deviations from the provisions of this Zoning Code is proposed:



   (A)   Condition of approval. Minor deviation from a condition of
approval for an approved variance, conditional use permit or development
agreement, as detailed in § 153.210.130.



   (B)   Lot width. Reduction in lot width of 5% or less.



   (C)   Side or rear yard. Reduction in the dimensions of a side or
rear yard of 20% or less.



   (D)   Street frontage. Reduction in street frontage of 5% or less.



   (E)   Distance between buildings. Reduction in the distance between
buildings of 20% or less.



   (F)   Sign face area. Increase in sign face area for a monument,
freestanding or wall sign of 10% or less.



   (G)   Fence or wall height. Adjustment in the height of a fence or
wall of 20% or less.



   (H)   Street side yard fence height - residential zone. Increase in
the height of a street side yard fence of two feet or less in a residential
zone.



   (I)   Street side yard fence height - nonresidential zone. Increase
in the height of a street side yard fence of two feet or less in a commercial
or industrial zone.



   (J)   Parking spaces. Adjustment in the number of required parking
spaces of 10% or fewer.



   (K)   Other standards. A reduction in any other numeric development
standard, excluding density, lot area or floor area, not exceeding 10%.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.370  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for an administrative adjustment shall be processed in
accordance with these regulations.



   (A)   Review authority. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the
determinations detailed in § 153.210.380, and resolve to approve,
conditionally approve or deny the adjustment. Such determination shall be
supported by written findings.



   (B)   Public hearing. The Zoning Administrator may also forward the
application to the Planning Commission in order to set the matter for a
public hearing. The Planning Commission shall then conduct a public hearing,
consider the determinations detailed in § 153.210.380, and resolve to
approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit by not less than a majority
of its voting members. Any action shall be supported by written findings.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.380  DETERMINATION.



   The Zoning Administrator, or Planning Commission upon referral, may
approve and/or modify an administrative adjustment application in whole or in
part, with or without conditions, if the applicant can demonstrate that the
circumstances of the particular case can justify making the following
findings.



   (A)   Zone. The requested adjustment will not interfere with the
purpose and intent of the regulations for the zone in which the property is
located.



   (B)   Adjacent property. The approval or conditional approval of the
adjustment will not be injurious to adjacent property.



   (C)   General Plan. The approval or conditional approval of the
adjustment will promote the general welfare and will not adversely affect the
general plan of the city.



   (D)   Superior design. The plans for construction and/or development
resulting from approval or conditional approval of the adjustment results in
a superior design solution which enhances the visual quality, use and
function of the site and surrounding area.



   (E)   Special circumstances. There are special circumstances which
reduce parking demand associated with the operation of a use and therefore
justify a deviation in the minimum required number of parking stalls.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.390  RECORD OF PERMIT.



   The authorized signature of the Zoning Administrator, Planning
Commission or the Appeal Authority if the permit was appealed, on a
designated form, or a stamp approval on a set of plans, shall signify
approval of an administrative adjustment.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 8.  VARIANCE



§ 153.210.400  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   California Gov’t Code § 65906 establishes the authority of the city
to grant exception to development standards and provisions of this chapter in
cases where, because of special circumstances applicable to a particular
property, the strict application of this code deprives such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical land
use zoning districts.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.410  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   Deviation from chapter. A variance application shall be filed
whenever any deviation from the provisions of this chapter is proposed,
except those minor deviations identified for an administrative adjustment in
§ 153.210.360.



   (B)   Authorized application. Variances may not be approved for uses
or activities not otherwise expressly authorized by this chapter. A variance
may not substitute for a Zoning Code text/map amendment or a conditional use
permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.420  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for a variance shall be processed in accordance with these
regulations.



   (A)   City Planner recommendation. The City Planner shall review the
application, consider pertinent facts and recommend the approval, approval
with modifications or denial of the application for the variance to the
Planning Commission.



   (B)   Planning Commission decision. The Planning Commission shall
conduct a public hearing, consider the determinations detailed in §
153.210.430 and resolve to approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit
by not less than a majority of a quorum.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.430  DETERMINATION.



   The Planning Commission may impose conditions and/or require guarantees
for the variance to ensure compliance and to prevent adverse or detrimental
impacts to the surrounding neighborhood.  Variances shall be granted only
when the Planning Commission determines that the proposed development or
activity complies with all of the following findings.



   (A)   Special circumstances. There are special circumstances
applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or
surroundings, that do not generally apply to other properties in the same
district.



   (B)   Similar privileges. The strict application of this chapter
deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the
vicinity and other identical zoning classification.



   (C)   Consistent privileges. The granting of the variance does not
constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations
upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is
situated.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.440  RECORD OF PERMIT.



   The authorized signature of the Planning Commission, or the Appeal
Authority if the permit was appealed, on a designated form, or a stamp
approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval, conditional approval or
denial of a variance.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 9.  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT



§ 153.210.450  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The city recognizes that certain uses, due to the nature of the use,
intensity or size, require special review to determine if the use proposed,
or the location of that use, is compatible with surrounding uses, or through
the imposition of development and use conditions, can be made compatible with
surrounding uses. The conditional use permit is provided for this purpose and
to ensure compatibility with zoning regulations and surrounding properties.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.460  APPLICABILITY.



   Applications for conditional use permits may be submitted only for
those uses specified as allowable conditional uses in the applicable zone
district. A conditional use permit may not substitute for a Zoning Code
text/map amendment.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.470  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for a conditional use permit shall be processed in
accordance with these guidelines.



   (A)   City Planner recommendation. The City Planner shall review the
application, consider pertinent facts and recommend the approval, approval
with modifications or denial of the application for the conditional use
permit to the Planning Commission.



   (B)   Planning Commission decision. The Planning Commission shall
conduct a public hearing, consider the determinations detailed in §
153.210.480 and resolve to approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit
by a majority of the quorum present.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.480  DETERMINATION.



   The Planning Commission may impose conditions and/or require guarantees
for the conditional use permit to ensure compliance and to prevent adverse or
detrimental impacts to the surrounding neighborhood.  Conditional use
permits shall be granted when the Planning Commission determines that the
proposed use or activity complies with all of the following findings.



   (A)   Conditionally permitted. The use is conditionally permitted
within the subject zone and complies with the intent of all applicable
provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Zone integrity and character. The use will not impair the
integrity and character of the zone in which it is to be located.



   (C)   Site suitability. The subject site is physically suitable for
the type of land use being proposed.



   (D)   Existing compatibility. The use is compatible with any land
uses presently on the subject property.



   (E)   Future compatibility. The use will be compatible with existing
and future land uses within the zone and the general area in which the
proposed use is to be located.



   (F)   Utilities and services. Adequate provisions for water, sewer
and public utilities and services are available to ensure that the use will
not be detrimental to public health and safety.



   (G)   Public access. Adequate provisions for public access are
available to serve the use.



   (H)   General Plan consistency. The use is consistent with the
General Plan.



   (I)   Safety and welfare. The use will not be detrimental to the
public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.490  LIMITED TIME APPROVAL.



   The Planning Commission may approve a condition specifying a term for
which the conditional use permit is valid. The approval may be contingent
upon the written acceptance and continued observance of specified conditions,
including, but not limited to, any of the following.



   (A)   Substantial conformity. Substantial conformity to approved
plans and drawings.



   (B)   Streets and public facilities. Dedication of and improvement
of streets and other public facilities.



   (C)   Landscaping, fences, and walls. Special landscaping, fences or
walls.



   (D)   Signage. Limitations on signs.



   (E)   Hours. Limitations as to the time of day during which
specified activities may be conducted.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.495  EXPIRATION FOR NON-USE.



   In the event that the use authorized by an approved conditional use
permit ceases operation for a period of 12 consecutive months, that
conditional use permit shall become null and void, and any proposal to
reinitiate the use following the end of the 12-month period shall require a
new conditional use permit.  However, prior to the expiration of the
12-month period, the permittee may file with the Planning Division a request
for an extension of up to six months for continuance of the conditional use
permit.  If granted, one additional six-month extension period may be
requested, but in not event shall the overall period for allowing for
continuance of a dormant conditional use permit exceed 24 months.  The City
Planner shall be responsible for determining the date upon which the approved
use ceased operations.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.500  RECORD OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Record. The authorized signature of the Planning Commission,
or the Appeal Authority if the permit was appealed, on a designated form, or
a stamp approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval, conditional
approval or denial of a conditional use permit.



   (B)   Investigation. Upon reasonable notice, the city may conduct an
investigation to ensure that the permittee is maintaining the use as
permitted for and has not converted or modified the use.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 10.  HISTORIC DESIGNATION



§ 153.210.510  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The historic designation process is established to recognize, protect
and ensure proper utilization of the historic resources in the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.520  APPLICABILITY.



   Applications for historic designation may be submitted by a property
owner or authorized agent of the property owner. The City Council may also
initiate proceedings to designate a building, structure or place as historic,
with or without the consent of the owner, by resolution.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.530  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for historic designation shall be processed in accordance
with these guidelines.



   (A)   Historic Resources Advisory Committee recommendation. The
Historic Resources Advisory Committee shall convene to review an application,
consider the determinations detailed in § 153.210.540, and draft a
recommendation to approve or deny the application for the historic
designation.



   (B)   City Council decision. The City Council shall conduct a public
hearing to consider the Historic Resources Advisory Committee’s
recommendation, and grant, grant with modifications or deny the designation
by resolution.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.540  DETERMINATION.



   Historic designation shall be granted to a proposed building, structure
or place when the City Council finds one or more of the following conditions
to exist, based on the recommendation of the Historic Resources Advisory
Committee.



   (A)   Historical representation. The building or structure is
particularly representative of a distinct historical period, type, style,
region or way of life.



   (B)   Connection to important personality. The building or structure
was connected with someone renowned, important or who was a local personality.



   (C)   Connection to rare business. The building or structure is
connected with a business or use which was once common but is now rare.



   (D)   Master work. The building or structure represents the work of
a master builder, engineer, designer, artist or architect.



   (E)   Historic event. The building or structure is the site of an
important historic event or is associated with events that have made a
meaningful contribution to the nation, state or city.



   (F)   Particular architectural style. The building or structure
exemplifies a particular architectural style.



   (G)   Best remaining. The building or structure exemplifies the best
remaining architectural type of a neighborhood.



   (H)   Outstanding design. The construction materials or engineering
methods used in the building or structure embody elements of outstanding
architectural or engineering design, detail, material or craftsman-ship.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.550  RECORD OF DESIGNATION.



   The authorized signature of the City Council on a designated form shall
signify approval, conditional approval or denial of the designation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 11.  HISTORIC STRUCTURE WORK PERMIT



§ 153.210.560  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The historic structure work permit process is a review that ensures
that all work proposed to be done to a historic building, structure or place
will not be detrimental to the character or value of the building, structure
or place.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.570  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for work permits shall be processed in accordance with
these guidelines.



   (A)   Director of Community Development approval or reference. After
the Director of Community Development has received the completed application,
the Director shall review the request and conduct a field investigation of
the site. If the Director determines that the proposed work will affect only
the interior of the building or structure, or will not have more than a minor
effect upon the exterior appearance, the Director shall approve the work
permit. The Director shall refer all other applications for work permits to
the Historic Resource Advisory Committee for determination.



   (B)   Historic Resource Advisory Committee action. The Historic
Resource Advisory Committee shall conduct a public hearing on all referred
work permit applications to consider the Director’s recommendation, and
shall act to grant, grant subject to conditions or deny the permit. The
action shall be by resolution.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.580 RECORD OF PERMIT.



   The authorized signature of the Director of Community Development, the
Historic Resources Advisory Committee or the Appeal Authority if the permit
was appealed, shall signify approval, conditional approval or denial of the
work permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 12.  HISTORIC STRUCTURE DEMOLITION PERMIT



§ 153.210.590  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The historic structure demolition permit process is a review that
ensures that any historic building or structure is preserved to the extent
possible prior to unsafe conditions, financial hardships or other conditions
require demolition.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.600  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for historic structure demolition permits shall be
processed in accordance with these guidelines.



   (A)   Application. The owner of the historic building or structure
shall submit a demolition permit application to the Historic Resources
Advisory Committee 180 days prior to the planned demolition. No application
to the city for a demolition permit will be accepted during the 180-day
period. 



   (B)   Preservation tasks permitted. Following the receipt of such
notice, during the 180-day period, the Historic Resources Advisory Committee
may perform any of the following tasks as it determines are necessary to
preserve the building or structure:



      (1)   Seek local trusts and other financial sources which may
be willing to purchase and restore the historic building.;



      (2)   Publicize the availability of the historic building for
purchase for restoration purposes;



      (3)   Investigate possible sites for relocation of the
historic building; and



      (4)   Recommend to the City Council that the city purchase the
historic building where it does not appear that private preservation is
feasible.



   (C)   Historic Resources Advisory Committee action. Upon completion
of any or all of the tasks specified in subsection B above, the Historic
Resources Advisory Committee shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed
demolitions to consider an action to grant, grant subject to conditions or
deny the permit. The action shall be by resolution.



   (D)   Waiver of notice. The Historic Resources Advisory Committee
may waive the requirement of a written notice 180 days prior to demolition,
if the demolition involves any of the following:



      (1)   An emergency repair or removal of an unsafe condition of
the historic building;



      (2)   A relocation of the historic building to a site approved
by the Committee; or



      (3)   Relief of extreme financial hardship to the owner of the
historic building.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.610  RECORD OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Record. The authorized signature of the Director of Community
Development, the Historic Resources Advisory Committee or the Appeal
Authority if the permit was appealed, shall signify approval, conditional
approval or denial of the demolition permit.



   (B)   Local Official Register. When a historic building has been
demolished, the Secretary of the Historic Resources Advisory Committee, upon
notice thereof, shall delete the historic building from the Local Official
Register.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 13.  WIRELESS FACILITY ENCROACHMENT PERMIT



§ 153.210.620  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   To address the growing proliferation of wireless telecommunication
facilities being erected throughout the City, the wireless facility
encroachment permit is established to ensure that such facilities will not
detract from the overall quality and appearance of the city’s commercial
and industrial neighborhoods, and will not adversely affect the health,
safety and welfare of residents.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.630  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for a wireless facility encroachment permit shall be
processed in accordance with these guidelines.



   (A)   Written notice. The Director of Public Works shall be
responsible for providing written notice of the application to all property
owners within a 300-foot radius of the proposed facility at least 15 days
prior to issuing the permit.



   (B)   Review. The Director shall then review the application,
considering all comments provided by the public and pertinent facts.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.640  DETERMINATION.



   The Director of Public Works may impose conditions and/or require
guarantees for the wireless facility encroachment permit to ensure compliance
and to prevent adverse or detrimental impacts to the surrounding
neighborhood. Wireless facility encroachment permits shall be granted when
the Director determines that the proposed use or activity complies with all
of the following findings.



   (A)   Safety and welfare. The facility will not be detrimental to
the public interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare.



   (B)   Aesthetic impacts. The facility will not significantly result
in adverse aesthetic impacts.



   (C)   Development standards and permit requirements. The facility
complies with all development standards and permit requirements outlined in
subchapter 153.180, Antennas and Other Telecommunications Facilities.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.650  RECORD OF PERMIT.



   The authorized signature of the Director of Public Works, or the Appeal
Authority if the permit was appealed, on a designated form, or a stamp
approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval, conditional approval or
denial of a wireless facility encroachment permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 14.  SPECIFIC PLAN



§ 153.210.660  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The city recognizes that certain properties in the city may benefit
from focused planning efforts wherein infrastructure, land use relationships,
land use intensities, public service needs and resource protection goals can
be carefully examined and planned in a comprehensive manner. The specific
plan provides a mechanism to carry out such planning efforts. The following
regulations establish uniform procedures and guidelines for specific plans
prepared pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code Tit. 7, Div. 1, Ch. 3, Art. 8.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.670  SPECIFIC PLAN INITIATION.



   (A)   The City Council may identify those portions of the city where
a specific plan is appropriate by adopting a resolution of intention for a
specific plan designation. At the discretion of the City Council, specific
plans may be initiated and prepared by the city or by a property owner or
owners of any parcels subject to requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   For any specific plan application submitted by a property
owner or owners, or a designated representative, a pre-application meeting
with the Director of Community Development shall be required prior to the
formal submission of the specific plan application. The purpose of this
meeting is to review with the applicant the city’s requirements for
specific plan content, applicable policies, infrastructure needs and other
information as determined by the Director of Community Development.



   (C)   In addition to a formal application completed pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall submit a draft specific
plan containing text and diagrams containing all information specified in
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65452 and 65452, as well as other information,
standards and requirements specified by the city.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.680  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for a specific plan shall be processed in accordance with
these guidelines.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall review the application, consider
pertinent facts, and provide a recommendation to the City Council on the
specific plan application, which shall be in the form of an adopted
resolution for approval, approval with modifications or denial of the
application.



   (B)   If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to
the specific plan not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the
Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the Commission
to act within 45 days of receiving the Council’s request shall provide the
Council with the authority to act without the recommendation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.690  DETERMINATION.



   The City Council shall make the following findings to approve a
specific plan and any amendment thereto:



   (A)   The specific plan is consistent with and provides for the
orderly, systematic and specific implementation of the General Plan;



   (B)   The land use and development regulations within the specific
plan are comparable in breadth and depth to regulations contained in this
chapter;



   (C)   The specific plan will not adversely affect the public health
and safety or result in incompatible land uses;



   (D)   The specific plan provides the framework to phase and pace
growth within the specific plan area so as to ensure completion of all
necessary public facilities concurrently with completion of development
entailed in the specific plan; and



   (E)   The specific plan identifies adequate financing mechanisms for
the infrastructure and public facilities required to support the development.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.700  RECORD OF PLAN.



   The final action on the specific plan by the City Council shall be
adoption of the plan documents by ordinance or resolution. The rezoning of
the subject property to a specific plan district shall be adopted by
ordinance of the City Council.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.710  SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENTS.



   Any specific plan may be amended by the same procedure as the specific
plan is adopted. The city may initiate amendments to any portion of a
specific plan. The following changes to a specific plan shall require a
specific plan amendment:



   (A)   Changes to the text or maps other than the addition of
information that does not change the effect of any regulation;



   (B)   Changes in any specific plan boundary;



   (C)   Changes in the specified density for any area; and



   (D)   Changes in standards or regulations, including landscaping and
design standards.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 15.  ZONING CODE TEXT AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS



§ 153.210.720  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   California Gov’t Code § 65853 allows amendments to any provisions of
this chapter, including the adoption of new regulations or deletion of
existing regulations, and for changes to the zoning designation on any parcel
within the city. 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.730  AMENDMENT INITIATION.



   Amendments to the provisions of this chapter may be initiated in any
one of the following manners:



   (A)   Upon resolution of the City Council;



   (B)   Upon resolution of the Planning Commission; or



   (C)   Upon application by a property owner, by a property owner’s
authorized agent or by any public utility who has exercised eminent domain.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.740  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for a zoning code text or map amendment shall be processed
in accordance with these regulations.



   (A)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed zoning code amendment is consistent with the objectives of this
chapter, the General Plan and development policies of the city.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend
to the City Council approval, approval with modifications or denial of the
proposed application. A majority vote of the quorum present is required to
recommend approval or approval with modifications.



   (D)   The Planning Commission’s resolution shall include its
recommendation and shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the
matter for consideration by the City Council.



   (E)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission resolution for denial
of a zoning map amendment (change of zone), the City Clerk shall place the
Commission’s resolution on the City Council agenda as a receive-and-file
item. The Planning Commission’s decision shall be considered final and no
further action by the City Council will be required unless an appeal is
filed, or unless the City Council chooses to set the matter for hearing.



   (F)   Upon receipt of the Planning Commission resolution for
approval of a zoning map amendment (change of zone), zoning code text
amendment or denial of a zoning code text amendment, the City Clerk shall set
the matter for hearing before the City Council.



   (G)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Planning
Commission’s recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed amendment is consistent with the objectives of this chapter, the
General Plan and development policies of the city.



   (H)   The City Council shall act to approve or deny the application.



   (I)   If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to
the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the Planning
Commission to act within 45 days of receiving City Council’s request shall
provide the City Council with authority to act without Planning
Commission’s recommendation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.750  DETERMINATION.



   In acting to approve an amendment to the zoning code, the City Council
shall make the following findings about the proposed zoning code amendment:



   (A)   The amendment is consistent with the goals, policies and
objectives of the General Plan;



   (B)   The amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties;



   (C)   The amendment promotes public health, safety and general
welfare; and



   (D)   The amendment serves the goals and purposes of the zoning code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.760  RECORD OF AMENDMENT.



   The adoption of the zoning code text or map amendment shall constitute
final action, approval and record of the amendment.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 16 - GENERAL PLAN TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS



§ 153.210.770  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   California Gov’t Code § 65358 allows for amendments and
modifications to the city’s General Plan. Amendments are considered
appropriate in response to changes in city policies, economic conditions and
other factors affecting Baldwin Park.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.780  AMENDMENT INITIATION.



   (A)   A General Plan amendment may be initiated in any one of the
following manners:



      (1)   Upon resolution of the City Council.



      (2)   Upon resolution of the Planning Commission.



      (3)   Upon application by a property owner of any parcel
subject to the General Plan, by a property owner’s authorized agent, or by
any public utility which has exercised eminent domain with regard to such
property.



   (B)   In the case of a proposed amendment to the General Plan land
use policy map, if the property owner for which the amendment is proposed is
in more than one ownership, all owners or their authorized agents shall be
required to sign the application.



   (C)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65358, no mandatory element
of the General Plan may be amended more frequently than four times during any
calendar year. Subject to that limitation, an amendment may be made at any
time and may include more than one change to the General Plan.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.790  PROCEEDINGS.



   Applications for a General Plan amendment shall be processed in
accordance with these regulations.



   (A)   A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be
noticed and conducted.



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and proposal and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this
chapter, the balance of the General Plan, and development policies of the
city.



   (C)   The Planning Commission shall act by resolution to recommend
to the City Council approval, approval with modifications or denial of the
proposed application. A majority vote of the entire Planning Commission is
required to recommend approval or approval with modifications.



   (D)   The Commission’s resolution shall include its recommendation
and such shall be transmitted to the City Clerk for scheduling the matter for
consideration by the City Council.



   (E)   Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution, the City
Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council.



   (F)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Planning
Commission’s recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed General Plan amendment is consistent with the objectives of this
chapter, the balance of the General Plan, and development policies of the
city.



   (G)   The City Council shall act to approve or deny the application.
A majority vote of the entire City Council is required to amend the General
Plan. The Council’s action to amend the General Plan shall be by formal
resolution.



   (H)   If the City Council proposes any substantial modification to
the application not previously considered by the Planning Commission, the
City Council shall refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for
consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the Planning
Commission to act within 45 days of receiving City Council’s request shall
provide the City Council with authority to act without Planning
Commission’s recommendation.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.800  DETERMINATION.



   In acting to approve an amendment to the General Plan, the City Council
shall make the following findings about the proposed General Plan amendment:



   (A)   The amendment is consistent with all other goals, policies and
objectives of the General Plan;



   (B)   The amendment will not adversely affect surrounding properties;



   (C)   The amendment promotes public health, safety and general
welfare; and



   (D)   The amendment serves the goals and purposes of the zoning code.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.810  RECORD OF AMENDMENT.



   The adoption of the General Plan text and/or map amendment shall
constitute final action, approval and record of the amendment.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 17.  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT



§ 153.210.820  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Development agreements are authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65864 as
a means of providing both the city and property owners with assurances that
development projects can be completed under the terms, conditions and
regulations in effect at the time that authority is granted to proceed with a
project.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.830  DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT APPLICATION.



   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65865, any person having a
legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of such
property, or any authorized agent thereof, may apply to the city for a
development agreement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.840  CONTENTS OF AGREEMENT.



   (A)   All draft and final development agreements shall, at a
minimum, contain the following information:



      (1)   The duration of the agreement;



      (2)   The permitted uses of the property;



      (3)   The density and intensity of permitted use;



      (4)   The maximum height and size of proposed buildings; and



      (5)   Provisions for reservation or dedication of lands for
public purposes.



   (B)   The development agreement may also contain the following
information:



      (1)   Conditions, terms, restrictions and requirements for
subsequent discretionary actions, provided such conditions, terms, provisions
and requirements do not prevent development of land for the purposes and
level of use set forth in the agreement; and



      (2)   Requirements that construction be commenced within a
specified time period, and that the project or any phase thereof be completed
within a specified time frame.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.850  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the
City Council on a development agreement application for approval, approval
with modifications or denial of the application. The recommendation shall be
in the form of a resolution.



   (B)   Upon receipt of a Planning Commission resolution, the City
Clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the City Council.



   (C)   At the hearing, the City Council shall review the Planning
Commission’s recommendation and receive evidence as to how or why the
proposed development agreement is consistent with the objectives of this
chapter, the General Plan, and development policies of the city.



   (D)   The City Council shall act to approve or deny the development
agreement. A majority vote of the entire City Council is required to approve
the development agreement.



   (E)   Development agreements shall be adopted by ordinance of the
City Council, which constitutes final action and approval of the agreement.
After the effective date of the ordinance approving the development agreement
and recording of the agreement pursuant § 153.210.870, the city may enter
into the agreement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.860  DETERMINATION.



   In acting to grant a development agreement, the City Council shall make
the following findings about the proposed development agreement:



   (A)   The development agreement is consistent with the General Plan
objectives, policies, land uses and implementation programs and any other
adopted plans or policies applicable to the agreement;



   (B)   The development agreement is compatible with the uses
authorized in, and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in
which the real property is located;



   (C)   The development agreement is in conformance with the public
convenience and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area and
will not be detrimental or injurious to property or persons in the general
neighborhood or to the general welfare of the residents of the city as a
whole; and



   (D)   The development agreement is consistent with the provisions of
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65864 through 65869.5.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.870  RECORDATION AND FILING AGREEMENT.



   Within ten days after the effective date of a development agreement,
the City Clerk shall have the development agreement recorded with the Los
Angeles County Recorder. Additionally, the City Clerk shall be the official
custodian of the agreement file. The file shall include an executed copy of
the agreement and the originals of all exhibits, reports of periodic review,
amendments and/or cancellations to the agreement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.880  AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION.



   Either the city or other parties to a development agreement may propose
an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of an agreement
previously entered into. The procedure to amend a development agreement is
the same as the original adoption. However, for instances in which the city
initiates the proposed amendment or cancellation, the city shall give notice
to the parties to the agreement of the city’s intention to initiate such
proceedings.



§ 153.210.890  PERIODIC REVIEW.



   The city shall review the development agreement at least once every 12
months from the date the agreement is entered into. The City Planner shall
initiate review proceedings and notice the property owner at least ten days
prior to determination by the City Planner. The City Planner shall determine
on the basis of substantial evidence whether or not the property owner has,
for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and
conditions of the agreement. If so, the review shall be concluded. However,
if the city finds that the property owner has not complied in good faith with
the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the
City Council may hold a public hearing to modify or terminate the agreement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 18.  DOWNTOWN OVERLAY



§ 153.210.900  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The Downtown Overlay (DO) is established to facilitate the
consideration of development projects, uses, and activities within the areas
subject to the Downtown Overlay.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.910  APPLICABILITY.



   The DO applies to all land within the boundaries of the DO as shown on
the zoning map.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.920  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Before any new permitted or conditionally permitted use can
commence operation, or any building permit can be issued for a structure on a
property within the Downtown Overlay area, the property owner or his or her
representative shall file an application for and receive approval from the
Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development may
refer the review and approval to the Planning Commission, in his or her sole
discretion. The approval shall be based on the guidelines and provisions
applicable to a design review and conditional use permits established by this
chapter.



   (B)   Notwithstanding any application, filing and review procedures
established by this chapter or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, a party
other than the property owner(s) or their designated representative(s) may
file an application for the city’s consideration of land use entitlements
without the consent of the property owner(s) or their representative(s), if
that party has entered into a cash depository agreement, exclusive
negotiation agreement, owner participation agreement, owner participation and
disposition agreement, disposition and development agreement or similar
agreement with the City of Baldwin Park; provided, that any entitlement
granted pursuant to this part shall not be effective unless and  until the
applicant becomes the owner of the property involved or the property owner(s)
of that property has(have) submitted written approval for the applicant to
proceed with that entitlement.



   (C)   The fee for filing an application in the Downtown Overlay area
shall be the same as the fee for filing an application for a conditional use
permit. The fee for filing an appeal of any decision on that application
shall be the same as for an appeal of the decision on a conditional use
permit.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.930  DETERMINATION.



   The Director of Community Development may refer the review and approval
to the Planning Commission, at his/her sole discretion. Downtown Overlay
clearance shall be granted, conditionally granted or denied based on the
guidelines and provision applicable to design review and conditional use
permits established in parts 2 and 9 of subchapter 153.210.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.940  RECORD OF OVERLAY.



   The authorized signature of the Planning Commission, or the Appeal
Authority if the decision was appealed, on a designated form, or a stamp
approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval, conditional approval or
denial of a Downtown Overlay.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 19.  DEVELOPMENT PLAN (PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY)



§ 153.210.950  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The development plan process is established to provide a permitting and
conditioning mechanism for projects proposed to be established within a
Planned Development Overlay zone. The purpose of the permit is to ensure that
a Planned Development Plan application conforms with the requirements of
subchapter 153.100 and provides for high-quality residential development
consistent with the city’s General Plan.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.960  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for the construction,
reconstruction or relocation of any building or structure, nor shall any use
of land be commenced or permitted on any lot within the city which is zoned
or proposed to be zoned with a Planned Development Overlay zone, unless a
development Plan has been approved. Where such a development plan has been
approved, notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the
contrary, the conditions of approval imposed upon such plan, and the
provisions of this part, depending upon the underlying zoning classification,
shall be observed in development of the property to which such plan applies,
to the exclusion of any contrary regulations applicable to such property.



   (B)   All buildings or structures proposed to be located on any
property within a Planned Development Overlay zone shall be subject to the
provisions of part 2 of subchapter 153.210, Design Review.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.970  REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.



   No development plan shall be approved by the Planning Commission unless
the Commission finds that the proposed planned development conforms with all
applicable provisions of this chapter, the Planned Development Design
Guidelines and other applicable regulations, and is compatible with adjacent
land uses. The Planning Commission may apply conditions of approval to ensure
compliance.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.980  RECORD OF PLAN.



   The authorized signature of the Planning Commission, or the Appeal
Authority if the decision was appealed, on a designated form, or a stamp
approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval, conditional approval or
denial of a development plan.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



Part 20.  REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION



§ 153.210.990  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   The reasonable accommodation process establishes a formal procedure for
individuals with disabilities seeking equal access to housing to request a
reasonable accommodation to zoning regulations, as provided by the Federal
Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and California’s Fair Employment and
Housing Act, and to establish criteria to be used when considering these
requests. The purpose of the reasonable accommodation process is to provide
flexibility in the application of land use, zoning or building regulations,
policies or procedures for individuals with disabilities or developers of
housing for persons with disabilities when it is necessary to eliminate
barriers to equal housing opportunities.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.1000  APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any
person with a disability, or a representative, when the application of a
zoning, land use or building regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier
to equal housing opportunities.



   (B)   If a reasonable accommodation request is approved, the request
shall be granted to an individual and shall not run with the land unless the
City Planner determines that:



      (1)   The modification is physically integrated into the
residential structure and cannot easily be removed or altered to comply with
applicable codes; or



      (2)   The accommodation is to be used by another disabled
person.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.1010  PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   The Community Development Department shall prominently display
at City Hall a notice advising those with disabilities or their
representatives that they may submit a request for reasonable accommodation.
A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices
and/or procedures may be filed on an application form provided by the
Community Development Department at any time that the accommodation may be
necessary to ensure equal access to housing.



   (B)   A request for reasonable accommodation shall state the basis
of the request including, but not limited to, a modification or exception to
the regulations, standards and practices for the siting, development and use
of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory
barriers and provide a disabled person equal opportunity to housing of his or
her choice.



   (C)   The City Planner may request additional information necessary
for making a determination on the request for reasonable accommodation that
complies with the fair housing law protections and the privacy rights of the
disabled person to use the specified housing. If additional information is
requested, the review period for the reasonable accommodation stops until
additional information is provided.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.1020  FINDINGS.



   The written decision of the City Planner to grant or deny a request for
reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act.
The following findings must be analyzed, made, and adopted before any action
is taken to approve or deny a request for reasonable accommodation.



   (A)   The housing that is subject to the request will be used by an
individual with a disability, as defined under Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988 and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act.



   (B)   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
specific housing available to an individual with a disability.



   (C)   The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an
undue financial or administrative burden on the city.



   (D)   The requested reasonable accommodation would not require a
fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including, but
not limited to, land use and zoning.



   (E)   There are no other alternative reasonable accommodations that
may provide an equivalent level of benefit at a similar cost while providing
greater consistency with the city’s laws and regulations.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.1030  DETERMINATION.



   (A)   The City Planner, or Building Official, as appropriate, shall
have the authority to consider and act on requests for reasonable
accommodation. The City Planner shall issue a written determination within 30
days of receipt of a completed application that either grants, grants with
modifications or denies a request for reasonable accommodation. In granting a
request for reasonable accommodation, the City Planner or Building Official
may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to
ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings
listed in § 153.210.1020.



   (B)   Requests for reasonable accommodation submitted for concurrent
review with another discretionary land use application shall be reviewed by
the authority reviewing the discretionary land use application.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.210.1040  RECORD OF REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION.



   The authorized signature of the City Planner, Planning Commission or
the Appeal Authority if the request was appealed, on a designated form, or a
stamp approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval of a reasonable
accommodation request.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



153.220  DEFINITIONS



§ 153.220.010  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Definitions of the technical and special terms and phrases that are
used in this chapter are provided here in an effort to ensure precision in
interpretation of the Zoning Code. Where any definition in this chapter may
conflict with definitions in other chapters of this code, these definitions
shall prevail for the purposes of this chapter. If a word is not defined
here, or in other provisions of this code, the most common dictionary
definition is presumed to be correct.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.020  A DEFINITIONS.



   ABANDON.  To cease to use, operate or occupy.



   ABATEMENT.  The act or process of putting an end to the use of a
structure, sign or business that fails to comply with the provisions of the
Zoning Code.



   ABUT/ABUTTING LAND.  A parcel of land that has a common boundary with
another parcel of land, including parcels which share a common corner.



   ACUPRESSURE/ACUPUNCTURE ESTABLISHMENT.  An establishment that provides
acupuncture and/or acupressure services. Acupuncture is the practice of
inserting needles into the body to reduce pain or induce anesthesia.
Acupressure is a form of touch therapy that utilizes the principles of
acupuncture and Chinese medicine; the same points on the body are used in
acupressure as in acupuncture, but are stimulated with finger pressure
instead of with the insertion of needles.



   ACCESS.  The place, means or way, by which pedestrians and vehicles
shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a lot, from a
public street, private street or alley.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure that is subordinate and incidental
to the main building or structure that is located on the same lot.



   ACCESSORY USE.  The use of a portion of a lot or building that is
incidental, related or subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building, and is located on the same lot with such principal use or building.



   ADDITION.  Any construction that is attached to an existing building
or facility and which increases the size or capacity of a building or
facility in terms of site coverage, building height, length, width or gross
floor area.



   ADJACENT.  Two or more objects that are located in close proximity to
each other.



   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY.  A facility that provides supervision and
non-medical care to more than 6 adults, including elderly persons, on a less
than 24-hour basis.



   ADULT DAY CARE HOME.  A home that provides supervision and non-medical
care to six or fewer adults, including elderly persons, in the provider’s
home on a less than 24-hour basis.



   ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Adult-oriented business and any related or
associated activities shall be defined as set forth in subchapter 124.010 of
this code.



   ALCOHOL SALES, OFF-SALE OUTLET.  Any commercial retail establishment,
business or facility that holds a license from the State Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control that authorizes the sale of beer, wine or
distilled spirits for consumption off premises where sold. References to the
establishment shall include any immediately adjacent area that is owned,
leased, or rented, or controlled by the licensee.



   ALCOHOL SALES, ON-SALE OUTLET.  Any commercial retail establishment,
business or facility at which alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or given
away for consumption on the premises and which is applying for or has
obtained a license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control
that authorizes the sale of beer, wine or distilled spirits for the
consumption on the premises where sold. References to the establishment shall
include any immediately adjacent area that is owned, leased, or rented, or
controlled by the licensee.



   ALLEY.  A public or private right-of-way, other than a street, which
is designated as an alley by the city, that provides a permanently reserved
but secondary means of access to adjoining lots.



   ALTERATIONS.  An exterior or interior change or variation of the
structural or architectural feature or visual characteristic of a building or
structure.



   ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION.  The use of modes of transportation other
than the single passenger motor vehicle (e.g., a motor vehicle operated by
one passenger and transporting the same), including, but not limited to,
carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit and bicycling.



   AMENDMENT.  A change in the working, context or substance of the
zoning code or General Plan or a change in the boundaries or classification
on the zoning map or land use map.



   AMORITIZATION.  A method of eliminating nonconforming uses and
structures by requiring the termination of the use or demolition of the
structure after a specified period of time.



   ANTIQUE SHOPS.  A commercial business that sells only bona fide
antiques or collectable items. The Community Development Director shall
determine the suitability of materials for sale.



   APARTMENT.  One or more rooms, with kitchen facilities, comprising as
independent, self-contained dwelling unit located within a multiple dwelling
structure.



      EFFICIENCY APARTMENT.  An efficiency apartment, also known as a
studio apartment or bachelor/bachelorette style apartment, is a
self-contained, small apartment, which combines living room, bedroom and
kitchenette into a single room.



   APPLICANT.  Any person or persons who submits and application for a
use or development project.



   APPROVING AUTHORITY.  The designated planning agency responsible for
the review and action on land use and development permits and approvals.



   ARCADE.  A location where four or more mechanical or electronic
amusement games, including computer terminals, where such machines may be
played or utilized, are located for use by business patrons, even if the
games are provided in conjunction with or as an accessory to another
business. Also includes internet cafés, defined as an establishment that
provides more than three computers and/or other electronic devices, for
access to that system commonly referred to as the “internet,” e-mail,
playing video games over the Internet or other network system, and/or access
to other computer software programs, to the public for compensation and/or
for public access. Internet café is also synonymous with PC café, cyber
café, internet gaming center, computer/internet rental and cyber centers.



   ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE.  An architectural element of the design of a
building or structure embodying the style, general arrangement and components
on the outer surface thereof, including, but not limited to, the kind, color
or texture of building materials and the type and style of windows, doors,
lights, signs and other fixtures appurtenant to the building or structure.



   ART/PHOTOGRAPHY STORE, STUDIO OR GALLERY.  Small-scale facilities for
the demonstration of art. Examples include: art and/or photography galleries
and production studios for individual painters, sculptors, photographers, and
other artists. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products
related to the services provided.



   ASSESSED VALUE.  The then assessed value of the land, building or
structure, as is shown on the current equalized assessment role in effect as
of the time of the making of the determination of such assessed value.



   ASSESSOR.  The Tax Assessor of the county.



   ASTROLOGY AND FORTUNETELLING ESTABLISHMENT.  The business or art of
astrology, phrenology, life reading, fortune-telling, clairvoyance,
clairaudience, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, mesmerism, oriental
mysteries, palmistry, spirit photography, spirit writing, spirit voices,
spirit materialization, etherealization, numerology, augury, divination or
other similar or related art or business.



   AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING YARD.  Any lot used for the purpose of
dismantling of motor vehicles and/or trailers for sale or storage of such
parts, vehicles and/or trailers.



   AUTOMOTIVE  SALES AND SERVICES.



      AUTOMOTIVE DETAILING.  A car wash establishment where operating
functions are performed entirely by an operator/owner with the use of
washing, waxing, vacuuming and drying equipment supplemented with manual
detailing by the operator/owner of the establishment.



      AUTOMOTIVE PARTS SUPPLY STORE. The sale of vehicle equipment and
parts. These uses include brake shops, oil change shops, auto glass sales,
stereo and alarm sales, and tire sales, but exclude vehicle dismantling,
salvage, tire retreading or recapping.



      AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND INSTALLATION.  The repair of automobiles,
trucks, motorcycles, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, or boats, including
the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. These
uses include auto repair shops, body and fender shops, but exclude vehicle
dismantling or salvage and tire retreading or recapping.



      AUTOMOTIVE SALES, RENTAL AND LEASING, NEW.  The sale, leasing,
or rental of new automobiles, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural
equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and
incidental maintenance and repair.



      AUTOMOTIVE SALES, RENTAL AND LEASING, USED.  The sale, leasing,
or rental of used automobiles, trucks, tractors, construction or agricultural
equipment, mobile homes, and similar equipment, including storage and
incidental maintenance and repair.



      AUTOMOTIVE WASH.  An establishment where washing, drying,
polishing, or vacuuming of an automobile is done by the car driver or
occupant.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.030  B DEFINITIONS.



   BANK/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  A full-service state or federally
chartered bank, savings association, credit union or industrial loan company,
but does not include any business whose primary function is check cashing,
money wiring or the operation of freestanding automated teller
machines/kiosks.



   BAR.  Any facility licensed by the State of California which restricts
entry to persons of legal alcoholic beverage drinking age and at which the
sale of alcoholic beverages is provided for consumption on premises. Also
referred to as tavern.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is totally or partly below
the level of the furnished grade of the lot upon which it is located.



   BEDROOM.  Any habitable room other than a bathroom, kitchen, dining
room, living room, family room or den.



   BILLIARD HALL.  Any place of business where any of several games are
played on a table by driving small balls against one another or into pockets
with a cue.



   BOARDINGHOUSE.  A dwelling unit where non-transient lodging, with or
without meals, is provided for compensation to one or more persons who are
not members of the family occupying the premises. For purposes of this
definition, lodging shall be deemed non-transient if it is for not less than
31 consecutive days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall not
be deemed a BOARDINGHOUSE when the dwelling unit is used to serve six or
fewer persons and the occupant or owner of the dwelling unit has all licenses
required by law for such service.



      (1)   An intermediate care facility/developmentally disabled
habilitative or an intermediate care facility/developmentally
disabled-nursing, as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1250.



      (2)   A residential facility as defined in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 1502.



      (3)   A residential care facility as defined in Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 1568.01.



      (4)   A residential care facility for the elderly as defined
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1569.2.



      (5)   An alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment
facility as defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11834.11.



      (6)   Or any other use which state law states may not be
deemed to be a BOARDINGHOUSE.



   BOAT SALES.  Establishments engaged in renting or selling any type of
watercraft that is used or capable of being used as a means of transportation
on water. Includes storage and incidental maintenance. 



   BREEZEWAY.  A structure with two sides open which connects the main
building with an accessory building.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons or
property of any kind.



      MAIN BUILDING.  The building on a lot that contains the primary
permitted use of the lot.



   BUILDING FACADE.  That portion of any exterior elevation of a building
which extends from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and includes
the entire width of the building elevation. Calculation of the area of
BUILDING FACADE includes all window and doorway openings.



   BUILDING FRONTAGE.  That face of a building that is parallel to, or is
at a near parallel angle to a public street or public parking area.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  A line within a lot, as determined under the
standards of the zoning code, that delineates the area between this line and
the street centerline within which no building or portions thereof can be
located.



   BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES.  An establishment within a building,
providing other businesses with various services including maintenance,
repair and service, testing, rental, and the like; also includes:



      (1)   Blueprinting;



      (2)   Computer services;



      (3)   Publishing;



      (4)   Film processing and photofinishing;



      (5)   Equipment rental businesses within buildings;



      (6)   Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on
the client site;



      (7)   janitorial and window-cleaning services;



      (8)   Mail-box services; and



      (9)   Outdoor advertising services.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.040  C DEFINITIONS.



   CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA).  A statute that requires
all jurisdictions in the state to evaluate the extent of environmental
degradation posed by proposed development.



   CANOPY.  A structural, ornamental, roof-like appendage, freestanding
or attached to a building.



   CARPOOL.  A vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to
and from work on a regular basis.



   CARPORT.  A permanently roofed structure with no more than two
enclosed sides that is used for automobile storage and shelter.



   CATERING ESTABLISHMENT.  Preparation and delivery of food and
beverages for off-site consumption without provision for on-site pickup or
consumption.



   CENTERLINE.  The centerline of any street, highway or alley, the
location of which shall be determined by the City Engineer.



   CHECK CASHING.  A person or entity that for compensation engages, in
whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts money
orders or other commercial paper serving the same purpose. CHECK CASHING does
not include a retail seller (i) engaged primarily in the business of selling
consumer goods, including consumables to retail buyers, and (ii) that also
cashes checks or issues money orders for a minimum flat fee not exceeding $2
as a service to its customers that is incidental to its main purpose of
business.



   CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY. A facility which provides non-medical, care,
protection and supervision, to more than 14 children under 18 years of age,
on a less than 24-hour basis.



   CHILD DAY CARE HOME.  A home that regularly provides care, protection
and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider’s own home, for
periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are
away, and is either a small or large family day care home as follows:



      LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOME.  A home which provides family day
care (for periods less than 24 hours a day) to seven to 14 children (under
the age of 18) in the provider’s home, including children under the age of
ten years who reside at the home (see Cal. Health & Safety Code § 1596.78.c).



      SMALL FAMILY DAY CARE HOME.  A home which provides family day
care (for periods less than 24 hours a day) to eight or fewer children (under
the age of 18) in the provider’s home, including children under the age of
ten years who reside at the home (see Cal. Health & Safety Code §
1596.78[b]).



   CHURCH.  Any property used for regular religious worship and related
activities, maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to
support public worship.



   CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Baldwin Park.



   CLEAR CROSS-VISIBILITY AREA.  An area of clear cross-visibility area
at an intersection unobstructed by structures or landscaping.  CLEAR
CROSS-VISIBILITY areas are generally in the shape of a triangle and are
located at any corner formed by the intersection of two streets.







 



   CLUB.  A building or premises used by a private or public,
incorporated or unincorporated, group of persons organized for the purposes
of promoting literature, science, politics, good fellowship, or other common
cause, excluding services customarily carried on as a business.



   COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY.  Any facility, place or building which is
maintained and operated to provide non-medical residential care, day
treatment, adult day care, foster care or agency services to children and/or
adults including, but not limited to, physically handicapped, mentally
handicapped, substance abusers, battered persons and abused or neglected
people.



   COMMERCIAL CENTER.  A group of architecturally unified commercial
establishments built on a site that is planned, developed, owned and managed
as an operating unit.



   COMMERCIAL ENTERTAINMENT. Establishments providing participant or
spectator recreation or entertainment, either indoors or outdoors, for a fee
or admission charge. Does not include “Adult-Oriented Businesses” or
“Bars.” Illustrative examples of commercial recreation and entertainment
uses include motion picture theaters, performing arts centers, and dance
halls.



   COMMERCIAL RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT, MINOR.  Any commercial retail
establishment, business or facility which encompasses a gross floor area less
than 10,000 square feet.



   COMMERCIAL UNIT.  A portion of a building that is physically separated
from other units and/or common interior hallways within the same building by
solid fire rated walls extending from the floor to the ceiling, and where
each unit possesses one or more of the following features: independent
utilities, heating and air conditioning controlled within the unit itself,
lockable doors and direct access from the outside or from a common interior
hallway. All individual units are to comply with all applicable building and
fire codes including, but not limited to, wall construction, common
hallway/aisle widths, emergency access requirements, heating, plumbing and
electrical requirements.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A use permitted on a particular lot and within a
zone only upon a finding that such use in a specified location will comply
with all the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as specified in the zoning code and authorized by the City Council.



   CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.  An approval that is required for a use to be
carried out in a particular zone that is not a use permitted by right.



   CONDOMINIUM.  The interior airspace of two or more dwelling units that
are individually owned and where the balance of the property is owned in
common by the owners of the units.



   CONGREGATE LIVING HEALTH FACILITY. A facility that provides inpatient
care including medical supervision, 24-hour skilled nursing and supportive
care, pharmacy, dietary, social and recreational activity.



   CONVENIENCE STORE.  See RETAIL FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES.



   COTTAGE FOOD OPERATION. An enterprise with annual gross sales limits
set forth under Cal. Health & Safety Code § 113758(a), operated by a cottage
food operator having no more than one full-time equivalent employee,
conducted within a private home kitchen where the cottage food operator
resides, and where the cottage food products are prepared or packaged for
direct, indirect, or direct and indirect sales pursuant to Cal. Health &
Safety Code § 113758. A cottage food operation may engage in the following
sales activities subject to approval from the Los Angeles County Department
of Public Health:



      (1)   Class A cottage food operations may engage only in
direct sales of cottage food products including direct sale venues such as
temporary events. Door to door sales shall be prohibited. (See definition of
"direct sales" at § 153.220.050.)



      (2)   Class B cottage food operations may engage in both
direct and indirect sales of cottage food products such as a permitted
third-party retail food facility. (See definition of "indirect sales" at §
153.220.100.)



   COTTAGE FOOD OPERATOR. An individual who owns or operates a Cottage
Food Operation in his or her private home kitchen.



   COTTAGE FOOD PRODUCTS. Foods specifically listed as cottage foods
approved by the California Department of Public Health and posted on its
Internet Website and that are prepared for sale in the kitchen of the
permitted area of a cottage food operation. This lists includes certain
non-potentially hazardous foods. Typical food items include baked goods
without cream, custard or meat fillings; candies; dried fruits and pastas;
fruit pies; cereals; herbs; honey; jams and jellies; nuts; popcorn; roasted
coffees and dried teas.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)



§ 153.220.050  D DEFINITIONS.



   DANCE STUDIO.  Any facility in which classes are offered and held on a
regular basis that teach the techniques of any dance, aerobic routine,
martial art or other similar activity for compensation. Such use may include
facilities for the occasional recital performance of such classes for persons
enrolled in the class.



   DAY CARE FACILITY.  See CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY and ADULT DAY CARE
FACILITY.



   DEMOLITION PERMIT.  A permit issued to allow the demolition of a
historic building or any building or structure located in a historic district.



   DENSITY.  The total number of permanent residential dwelling units per
acre of land, exclusive of all existing public right-of-way surfaces or
similar property.



   DESIGN GUIDELINES.  The Baldwin Park Designs Guidelines Manual.



   DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.  The Design Review Committee of the City of
Baldwin Park.



   DEVELOPER.  The builder who is responsible for the planning, design
and construction of an applicable development project. A DEVELOPER may be
responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by
the property owner.



   DEVELOPMENT.  A manmade change to a piece of property that involves
the construction, reconstruction, alteration or removal of a building or
structure, including mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation
or drilling operations.



   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.  Regulations establishing parameters on size,
bulk and siting of buildings or uses within a particular zoning district.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Community Development Department of the
City of Baldwin Park.



   DIRECT SALES. A transaction between a cottage food operator and a
consumer, where the consumer purchases the cottage food product directly from
the cottage food operator. Examples include, but are not limited to, holiday
bazaars, temporary events, bake sales, food swaps, certified farmers’
markets and community-supported agricultural subscriptions.



   DISABILITY.  As defined under the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act
of 1988 and California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act, a physical or
mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities. An
individual with a DISABILITY is anyone who is regarded as having that type of
impairment, or anyone who has a record of that type of impairment. The
disability discrimination provisions of the Fair Housing Act do not extend to
persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of having been
adjudicated a juvenile delinquent, having a criminal record or being a sex
offender. Furthermore, the Fair Housing Act does not protect persons who
currently use illegal drugs, persons who have been convicted of the
manufacture or sale of illegal drugs, or persons with or without disabilities
who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others.



   DOUBLE-LOADED.  A type of site planning that is identifiable by
showing residential planned development units along both sides of a public
street.



   DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENTS. Establishments that provide services
accessible to persons who remain in their motor vehicles.



   DRIVEWAY.  A private roadway or access way providing vehicular access
to a parking space, parking lot, garage or other parking area.



   DROUGHT-TOLERANT PLANT MATERIAL. Those plants that tolerate heavy clay
to sandy soil with the use of limited supplemental water. Such plants are
able to thrive with deep, infrequent watering once their root systems are
established (three to 12 month average time period). Plants include those
that naturally grow in areas of limited natural water supply and that are
adaptable to weather and soil conditions prevalent in the city.



   DRUG STORE/PHARMACY.  A retail shop that provides a full range of
pharmacy services and sells health and beauty products and general
merchandise. 



   DWELLING UNIT.  Any building or portion thereof designed for living
and sleeping purposes that contains independent cooking and sanitation
facilities.



      DUPLEX DWELLING UNIT.  A building containing two dwelling units
designed for the independent occupancy of two households.



      MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. A building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units designed for the independent
occupancy of three or more households.



      PRIMARY DWELLING UNIT.  An existing single-family residential
structure on a single lot with provisions for living, sleeping, eating, a
single kitchen for cooking, and sanitation facilities occupied.



      SECOND DWELLING UNIT. An attached or detached dwelling unit which
provides complete, independent living facilities for 1 or more persons,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation on the same parcel as an existing dwelling unit is situated.



      SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT. A detached building containing no
more than one dwelling unit which, regardless of form of ownership, is
designed and/or uses to house not more than one household, including all
domestic employees for such household.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)



§ 153.220.060  E DEFINITIONS.



   EASEMENT.  A portion of a lot that is reserved of used for utility
rights-of-way, access or any public or private use, as indicated on a
subdivision map, deed restriction or other recorded document.



   EAVE. The protecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a
building.



   EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION.  A public or private school, college,
university or other such institution that provides academic instruction.



   EMERGENCY SHELTER. Housing with minimal supportive services for
homeless persons. Occupancy is limited to a maximum of six months. No
individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an
inability to pay.



   ENGINEER.  The City Engineer of the city.



   EQUIPMENT SALES, RENTAL OR REPAIR. Establishment that sells, rents
and/or repairs small-scale equipment such as sewing machines, vacuums and
other small-scale home appliance and/or electric equipment.



   EQUIPMENT SALES, RENTAL OR REPAIR  LARGE EQUIPMENT.  Establishment
that sells, rents and/or repairs large-scale equipment including large home
appliances such as washing machines, ovens and refrigerators, and/or office
equipment repair and maintenance such as copy machines. Does not include
maintenance and repair of vehicles (see AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICES.



   ESTABLISHMENT.  A business.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.070  F DEFINITIONS.



   FAMILY.  A group of persons, whether related or unrelated, who live
together in a nontransient and interactive manner, including the joint use of
common areas of the premises which they occupy and sharing household
activities and responsibilities such as meals, chores and expenses.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any group of persons required to be considered
as a FAMILY for zoning purposes pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code §§
1267.8, 1566.3, 1568.0831, 1569.85, 11834.23 or any other state law shall be
deemed to be a family for purposes of this code.



   FENCE.  An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.



   FLAG.  A piece of fabric or canvas, usually rectangular or triangular
in shape, displaying colors, graphics, symbols and/or written copy that are
noncommercial in nature, designed to be flown from a flag pole. This
definition does not include pennants, which contain commercial messages.



   FLOOR AREA.  The total horizontal floor area of all the floors of a
building included within the surrounding walls, exclusive of vents, shafts,
courts, elevators, stairways, porches, patios, terraces and similar
facilities.



   FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR).  A ratio derived by dividing the total net
floor area of all structures built and maintained on a lot, including the
main building and accessory buildings, by the lot area.



   FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES.  The retail sale of food and beverages for
off-sire preparation or consumption.



      CONVENIENCE STORE.  A high-volume retail facility that sells a
variety of products for consumption off-premises, including, but not limited
to, food and beverages, snacks, alcoholic beverages, household goods,
magazines and accessory automobile supplies.



      GROCERY STORE.  A self-service food, beverage and associated
consumer goods store divided into departments and also offering prepared
foods and food service.  May include secondary uses within the store for
visitor convenience, such as banking services, retail sales of non-food items
and a pharmacy.



      LIQUOR STORE.  A retail establishment primarily engaged in the
sale of beer, wine, and spirits, and regulated by the Department of Alcoholic
Beverage Control. See also ALCOHOL SALES, OFF-SALE OUTLET.



      SPECIALTY STORE.  Includes establishments such as delis, coffee
shops, bakeries, and produce stores.



   FOOD PROCESSING PLANT.  Establishment engaged in the manufacturing or
processing of food or beverages for wholesale distribution.   



   FREESTANDING AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE/KISOK.  A machine not on the
premises of a financial institution, either manned or unmanned, that engages
in receiving deposits and dispensing cash money from walk-up individuals.
This definition does not include an unmanned automated teller machine that is
located wholly within the confines of a retail seller engaged primarily in
the business of selling consumer goods and/or perishables.



   FREEWAY LOT FRONTAGE.  A property line abutting a freeway right-of-way
or separated from a freeway only by a frontage road.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.080  G DEFINITIONS.



   GAME MACHINES.  Any mechanical, electric or electronic device which,
upon insertion of a coin, slug, token or similar object, operates as a game,
contest or amusement through the exercise of chance or skill.



   GARAGE.  Any building, with three enclosed sides, provided with a
closeable access door or doors, designed for use as an automobile shelter or
storage.



   GENERAL PLAN.  The General Plan of the City of Baldwin Park, adopted
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65301 et seq., and adopted by the City
Council.



   GLARE.  Any brightness within the field of vision of such a character
as to cause annoyance, discomfort, interference with vision or loss in visual
performance and visibility.



   GOVERNMENT CODE.  The California Government Code.



   GRADE.  The average level of the finished ground levels at the
different midpoints of the exterior walls of a building.



   GRADIENT.  The rate of vertical change of ground surface expressed as
a percentage figure and determined by dividing the vertical distance by the
horizontal distance.



   GROUP HOME.  Any residential care facility licensed by the State of
California occupied by 6 or fewer persons.



   GUEST.  Any transient person who occupies a room for sleeping purposes.



   GUESTHOUSE.  Living quarters, having no kitchen or cooking facilities,
located within an accessory structure, available for use solely by members of
the family who occupy the one-family dwelling on the lot or temporary guests
or persons permanently employed on the premises, as domestic help.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.090  H DEFINITIONS.



   HEALTH OFFICER.  The Health Officer of the city or his or her
authorized representative.



   HELISTOP.  An area of land, water or structure used for the takeoff
and landing of a helicopter, engaged in the dropping off or picking up of
passengers, which is owned or controlled by the owner or occupant of the
premises. HELISTOPS are limited to tie-down for accommodation of a single
helicopter and a helistop shall not include facilities for fuel service,
maintenance or overhaul and shall not accommodate helicopters used for common
carriers. Also known as heliport.



   HISTORIC BUILDING.  Any building or structure which has special
historic, cultural, architectural or community value and which has been
designated as a historic building.



   HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICT.  A specific geographic area which contains
a number of buildings or structures which have a special historical,
cultural, architectural, community or aesthetic value, and which has been
designated as a historic district.



   HOME IMPROVEMENT STORE.  An establishment that sells a broad range of
home repair and maintenance goods like hardware, tools and electrical goods,
as well as lumber and structural material for construction and renovations.
May also include establishments that focus on a specific area, such as
flooring or wall coverings. 



   HOME OCCUPATION.  Any commercial activity conducted entirely within a
particular dwelling unit by the inhabitants of such dwelling unit. HOME
OCCUPATIONS are incidental uses that do not change the character of the
dwelling unit nor adversely affect permitted uses in the surrounding area.
HOME OCCUPATIONS include cottage food operation uses.



   HOSPITALS AND MEDICAL SERVICES.



      AMBULANCE SERVICES.  A privately-owned facility for the
dispatch, storage and minor maintenance of emergency medical care vehicles.



      GENERAL HOSPITAL FACILITY.  An institution staffed and equipped
to provide the various types of intensified hospital care, including, but not
limited to, short term care in acute medical, surgical and obstetrical
services. Does not include walk-in clinics (see URGENT CARE FACILITY.)



      MEDICAL/DENTAL OFFICE.  A use where medical and/or dental
services are provided. Includes facilities for the diagnosis and treatment of
human patients and laboratories incidental to the office use.



   HOTEL.  Any building or portion of any building with access provided
through a common entrance, lobby or hallway and which contains guestrooms
that have no cooking facilities. HOTELS are designed and intended to be used
as temporary overnight accommodations for transients.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)



§ 153.220.100  I DEFINITIONS.



   IMPROVEMENT.  Any construction, building, paving or landscaping
activity which materially adds to the value of a facility, substantially
extends its useful life or adapts it to new uses. Repairs performed for the
purpose of maintaining a facility in good operating condition but which do
not materially add to the value of a facility or substantially extend its
useful life are not considered IMPROVEMENTS.



   INDIRECT SALES. An interaction between a cottage food operator, a third
party retailer, and a consumer, where the consumer purchases cottage food
products may by the cottage food operation from a third party retailer. A
third party retailer is a permitted retail food facility, such as a
restaurant, grocery or food market that holds a valid operating permit from
the County of Los Angeles in accordance with California Retail Food Code §
114381.



   INTERNET CAFÉ.  See ARCADE.   



   IRRIGATION SYSTEM.  A complete connection of system components,
including the water distribution network, any necessary irrigation equipment
and those portions of the system located downstream from the backflow
prevention device.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1374, passed 9-2-15)



§ 153.220.110  J DEFINITIONS.



   Reserved.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.120  K DEFINITIONS.



   KENNEL.  A public or private facility where dogs, cats and other
domesticated animals are kept, boarded or trained, with or without payment of
a fee, by the owners of such animals.



   KITCHEN.  Any room or space within a building designated and intended
to be used for cooking and/or preparation of food.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.130  L DEFINITIONS.



   LANDSCAPING. Areas devoted to, or developed and maintained
predominantly with, native or exotic plant materials including lawn, ground
cover, trees, shrubs and other plant material. Landscaping may also include
small amounts of accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as
pools, fountains and paved or decorative surfaces, all of which are suitably
designed, selected, installed and maintained to enhance a site.



      APPLIED WATER. The portion of water supplied by the irrigation
system to the landscape.



      AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER. An automatic timing device used
to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic
irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either
evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.



      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A safety device used to prevent
pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of
water from the irrigation system.



      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION. Refers to the document required
pursuant to § 153.160.140 of the city's Municipal Code.



      CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER. A person certified to design
irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional
trade organization or other program such as the United States Environmental
Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and
Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designer program.



      CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR. A person certified to
perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a
professional trade organization or other program such as the United States
Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification
program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor
program.



      CHECK VALVE or ANTI-DRAIN VALVE. A valve located under a
sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in
the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.



      COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS. Community apartment projects,
condominium projects, planned developments and stock cooperatives.



      COMPOST. The safe and  stable product of controlled biologic
decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.



      CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62). The number that converts acre-inches
per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.



      DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY. The measure of uniformity of irrigation
water over a defined area.



      DRIP IRRIGATION. Any non-spray low volume irrigation system
utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low
volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of
water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.



      ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT. A project where the site is
intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.



      EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION or USABLE RAINFALL (EPPT). The portion of
total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.



      EMITTER. A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water
slowly from the system to the soil.



      ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE. The point at which plants in the landscape
have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically most plans
are established after one or two years of growth.



      ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS. The first year after
installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation
will be terminated after establishment. Native habitat migration areas and
trees may need three to five years for establishment.



      ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU). The total water used per year
per hydrozone, or sum of hydrozones, for the landscape.



      ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF). A factor of 0.55 for residential
areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, that, when applied to reference
evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two
major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the
landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special
landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated
landscapes is 0.8.



      EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE. The quantity of water evaporated from
adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified
time.



      FLOW RATE. The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves
and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or
cubic feet per second.



      FLOW SENSOR. An inline device installed at the supply point of
the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow
rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller,
or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals sand operation master
valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a
landscape water or submeter.



      FRIABLE. A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely
compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby
the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread
unimpeded.



      GRAYWATER. Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by
any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or
unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by
unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. GRAYWATER
includes, but is not limited to wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom
washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include
wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers.



      HARDSCAPES. Any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).



      HYDROZONE. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with
similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or
non-irrigated.



      INFILTRATION RATE. The rate of water entry into the soil
expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).



      INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES. Species of plants not historically found
in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage
environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by
county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are
maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and United States
Department of Agriculture invasive and noxious weeds database.



      IRRIGATION AUDIT. An in-depth evaluation of the performance of an
irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An
irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up,
system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting
overspray or runoff that causes overland flow and preparation of an
irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with
the Irrigation Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification
Program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 'Watersense" labeled
auditing program.



      IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (IE). The measurement of the amount of
water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation
efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system
characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for
purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for
drip systems.



      IRRIGATION SURVEY. An evaluation of an irrigation system that is
less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is
not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to
improve performance of the irrigation system.



      IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS. A review of water use data based
on meter readings and billing data.



      LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A person who holds a license to practice
landscape architecture in Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 5615.



      LANDSCAPE AREA. All the planting areas, turf areas and water
features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water
allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of
buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios,
gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes and other
non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and
existing native vegetation).



      LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR. A person licensed by the State of
California to construct, maintain, repair, install and subcontract the
development of landscape systems.



      LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE. The package of documents
required to be submitted to the city pursuant to § 153.160.080.



      LANDSCAPE PROJECT. The total area of landscape in a project as
defined in 'landscape area" for the purposes of Subchapter 153.160.020 of the
city's Municipal Code.



      LANDSCAPE WATER METER. An inline device installed at the
irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation
system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.



      LATERAL LINE. The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to
the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.



      LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR. Any entity, including a public or private
water company that provides retail water services.  There are three LOCAL
WATER PURVEYORS in Baldwin Park, Valley County Water District, San Gabriel
Valley Water Company and Valley View Mutual Water Company.



      LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION. The application of irrigation water at low
pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters
such as drip, drip lines and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are
specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the
root zone of plants.



      MAIN LINE. The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the
water source to the valve or outlet.



      MASTER SHUT OFF VALVE. Is an automatic valve installed at the
irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system.



      MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA). The upper limit of annual
applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the
area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET Adjustment Factor and the size of
the landscape area. The Estimated Total Water Use shall not exceed the MAWA.
Special Landscape Areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and
solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and
areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ET
Adjustment Factor not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (.62) [(ETAF x LA) +
((1-ETAF) x SLA)].



      MEDIAN. An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be
unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials and ornamental grasses.



      MICROCLIMATE. The climate of a small, specific area that may
contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such
as wind, sun exposure, plant density or proximity to reflective surfaces.



      MULCH. Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost
or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel or decomposed granite
left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of
reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature and
preventing soil erosion.



      NEW CONSTRUCTION. For purposes of subchapter 153.160 new building
with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or
greenbelt without an associated building.



      NON-RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE. Landscapes in commercial,
institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designed
for recreational or public assembly. It also includes portions of common
areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.



      OPERATING PRESSURE. The pressure at which the parts of an
irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.



      OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS. Systems that deliver water
through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).



      OVERSPRAY. The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the
target area.



      PERMIT. An authorizing document issued by the City of Baldwin
Park for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.



      PERVIOUS. Any surface or material that allows the passage of
water through the material and into the underlying soil.



      PLANT FACTOR or PLANT WATER USE FACTOR. A factor, when multiplied
by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of
subchapter 153.160, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0
to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the
plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant
factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors are
derived from the publication, "Water Use Classification of Landscape
Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers
from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the
California Department of Water Resources (DWR).



      PROJECT APPLICANT. The individual or entity submitting a
Landscape Documentation Package, to request a permit, plan check or design
review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or
her designee.



      RAIN SENSOR or RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE. A component which
automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.



      RECORD DRAWING or AS-BUILTS. A set of reproducible drawings which
show significant changes in the work made during construction and



which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data
furnished by the contractor.



      RECREATIONAL AREA. Areas, excluding private single-family
residential areas, for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks,
sports fields, picnic grounds, and amphitheaters.



      RECYCLED WATER or RECLAIMED WATER. Treated or recycled waste
water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation
and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.



      REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION or ETo. A standard measurement of
environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is
expressed in inches per day, month or year, and is an estimate of the
evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season
grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis
of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional
differences in climate can be accommodated.



      REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE. Any re-landscaping project that requires
a permit, plan check or design review, and the modified landscape area is
equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.



      RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE. Landscapes surrounding single or
multifamily homes.



      RUNOFF. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to
which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff
may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate
exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.



      SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE or SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR. A device
that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or
initiate an irrigation event.



      SOIL TEXTURE. The classification of soil based on its percentage
of sand, silt, and clay.



      SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA). An area of the landscape dedicated
solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled
water, or water features using recycled water.



      SPRINKLER HEAD. A device which delivers water through a nozzle.



      STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pipeline or municipal water supply
pressure when water is not flowing.



      STATION. An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that
operate simultaneously.



      SUBMETER. A metering device to measure water applied to the
landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.



      SWING JOINT. An irrigation component that provides a flexible,
leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to
allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.



      TURF. A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass,
Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue and Tall fescue are
cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St.
Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.



      VALVE. A device used to control the flow of water in the
irrigation system.



      WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES. A plant species identified as
having a very low or low plant factor.



      WATER FEATURE. A design element where open water performs an
aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes,
waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas and swimming pools (where
water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is
included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed
wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management
practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or
stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject
to the water budget calculation.



      WATERING WINDOW. The time of day irrigation is allowed.



      WUCOLS. The Water Use Classification of Landscape Species
published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the
Department of Water Resources 2014.



   LAUNDROMAT. An establishment providing washing and drying machines on
the premises for rental uses to the general public for the laundering of
clothes.



   LAUNDRY FACILITY, COMMERCIAL. Centralized contract laundries that
launder fabrics from other businesses (such as uniforms, restaurant table
cloths, bed linens, and the like). Also includes carpet and upholstery
cleaning.



   LIQUOR STORE. See FOOD AND BEVERAGE SALES and ALCOHOL SALES, OFF-SALE
OUTLET.



   LOADING SPACE. An off-street spaces or berth on the same lot as the
building it serves that is used for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise, materials or people.



   LODGE.  See CLUB.



   LOT.  A parcel that is separately owned or has been legally divided
from a piece of real property according to the requirements of state law and
this code as shown of the recorded plat in the office of the County of Los
Angeles.







 



      CORNER LOT.  A lot or parcel of land abutting  upon the
intersection of two or more streets.



      FLAG LOT.  A lot with access to a street by means of a private
driveway, access easement or parcel of land with a minimum width of 15 feet.



      INTERIOR LOT.  A lot bounded on one side by a street or easement
that has been determined is adequate for access.



      REVERSED CORNER LOT.  A corner lot with a side lot line that is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the key lot that abuts
the reversed corner lot.



      THROUGH LOT.  An interior lot having frontage on two
approximately parallel streets.







 



   LOT AREA.  The total extent of the surface of a parcel of land within
its lot lines as measured on a horizontal plane.



   LOT COVERAGE.  The percentage of the total lot area covered by
enclosed structures and/or carports, but excluding uncovered steps,
driveways, walks, covered patios, terraces and swimming pools.



   LOT DEPTH.  The average distance between the front and rear lot lines.



   LOT FRONTAGE.  The length of the defined front lot line measured at
the street right-of-way line.



   LOT LINE.  Any line bounding a lot.



      FRONT LOT LINE.  A line separating an interior lot from a
street, or a line separating the narrower street frontage of a corner lot
from the street, or in the case of a reverse corner lot, either street side
property line may be considered the front lot line.



      REAR LOT LINE.  A lot line which is opposite and most distant
from the front lot line. For a triangular or irregular shaped lot, the rear
lot line means a line ten feet in length within the lot which is parallel to
the front lot line, or parallel to the chord of a curved front lot line, and
at the maximum distance from the front lot line.



      SIDE LOT LINE.  Any lot line other than the front or rear lot
line.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at right angles to the lot depth line at a distance midway between
the front and rear lot lines.







 



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12 ; Am. Ord. 1379, passed 11-4- 15)



§ 153.220.140  M DEFINITIONS.



   MANUFACTURED HOUSING. Both mobile homes and factory-built housing.



   MANUFACTURING. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly form
previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products
and incidental processing of extracted or raw materials.



   MARIJUANA. "Marijuana" shall have the same definition as that set forth
in Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11018.



      CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana or cannabis.



      DELIVERY. The commercial transfer by any form or arrangement of
transportation of recreational or medical marijuana and marijuana products
from a dispensary to a customer, primary caregiver, patient, or a testing
laboratory. "Delivery" also includes the use by a dispensary of any
technology platform owned and controlled by the dispensary, or independently
licensed under the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act that enables
qualified patients or primary caregivers to arrange for or facilitate the
commercial transfer by a licensed dispensary of medical marijuana or medical
marijuana products.



      MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A facility where marijuana is made
available for medical purposes in accordance with Cal. Health & Safety Code
§ 11362.5, and any establishments from which marijuana is delivered to
patients who cannot obtain it from a dispensary due to physical or mental
disability, for medical purposes in compliance with Cal. Health & Safety Code
§ 11362.5.



      MOBILE DISPENSARY. Any clinic, cooperative, club, business, or
group that transports or delivers, or arranges the transportation or
delivery, of medical or recreational marijuana to a person.



      RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY. A facility where marijuana is
made available for recreational use.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT/SERVICES. An establishment where massage services
are provided. Massages are defined as the application of a system of
structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissues of the
human body with the intent to enhance or restore the health and well-being of
the client.



   MATURE TREE. Any tree located in the front yard, front yard setback
area, rear yard, rear yard setback area, side yard or side yard setback area
and:



      (1)   Is greater than 18 inches in diameter when measured 54
inches from the ground or is greater than 40 feet in height; or



      (2)   Is a tree of historic value due to the tree's (or stand
of trees') age or prominence as a local identifying feature.



   MEDICAL USE. Any use involving the care of persons' general health by
licensed practitioners. Includes hospitals, urgent care clinics, out-patient
facilities, doctor and dental offices, chiropractic and podiatric facilities,
and similar practices of the medical arts and directly related laboratory
services.



   MOBILE HOME. A transportable structure that is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to function as a dwelling when connected to the required
utilities, including plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems (pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code §§ 18007 and 18008).
Consistent with the California Health and Safety Code definitions, a mobile
home is included in the definition of manufactured home.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. Any area or tract of land where two or more lots are
rented or leased, held out (or were formerly held out) for rent or lease to
accommodate manufactured homes or mobile homes used for human habitation
(pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18214). A mobile home park provides
utility services and other facilities either separately or in common to
mobile home spaces therein.



   MONEY WIRING. A person or entity that for compensation primarily
engages in the business of sending money to an end entity via a transfer for
pick-up by an individual or business entity.



   MORTUARY. An establishment engaged in the provision of service
involving the care, preparation, or disposition of human dead other than in
cemeteries. May or may not include crematorium. No internment is provided on
site. May include areas for assembly services and living quarters for funeral
home/mortuary manager.



   MOTEL. Any building or portion of any building with access provided
through a common entrance, lobby or hallway and which contains guestrooms
that have no cooking facilities. Motels are designed and intended to be used
as temporary overnight accommodations for transients. One dwelling unit shall
be permitted for use as a resident manager's unit.



   MULTIPLE-TENANT RETAIL - SMALL. A business, wholly within the confines
of a single commercial unit of less than 75,000 square feet, in which one
principle tenant and up to two ancillary tenants with unique business
licenses are located, offering personal services and/or personal property for
retail sale. This term shall not include temporary events held for the
exclusive benefit of any nonprofit organization. This term shall not include
swap meets.



   MULTIPLE-TENANT RETAIL - LARGE. A business, wholly within the confines
of a single commercial unit that is at least 75,000 square feet, or greater,
in which one principle tenant and up to six ancillary tenants with unique
business licenses are located, offering personal services and/or personal
property for retail sale. This term shall not include temporary events held
for the exclusive benefit of any nonprofit organization. This term shall not
include swap meets.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1382, passed 1-20-16)



§ 153.220.150  N DEFINITIONS.



   NIGHTCLUB.  An establishment that sells or serves alcoholic beverages
for consumption on the premises and is holding or applying for a public
premise license from the California State Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control (ABC) (i.e., ABC License Type 42 [On Sale Beer & Wine-Public
Premises], ABC License Type 48 [On Sale General-Public Premises], and ABC
License Type 61 [On Sale Beer-Public Premises]). Persons under 21 years of
age are not allowed to enter and remain on the premises. The establishment
shall include any immediately adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented, or
controlled by the licensee.



   NONCONFORMING LOT.  Any subdivision of land that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time the property was subdivided, but which, due to a subsequently enacted
ordinance or law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and
standards of the zone in which the property is located.



   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE.  Any structure, building, sign, improvement
or portion thereof, that was lawfully established and in compliance with all
applicable ordinances and laws at the time it was erected, but which, due to
a subsequently enacted ordinance or law, no longer complies with all the
applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the structure is
located.



   NONCONFORMING USE.  Any use or activity of land that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time it was undertaken, but which, due to a subsequently enacted ordinance or
law, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of
the zone in which the use is located.



   NURSERY SCHOOL.  See CHILD DAY CARE FACILITY.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.160  O DEFINITIONS.



   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY.  See PARKING FACILITY.



   OFFICE, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL. An office where (1) common business
services are provided to the general public (e.g., consumer services [e.g.,
auto club, entertainment ticket sales, and the like], insurance, investment,
real estate, tax preparation, travel, utility company offices, and the like)
or (2) professional services (e.g., accounting, architectural, engineering,
legal, planning, psychological, psychiatric, and the like) are provided.
Typically, these uses serve visitors on an appointment only basis and walk-in
traffic is minimal. Does not include “Places of Assembly,”
“Bank/Financial Institution” or “Medical/Dental Office.”



   OPEN SPACE.  An area or a lot, other than a required yard area,
driveway or off-street parking facility, which has no building or structure
located therein, except for landscaping, walls, fences, patios, swimming
pools and other permitted buildings or structures, used exclusively for
recreational purposes.



      COMMON OPEN SPACE.  An open space area, located at grade which
is available for the common use or enjoyment of all persons residing on the
lot upon which such open space is located.



      PRIVATE OPEN SPACE.  That open space, other than a required yard
area, which is immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit served thereby, and
which is available for the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling
unit.



      OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.  Signs soliciting public support
or directing public attention to the sale, lease, hire or use of any objects,
products, services or functions which are not produced, sold or otherwise
available on the premises where such sign is erected or maintained.



      OUTDOOR STORAGE AND USE.  The storage of various materials
outside of a building as an accessory use, or accessory uses and activities
that occur outside of a building.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.170  P DEFINITIONS.



   PARCEL.  An area of land, the boundaries of which have been legally
established in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act.



   PARCEL DELIVERY TERMINAL.  A building in which commodities sold at
retail within the area, and packaged by the retailer, are assembled and
routed for delivery to retail customers located within the area.



   PARK.  The standing of a motor vehicle, other than for the purpose of
loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.



   PARKING FACILITY.  An off-street area, whether open or enclosed, other
than a showroom or sales lot, used to store motor vehicles on a daily basis,
but not including the storage of dismantled or wrecked motor vehicles or
parts thereof.



      COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITY.  Provided by a private party for a
fee.



      PARKING GARAGE.  An enclosed parking structure provided above or
below grade, which may be commercial, public or private.



      PARKING LOT.  An open, at-grade parking area, which may be
commercial, public or private.



      PRIVATE PARKING FACILITY.  Provided for the use of residents,
customers or employees primarily in response to code requirements.



      PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY.  Provided by the city, the use of which
may or may not be subject to a fee.



   PARKING SPACE.  A permanent area for the parking of one vehicle
designed to meet the minimum dimensions and access requirements established
by the city.



      GARAGE PARKING SPACE.  A parking space provided within an
enclosed structure, with a closing and locking door, whose primary use is the
storage of vehicles.



      OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE.  A permanent parking space for a
vehicle which is designed to city standards and not located on a dedicated
street right-of-way.



      ON-STREET PARKING SPACE.  A parking space for a vehicle which is
designed to city standards and located on a dedicated street right-of-way.



   PARKWAY.  A portion of a street right-of-way, between the back of the
curbline and the lot line which is used or is available for use as
landscaping, utilities or sidewalks.



   PERMIT.  Written governmental permission issued by an authorized
official, empowering the holder thereof to engage in some activity not
forbidden by law, but not allowed without such authorization.



   PERMITTED USE.  A use specifically and expressly allowed in any one or
more of the zones by this chapter.



   PERMITTEE.  The person to whom a permit has been issued.



   PERSON.  Any individual, legal entity, joint venture or political
subdivision, except the city.



   PERSONAL SERVICE.  Any business or enterprise that provides individual
care to persons involving their personal health, fitness, grooming or
appearance. Such businesses include but are not limited to barber shops, hair
salons, nail care salons and day spas. Specifically excluded from this
definition are massage establishments of any kind and acupuncture and
acupressure clinics.



   PET STORE.  The retail sales of household animals within an entirely
enclosed building. These uses include grooming, if incidental to the retail
use, but specifically excludes boarding of animals other than those for sale.



   PLACES OF ASSEMBLY.  Any place, building or collection of buildings
and associated grounds used for the purpose of general public gathering  in
small, medium or large groups  for the purposes of worship, non-commercial
entertainment, private or public meetings or similar activities not generally
involving remuneration for use of said place, building or collection of
buildings and associated grounds. Examples include churches, temples,
mosques, service club facilities and private meeting halls.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission of the City of Baldwin
Park.



   PREFERENTIAL PARKING.  Parking designated or assigned, through use of
a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying
commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more
convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single
occupant vehicles [i.e., a motor vehicle operated by one passenger and
transporting the same].



   PRINCIPAL USE.  Any use which represents the predominant activity on a
property and for which authority to conduct such use is derived from the
zoning code.



   PROPERTY OWNER.  The legal owner of a development who serves as the
lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying
with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such
responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.



   PUBLIC TREE.  Any tree located in a place or area under ownership or
control of the city, including, but not limited to, any public street,
parkway, open space or parkland or other city-owned property, even if under
the operational control of another entity by virtue of a lease, license,
operating, or other agreement.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.180  Q DEFINITIONS.



   Reserved.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.190  R DEFINITIONS.



   RECREATIONAL FACILITY.  Establishments providing participant or
spectator recreation or entertainment, either indoors or outdoors, for a fee
or admission charge. Illustrative examples of these uses include: dance or
martial arts studios, health clubs and gymnasiums, indoor facilities
(billiards, bowling alleys) and outdoor facilities (batting cages, golf
courses).



   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.  Paper, newsprint, printed matter, pasteboard,
paper containers, cardboard, glass, aluminum, polyethylene terephthalate and
other plastics, beverage containers, compostable materials and other products
designated by the City Manager or the California Integrated Waste Management
Board as recyclable.



   RECYCLING FACILITY.  A center for the collection and/or processing of
recyclable materials.



   REGULAR VENDING MACHINE.  An automated mechanical device which ejects
products such as snack food items, non-alcoholic beverages or cigarettes,
when cash is deposited.



   REQUIRED TREE.  Every tree planted or preserved on private property
which:



      (1)   Was planted and is maintained pursuant to a city-imposed
condition of approval for a particular land use entitlement; or



      (2)   Was shown on a landscape drawing or plan for a project
approved by the city.



   RESIDENTIAL CARE HOME.  A residential home that provides 24-hour
non-medical care for six or fewer persons 18 years of age or older, or
emancipated minors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of
personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance or training
essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the
protection of the individual. This classification includes group homes,
residential care facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities,
wards of the juvenile court and other facilities licensed by the State of
California.



   RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY.  Any facility that provides 24-hour
non-medical care for more than six persons 18 years of age or older, or
emancipated minors, in need of personal services, protection, supervision,
assistance, guidance or training essential for sustaining the activities of
daily living, or for the protection of the individual. This classification
includes residential care facilities for the elderly, adult residential
facilities, facilities for wards of the juvenile court and other facilities
licensed by the State of California. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a
residential care home which has obtained the license required by Cal. Health
& Safety Code § 1508, and which serves six or fewer persons, shall be
subject only to such restrictions as are identical to those applied to other
dwellings of the same type in the same zone. The RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY
definition also include supportive housing, which is defined as housing with
no limit on length of stay that is occupied by a special needs population,
and that is linked to regular onsite services that assist the supportive
housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status
and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the
community.



   RESTAURANT.  A place which is regularly and in a bona fide manner used
and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for compensation, and which
has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences
for cooking an assortment of foods which may be required for ordinary meals,
the kitchen of which must be kept in a sanitary condition with the proper
amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on the premises, and must comply
with all regulations of the local Department of Health. Any establishment,
business or facility that satisfies the foregoing criteria, but has areas
designated for uses other than food preparation or consumption, such as a
bar/lounge area, billiards, dart boards and the like, in excess of 30% of the
total floor area of the premises, shall not be deemed a RESTAURANT.



      GUEST.  Persons who, during the hours when meals are regularly
served therein, come to a restaurant for the purpose of obtaining, and
actually order and obtain at such time, a meal.



      MEALS.  The usual assortment of foods commonly ordered at
various hours of the day. The service of sandwiches and salads not prepared
at the premises shall not be deemed to comply with the meaning of the term
MEALS. Additionally, the mere availability or service of items commonly
considered to be snack food (e.g., potato chips, pretzels, peanuts and the
like) shall not be sufficient to constitute either a MEAL or the existence of
a restaurant.



   RETAIL SHOP.  An establishment which offer goods (such as books, gifts
and clothing) to the general public. Does not include swap meet, pawn shop,
or thrift sales



   REVERSE VENDING MACHINE.  An automated mechanical device which accepts
all empty beverage containers required to be recycled by the State Division
of Recycling pursuant to AB2020 including but not limited to aluminum cans,
glass, non-aluminum metal cans and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund
or redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the containers
redemption value as determined by the state. A REVERSE VENDING MACHINE may
sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is
enclosed within the machine.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  A defined area of land, either public or private, on
which a right of passage has been recorded.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.200  S DEFINITIONS.



   SCHOOL.  Any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning
for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses
of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to
standards set by the state Board of Education. This definition includes a
nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high
school, senior high school or any special institution of education, but it
does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher
education, including a community or junior college, college or university.



   SCREENING.  The effect of locating an object behind a building, wall,
façade, fence, landscaping, berm and/or other specially designed device so
that view of the object from adjoining and nearby public rights-of-way and
private properties is eliminated or minimized.



   SECOND HAND STORE.  A business involved in the retail sale of used
goods and merchandise, whereby the sale of such used goods and merchandise
comprise 25% or more of total monthly sales volume. 



   SECURITY BARS.  Metal bars, including, but not limited to, wrought
iron guards and sliding scissor gates, attached to or covering a window or
glass door which are intended to provide additional protection against
vandalism and burglaries.



   SELF-STORAGE FACILITY.  A structure containing separate storage space
that is designed to be leased or rented individually. Indoor storage shall
mean that access to all storage spaces shall be from common interior
corridors, and the facility has only shared loading areas. This use does not
include outdoor storage of any kind. Further, such storage does not involve
any manufacturing, retail or wholesale selling, office or business services,
or human habitation in any storage space or anywhere on site.



   SERVICE CLUBS.  Any chapter, lodge or other local unit of an American
National Fraternal Organization, which has been in continuous existence for
at least 20 years, operates in at least 20 states of the United States and
has a minimum of 175 local units in those 20 states.



   SERVICE STATION.  A business, engaged primarily in the sale of motor
fuels and in supplying goods and services generally required for the
operation and maintenance of automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of
motorists’ needs. The same includes the sale of petroleum products, and may
include the sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories
and replacement items; washing and lubrication services; performance of minor
automotive maintenance and repair; and the supplying of other incidental and
related customer services and products. Major automotive repairs, painting
and body and fender work shall not be permitted as a part of service station
use.



   SETBACK.  The minimum distance between the main building on a lot and
the property lines of the lot, measured at a right angle from the designated
property line.



   SIGN.  Any device for the visual communication, including, without
limitation, any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display,
illustration or insignia which is used to advertise or promote the views,
products or services of any person, business group or enterprise available on
the lot where located and is intended to be visible from outside any building
or structure containing or supporting it.



      ABANDONED SIGN.  A sign is abandoned where for a period of 90
days or more, there is no sign copy appearing on the sign or where the
establishment to which the sign is attached has ceased operation and where it
is clear that the sign has been forsaken or deserted.



      ACCESSORY SIGN.  Signs that display hours of operation, credit
cards and time and temperature.



      ANIMATED SIGN.  A sign with action or motion, flashing or color
changes requiring electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of
supply, but not including electronic readerboard signs, time and temperature
signs and wind activated elements such as flags, banners or specialty signs.



      AWNING SIGN.  A sign made of cloth, plastic or other
nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or
it can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in
use.



      BANNER SIGN.  A sign that is composed on a lightweight material
(vinyl, plastic or cloth) without frames.



      CAN (BOX) SIGN.  A sign that contains all text and/or logo
symbols within a single enclosed cabinet which may or may not be illuminated.



      CANOPY SIGN.  Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning,
canopy or other material, or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window or service area.



      CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN.  A sign such as a marquee or electronic
readerboard sign that is designed so the characters, letters or illustrations
may be rearranged without altering the surface or face of the sign.



      COMMERCIAL MESSAGE.  Any sign wording, logo or other
representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity, or
which proposes a commercial transaction, or relates primarily to commercial
interests.



      CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A sign that identifies the architects,
engineers, financial institutions or contractors involved in a project.



      DIRECTORY SIGN.  A sign or set of similarly designed individual
signs, placed or displayed in sequence to list all or part of the businesses
within a building or shopping center.



      DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  Freestanding, ground, monument or wall signs
designed to guide or direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to a given
location.



      DISPLAY BOARD SIGN.  A permanently installed panel (bulletin
board or display case) provided for the posting of temporary advertisements
and/or messages on which manually changeable messages are displayed.



      ELECTRONIC READERBOARD SIGN. A sign which incorporates changeable
messages which may be changed by electronic processes or by remote control.



      FREESTANDING SIGN.  A sign that is permanently supported by
structures or supports in or upon the ground independent from support from
any building.



      GOVERNMENTAL/CIVIC SIGN.  Any temporary or permanent sign
erected and maintained by or required by the city, county, state or federal
government for traffic direction, city entrance or for designation or
direction to any school, hospital, historical site, public service, property
or facility.



      HOLIDAY SIGN.  A temporary sign that is for the purpose of
publicizing events during the holidays.



      ILLUMINATED SIGN.  A sign which uses an artificial source of
light in order to make readable the message and includes internally or
externally lighted signs, reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs.



      INCIDENTAL SIGN.  A sign, emblem or decal informing the public
of goods, facilities or services available on the premises, including but not
limited to a restroom and phone sign, credit card sign or a sign indicating
hours of business. INCIDENTAL SIGNS also include signs prohibiting
trespassing and soliciting, as well as neighborhood watch/alarm signs.



      INFLATABLE SIGN.  A balloon or other object inflated with
lighter than air gaseous elements for buoyancy, which is attached or anchored
to any building or the ground and shall include all parts, portions, units
and materials composing the same, including the support or anchor therefor.



      MENU/ORDER BOARD SIGN.  A sign on the site of a drive-thru
restaurant, either detached or attached to the building, displaying the type
and price of food and beverages sold in connection with and oriented towards
the drive-thru lane.



      MONUMENT SIGN.  A sign that is permanently supported by
structures or supports in or upon the ground independent from support from
any building.



      NAME PLATE SIGN.  A sign that displays only the name of the
property owner or occupant and/or the address of the site.



      NONCOMMERCIAL SIGN.  Any sign that does not bear a commercial
message, including, by way of example and limitation, commentary on social,
political, educational, religious, scientific, artistic, philosophical or
charitable subjects. Also includes signs regarding fund raising or membership
drive activities for noncommercial or nonprofit concerns.



      OFF-SITE SIGN.  A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment or other product or activity offered at a
location other than the site on which the sign is located. This definition
does not include real estate signs, temporary signs or directional signs
approved pursuant to this chapter.







 



      ON-SITE SIGNS.  A sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment or other product or activity offered at the
site on which the sign is located.



      PAINTED SIGN.  A sign that is affixed to the exterior surface of
a building or structure which has no raised borders, letters, characters,
decorations or illuminating appliances.



      PENNANT.  A piece of fabric or canvas, usually rectangular or
triangular in shape and designed to be attached to or flown between a pole or
poles, that includes a commercial message or other advertising material that
directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment or other
product or activity offered at the site on which the pennant is located.



      PERMANENT SIGN.  Every sign except temporary signs as defined in
subchapter 153.170.



      POLITICAL SIGN.  A noncommercial sign related to a forthcoming
public election. 



      PORTABLE SIGN.  Any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or a building or designed to be attached to the ground nor building. A-frame,
sandwich signs and vehicle mounted signs are considered PORTABLE SIGNS.



      POSTER SIGN.  A sign printed, written or painted on paper,
cardboard or similar material which is generally displayed in windows.



      PROJECT IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which states the name of
the building or its owner.



      PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign that is affixed at an angle or
perpendicular to the wall of any building in such a manner to read
perpendicular or at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.



      REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign indicating that the lot on which the
sign is located, or any building or structure located thereon, is for sale or
lease.



      ROOF SIGN.  A sign erected upon or above the roof of a building
and supported solely on the roof structure.



      TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas or
other similar lightweight material, with or without frames; or erected by
driving a stake or other support into the ground (e.g. common “For Sale”
signs).



      WALL SIGN.  A sign and/or sign structure painted on or attached
to the face of the outside wall of any building including but not limited to
projecting signs, awning signs and marquee signs.



      WINDOW SIGN.  A sign that is placed inside or upon a window
facing the outside and which is intended to be seen from the exterior
(temporary or permanent).



   SIGN FACE AREA.  The square footage of a sign made up of letters,
words and/or symbols within a frame shall be determined from the outside edge
of the frame itself. The square footage of a sign composed only of letters,
words and/or symbols shall be determined from imaginary straight lines (not
to exceed 8 lines) drawn around the entire copy or grouping of such letters,
words, and/or symbols. Only those portions of the construction elements that
are an integral part of the sign itself shall be considered in the allocation
of the square footage allowed. An obvious border designed as an integral part
of the sign shall be calculated in the total square footage allowed. The SIGN
FACE AREA of a double-faced sign shall be computed as including only the
maximum single display surface which is visible from any ground position at
one time upon which the message is placed.



   SIGN HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the average finished
grade of the lot upon which the sign is located to the highest point of the
sign.



   SINGLE-LOADED.  A type of site planning that is identifiable by
showing residential planned development units along only one side of a public
street.



   SITE.  Any lot or parcel of land, or combination of contiguous lots or
parcels of land, used or intended for a particular use or group of uses.



   SITE PLAN.  A plan drawn to scale, showing uses and structures
proposed for a property as required by the applicable regulations, including
lot lines, streets, grades, building sites, reserved open space and other
specific development proposals.



   SOLAR PANEL.  Any solar collector or other polar device, or any
structural design feature of a building whose primary purpose is to provide
for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space
heating or cooling, for water heating or for electricity.



   SOUTH COAST AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT (SCAQMD).  The regional
authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal
standards and to otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin
(the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside and San Bernardino
Counties, and Orange County).



   SPECIFIC PLAN.  Under Cal. Gov’t Code  §§ 65450 et seq., a legal
tool for detailed design and implementation of a defined portion of the area
covered by a General Plan. A SPECIFIC PLAN may include detailed regulations,
conditions, programs and/or proposed legislation which may be necessary or
convenient for the systematic implementation of any General Plan element.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. STORY includes a
basement.



   STREET.  A public thoroughfare or right-of-way, or approved private
thoroughfare or right-of-way determined by the city to be adequate for the
purpose of access, which affords the principal means of access for abutting
property including avenue, place, way, drive, land, boulevard, highway, road
or any other thoroughfare. The word STREET shall include all major and
secondary highways, traffic collector streets and local streets.



   STREET TREE.  Any tree located in a place or area under ownership or
control of the city, including but not limited to streets, parkways, open
space, parkland, and including city-owned property under the operational
control of another entity by virtue of a lease, license, operating or other
agreement.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected, which requires a fixed
location on the ground, or is attached to a building or other structure
having a fixed location on the ground.



   STUDIO.  Establishments engaged in industrial or scientific research,
inlcuing product testing. Includes electronic research firms or
pharmaceutical research laboratories. Excludes manufacturing, except of
prototypes, and medical testing and analysis. Also includes production
studios for filmmakers and motion picture processing studios.



   SWAP MEET.  Any event at which two or more persons offer personal
property, new and/or used, for sale or exchange and at which a fee is charged
for the privilege of offering or displaying personal property for sale or
exchange, and/or at which a fee is charged to prospective buyers for
admission to the area where personal property is offered or displayed for
sale or exchange.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12; Am. Ord. 1402, passed 11-15-17)



§ 153.220.210  T DEFINITIONS.



   TENANT.  The lessee of facility space at an applicable development
project.



   TOBACCO SHOP.  An establishment which offers tobacco products for sale
and/or where smoking is permitted, such as hookah lounges, cigar clubs, and
other private smoking businesses.



   TOWNHOUSE UNIT.  A dwelling unit which shares a common interior wall
with another dwelling unit and no portion of which is above or below another
dwelling unit.



   TRANSPORTATION FACILITY.  Facility for loading, unloading and
transferring passengers, baggage and incidental freight between modes of
transportation. These uses include bus or truck terminals, taxi dispatch
yards, railroad stations and public transit stations..



   TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM).  The alteration of travel
behavior usually on the part of commuters through programs of incentives,
services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicles
such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move
trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as in the case of
telecommuting or compressed work weeks).



   TRANSFER STATION.  An area, including any necessary building or
structures, for the temporary storage and the salvage of rubbish, garbage or
industrial waste.



   TREE OF HISTORIC VALUE.  A tree that has been related to historical
events or circumstances and has been found to be of significance to the
community and is so designated by action of the Tree Advisory Board.



   TRIP REDUCTION.  Reduction in the number of work-related trips made by
single-occupant vehicles.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.220  U DEFINITIONS.



   URGENT CARE FACILITY. A facility that delivers ambulatory medical care
outside of a hospital emergency department on a walk-in basis, without a
scheduled appointment. Urgent Care Facilities may include x-ray facilities
and minor trauma rooms to facilitate the repair of minor severity lacerations.



   USE.  The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged
or intended, or for which the land or building may be occupied or maintained.



   UTILITY.  Any public or private regulated agency which, under public
franchise or ownership, or under certificate of convenience and necessity,
provides the public with electricity, gas, heat, steam, communication, rail
transportation, water, sewage collection or other similar service.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.230  V DEFINITIONS.



   VANPOOL.  A vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together
to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating
arrangement designed to carry seven to 15 adult passengers, and on a prepaid
subscription basis.



   VARIANCE.  Permission to depart from the provisions of this chapter
when, due to special circumstances applicable to a property, strict
application of the requirements deprives such property of privileges enjoyed
by other identically zoned property.



   VEHICLE.  Any motorized form of transportation, including, but not
limited to, automobiles, vans, buses motorcycles, recreational vehicles,
tractors and similar types of vehicles.



   VENDOR.  Any person, partnership, corporation or organization who
engages in selling, or offering for sale as owner or consignee, personal
services and/or property within a multiple-tenant retail arcade.



   VETERINARY SERVICES (ANIMAL HOSPITAL/CLINIC).  Establishment where
household animals receive medical and surgical treatment and may be
temporarily boarded (more than one night stay) in association with such
medical or surgical treatment.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.240  W DEFINITIONS.



   WALL.  A physical barrier constructed largely of masonry, brick,
concrete, stucco, concrete block or any combination thereof and intended to
mark a boundary.



   WAREHOUSE.  A building or portion thereof used for the storage,
receiving, shipping or wholesaling of goods and merchandise, and any
incidental or accessory activities.



   WHOLESALE SALES.  The sale of commercial goods at or near production
cost.



   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.  Any and all of the following and
all related terms, and as may be further defined by applicable federal
regulations.



      AMATEUR RADIO STATION ANTENNA.  Any antenna, and its
accompanying support structure, that is used solely for the purpose of
transmitting and receiving radio signals in connection with the operation of
an amateur radio station in accordance with licenses issued by the FCC.



      ANTENNA, ANTENNA ARRAY, WIRELESS ANTENNA ARRAY, OR WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA ARRAY. One or more rods, poles, panels, discs or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency
signals, which may include omni-directional antennas (whip), directional
antennas (panel) and parabolic antennas (disc), but excluding any support
structure as defined below.



      ANTENNA HEIGHT.  The distance from the grade of the property at
the base of the antenna or, in the case of a roof mounted antenna, from the
grade at the exterior base of the building to the highest point of the
antenna and its associated support structure when fully extended.



      ANTENNA STRUCTURE.  An antenna or array of antennas and its
associated support structure, including, without limitation, a mast or tower.



      BASE STATION OR EQUIPMENT SHELTER.  A fixed station at a
specified site authorized to communicate with mobile stations, micro cells,
repeaters or other wireless stations, usually housed in metal cabinets or
small structures on or within close proximity to the antenna structure on the
same site. 



      BUILDING-MOUNTED.  Mounted to the side or façade of a building,
or to the side of another structure such as a water tank, church steeple,
freestanding sign or similar structure, but not to include the roof of any
structure.



      CO-LOCATION.  The use of a common wireless antenna facility, or
a common site, by two or more providers of wireless services, or by one
provider of wireless services for more than one type of telecommunications
technology.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



      FIXED WIRELESS ANTENNA FACILITY.  An unstaffed facility for the
transmission or reception of wireless telecommunications services, commonly
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure to
achieve the necessary elevation and an equipment facility or subterranean
vault to house accessory equipment, which may include cabinets, pedestals,
shelters and similar protective structures.



      FIXED WIRELESS SERVICES.  Any personal wireless services as
defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, including federally
licensed wireless telecommunications services consisting of cellular
services, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
services (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio services (ESMR), paging and
similar services that currently exist or that may be developed in the future.



      GROUND-MOUNTED.  Mounted to a base (e.g., pole, monopole, tower
or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of
supporting an antenna or wireless communication facility) placed directly on
the ground.



      MAST.  A support structure that is constructed for the specific
purpose of elevating a satellite earth station antenna in order to receive
broadcast signals of an acceptable quality.



      MONOPOLE.  A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower
used to support antennas or related equipment.



      ROOF-MOUNTED.  Mounted above the eave line of a building.



      SATELLITE EARTH STATION.  A parabolic or dish-shaped antenna or
other apparatus or device that is designed for the purpose of receiving or
transmitting signals for voice, video or data.



      STEALTH FACILITY.  Any communication facility which is designed
to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is
architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure, and
shall include and mean any concealed antenna.



      SUPPORT STRUCTURE OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA ARRAY
SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  A freestanding structure that is designed and
constructed for the specific purpose of supporting an antenna array and that
may consist of a monopole, a mast, a self-supporting lattice tower, a
guy-wire support tower or other similar structures.



      UNLICENSED WIRELESS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunication
services, using duly authorized devices which do not require individual
licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite
services, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7). 



      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICES.  Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7).



      WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.  Facilities for the provision
of wireless communication services, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7).



      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA FACILITY OR WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA ARRAY. An unstaffed facility for the transmission
or reception of wireless telecommunications services, commonly consisting of
an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure to achieve the
necessary elevation and an equipment facility or subterranean vault to house
accessory equipment, which may include cabinets, pedestals, shelters and
similar protective structures.



      WIRELESS SERVICES OR WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES.  Any
personal wireless services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996, including federally-licensed wireless telecommunications services
consisting of cellular services, personal communications services (PCS),
specialized mobile radio services (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
services (ESMR), paging and similar services that currently exist or that may
be developed in the future.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.250  X DEFINITIONS.



   Reserved.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.260  Y DEFINITIONS.



   YARD.  An area upon a lot located between the property line and
setback, other than a court or open space, required as a front, side or rear
yard, which shall be maintained unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward without any encroachment therein, except as expressly authorized by
the zoning code.



      FRONT YARD.  A required yard area extending across the full
width of a lot, immediately adjacent to the front lot line thereof. The depth
of a FRONT YARD shall be the specified horizontal distance measured between
the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.



      FLAG LOT FRONT YARD.  The line of the developable portion of the
flag lot that is also the rear property line of the lot that separates the
developable portion of the flag lot from the street to which the flag lot has
access or the line of the developable portion of the flag lot that also
extends as a property line perpendicular to the public street and adjacent to
the staff of the flag lot.



      REAR YARD.  A required yard area extending across the full width
of a lot, immediately adjacent to the rear lot line thereof. The depth of a
REAR YARD shall be the specified horizontal distance measured between the
rear lot line and a line parallel thereon on the lot.



      SIDE YARD.  A required yard area extending across the full
length of a lot immediately adjacent to the side lot line thereof. The depth
of a side yard shall be the specified horizontal distance measured between
the side lot line and a parallel line on the lot.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



§ 153.220.270  Z DEFINITIONS.



   ZONE.  A designated or mapped portion of the city within which a
uniform set of land use and development regulations apply. ZONES include the
following categories:



      BASE ZONES.  Zones that establish the primary type and intensity
of land use for the parcel, along with development regulations for that
particular type and intensity of land use.



      OVERLAY ZONES.  Zones that supplement the base zone for the
purpose of establishing special use or development regulations for a
particular area in addition to the provisions of the underlying base zone.



   ZONING MAP.  The current city-adopted map showing zone boundaries.



(Ord. 1346, passed 5-2-12)



APPENDIX:  ZONING MAP



To view a PDF of the Zoning Map, click here.







 


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




CHAPTER 154:  DEVELOPMENT FEES



Section



Park and Recreation Dedications/Fees



   154.001   Deposit and use of fees



   154.002   Park dedication or payment of fees



   154.003   Reduction of fees for second dwelling unit



   154.004   Recreational facilities credit



   154.005   Exemptions



   154.006   Return of fees



   154.007   Determination of fair market value



Art in Public Places Program



   154.015   Purpose



   154.016   Cultural Arts Commission established



   154.017   Definitions



   154.018   City Art Fund created



   154.019   Developments subject to the provisions of this chapter



   154.020   Final city approval



   154.021   Program allocations



   154.022   Application and approval procedures for placing art work
on private property



   154.023   Procedure for acceptance of art work donated to the city



   154.024   Limitations on forms of art



   154.025   Ownership and maintenance of art work



   154.026   Art work on public property, performing arts and purchase
of real property for public art



   154.027   Return of fees



   154.028   Criteria for approving architecture as art



   154.029   Procedure for approving architecture as art



   154.030   Exemption



   154.031   Removal of art work



   154.032   Appeal



Flood Control Facilities



   154.040   Deposit and use of fees



   154.041   Payment of fees



   154.042   Credit for facilities installed by developer



Traffic Congestion Relief Facilities



   154.050   Deposit and use of fees



   154.051   Payment of fees



   154.052   Credit for facilities installed by developer



Law Enforcement Facilities, Vehicles and Equipment



   154.060   Deposit and use of fees



   154.061   Payment of fees



PARK AND RECREATION DEDICATIONS/FEES



§ 154.001  DEPOSIT AND USE OF FEES.



   Fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the Park
Facilities Fund maintained by the City Treasurer, and shall be used solely
for the acquisition  of new and rehabilitation of existing community park
and recreational facilities.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.002  PARK DEDICATION OR PAYMENT OF FEES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any new
residential development of more than one unit, and any addition of one or
more units to an existing residential development shall be subject to the
park dedication requirement, or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or both,
established by this subchapter.



   (B)   The amount of land to be dedicated for neighborhood and
community park or recreational facilities or fees to be paid in lieu thereof
shall be based on the residential density of the proposed development, which
shall be determined on the basis of the number of dwelling units to be
constructed and the density factor as set forth in division (C) of this
section, so as to provide three acres of park area for 1,000 residents. 
Only the payment of fees shall be required if a development project contains
50 parcels or less except that when a condominium project, stock cooperative,
or community apartment project, as those terms are defined in California
Civil Code § 1351, exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be
required notwithstanding that the number of parcels may be less than 50.



   (C)   As used herein, the term DENSITY FACTOR means 4.44 persons per
dwelling unit, based upon the most recently available Census, or Census taken
pursuant to Cal. Gov. Code §§ 40200 et seq.



   (D)   When a fee is to be paid in lieu of or in addition to parkland
dedication, the amount of such fee shall be the fair market value, as
determined pursuant to § 154.007, per acre of the land within the proposed
residential development multiplied by the numbers of acres required to be
dedicated pursuant to this section, except that the amount of the fee shall
be calculated as provided in § 154.003 when the construction consists solely
of adding a second residential unit to a property containing only one
single-family dwelling unit.



   (E)   The park dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof, or
both, shall be completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy
or a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy for any such dwelling unit within a
development.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.003  REDUCTION OF FEES FOR SECOND DWELLING UNIT.



   (A)   When a building permit is sought for the addition of a second
unit to a property containing only one existing single-family dwelling unit,
regardless of the zoning district in which the property is located, the
amount of the in lieu fee to be paid at the time the Certificate of Occupancy
is issued for that second unit shall be 50% of the amount required under the
formula established in § 154.002(B) for so long as the property remains
developed with only two units.



   (B)   In the event a third (or more) residential unit is constructed
on the property for which the reduced in lieu fee established in division (A)
has been paid, the amount of the in lieu fee fees to be paid at the time the
Certificate of Occupancy is issued for such third unit shall be calculated
pursuant to the formula established in § 154.002(B) plus an additional
amount equal to 50% of the in lieu fee for the second dwelling unit shall
also be collected.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.004  RECREATIONAL FACILITIES CREDIT.



   (A)   Where private open space area is developed for active
recreational facilities in a proposed development, the value of such open
space may be partially credited against the parkland dedication/fee
requirement established in § 154.002 as provided in this section.



   (B)   The final decision making authority on the residential
development shall determine at the time the residential development is
approved or conditionally approved whether it is in the public interest to
credit up to 50% of the value of such private open space against the
dedication/fee otherwise due.  The decision shall take into consideration
factors such as the size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location of
such private open space area within the development.



   (C)   Any yard areas, setback areas or other open space areas
required to be maintained by any zoning or building requirement shall not be
considered as credit against the parkland dedication/fee requirement.



   (D)   To qualify for any credit under this section, the private
ownership and maintenance of the private open space area as active
recreational facilities must be adequately provided for by written agreement
and the use of such area restricted by recorded covenants which run with the
land and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the
city.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.005  EXEMPTIONS.



    Any unit within a residential development which is restricted by
covenant to occupancy for low- and moderate-income households or senior
citizens shall be exempted from the requirements of this subchapter during
the period such unit remains covenanted for such use.  Upon termination of
such restrictions, the then current owner of the unit shall pay additional
fees to the city, based upon the then current fair market value of the land
and in accordance with the density factor in effect at the time the
restrictions terminate.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.006  RETURN OF FEES.



   (A)   Fees paid into the Park Facilities Fund which are not
committed within five years from the date of payment shall be returned to the
then current owner(s) of the residential development project, with all
interest actually earned thereon, in the same proportion as the size of their
lot bears to the total area of all lots within the development project.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this
section, no refund shall be required if the City Council determines any one
of the following applies:



      (1)   Moneys were not posted as fees, but were satisfied by a
letter of credit, bond or other interest taken to secure payment at a future
date; or



      (2)   The administrative costs of refunding the uncommitted
fees pursuant to this section exceeds the amount to be refunded; provided a
public hearing is held thereon for which each of the dwelling units within
the project has been delivered a public notice, pursuant to § 153.210.100,
at least ten days prior to the hearing.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.007  DETERMINATION OF FAIR MARKET VALUE.



   (A)   The fair market value of the land to be dedicated shall be
determined by the city based upon a written appraisal report provided by the
developer and prepared and signed by an appraiser acceptable to the city. 
The appraisal shall be paid for by the developer.



   (B)   The date of the appraisal shall be no more than six months
prior to the payment of the fee.  If more than six months has elapsed from
the date of the appraisal to the time of payment of the fee, the city may
require preparation of an updated appraisal.  The subdivider shall pay for
the cost of any such updated appraisal.



   (C)   For the purposes of this subchapter, fair market value shall
be determined based upon the assumption that the tentative map or tentative
parcel map is approved and in accordance with acceptable standards of the
real estate appraisal profession.



(Ord. 1242, passed 9-15-04)



ART IN PUBLIC PLACES PROGRAM



§ 154.015  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The City Council finds:



      (1)   Cultural and artistic resources, including art work and
performing arts enhance the quality of life for individuals living in,
working in and visiting the city; and



      (2)    Balanced development of these resources preserves and
improves the quality of the urban environment and increases real property
values; and



      (3)    As development and rehabilitation of real property
within the city continues, the opportunity for creation of cultural and
artistic resources is diminished.  As development and rehabilitation
continues as a result of market forces, urbanization of the community
results.  Since these opportunities are diminished and urbanization occurs,
the need to develop alternative sources for cultural and artistic outlets to
improve the environment, image, and character of the community is increased;
and



      (4)    Development of cultural and artistic assets should be
financed by those whose development and revitalization diminishes the
availability of the community’s resources for those opportunities and
contributes to community urbanization; and



      (5)    Establishment of this public art program will promote
the general welfare through balancing the community’s physical growth with
revitalization and its cultural and artistic resources.



   (B)   Based upon the foregoing findings, the purpose of this chapter
is provide for the development of cultural and artistic assets, including art
work and performing arts which will enhance the quality of life for
individuals in the city.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.016  CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.



   A five-member Cultural Affairs Commission is hereby established (the
“Commission”).  The Commission shall implement the duties set forth in
this chapter.  The City Council may prescribe, by resolution, membership,
term and other operational rules and duties of the Commission.  A majority
of the City Council shall appoint the five members of the Commission,
pursuant to a process established by the City Council.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.017  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ART WORK.  A sculpture, mural, or portable painting, earthwork,
firework, neon, glass, mosaic, photograph, print, calligraphy, other forms of
physical hard media, or other structures that will have a positive aesthetic
impact and/or provide a positive perception of the city.



   FREELY AVAILABLE.  The art work is accessible to the public for
viewing, in a direct line of sight, for a period of ten hours per day, seven
days per week, with the option of excluding national holidays.



   PERFORMING ARTS.  Performances presented by professional or amateur
performers, including theater performances (any form of dramatic
presentation, spoken or silent), musical theater/opera (any dramatic
performance of which music is an integral part); dance (any form of
rhythmical movement); music/concert (any musical form whether classical or
popular); and children’s theater (any theater for young audiences, for or
by children).



   PROJECT. Physical changes and improvements needed to complete a
development.  Such physical changes shall include the construction of new
structures or the remodeling of existing structures.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.018  CITY ART FUND CREATED.



   (A)   There is hereby created a fund known as the “City Art
Fund” to account for fees paid pursuant to the program established by this
chapter (the “Art in Public Places Program”).  This fund shall be
maintained by the City Treasurer, and shall only be utilized solely pursuant
to this chapter.



      (1)   For the design, acquisition, commission, installation,
improvement, maintenance, and insurance of an art work.  Design fees may
include any fee paid to an appropriate party for the development of a design
concept and preparation of construction drawings, which are separate and
apart from the cost of the fabrication and installation of an art work;



      (2)   To sponsor or support performing arts;



      (3)   For the acquisition and improvement of real property for
the purpose of displaying art work, which has been or may be subsequently
approved by the city;



      (4)   During a fiscal year, for maintenance of and utility
charges related to the art work purchased pursuant to division (A)(1), above;
provided, that the total amount of expenditures made in any year from the
City Art Fund for the purpose set forth in this division (A)(4), shall not
exceed 10% of the total available amount of fees deposited, pursuant to this
chapter, during the city’s fiscal year immediately preceding the
expenditure; or



      (5)   For costs associated with administering the Art in
Public Places Program, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the Art in Public
Places Program allocation as set forth in § 154.021.



   (B)   If real property purchased with monies from the City Art Fund
is subsequently sold, then the proceeds from the sale shall be returned to
the City Art Fund.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.019  DEVELOPMENTS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER.



   (A)   All new residential development of more than four units, and
all commercial, industrial and public development projects, with a building
valuation exceeding $50,000 shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter; provided, that the value of a residential unit covenanted for very
low, low, and moderate income households shall not be included when
determining the value of a residential development.



   (B)   Including, but not limited to, exterior modifications and
additions, all remodeling of existing residential buildings of more than four
units and all remodeling of existing commercial, industrial and public
buildings, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter when such
remodeling has a valuation exceeding $50,000 excluding earthquake
rehabilitation required by this code for seismic safety.  As used herein,
the value of a residential unit covenanted for very low, low, and/or
moderate-income households or for senior citizens shall not be included when
determining the value of a residential development.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.020  FINAL CITY APPROVAL.



   (A)   No final city approval for any project subject to this chapter
shall be granted or issued unless and until full compliance with the Art in
Public Places Program is achieved by at least one of the following methods:



      (1)   The approved art work has been placed in a manner
satisfactory to the Commission.  Placement of art work shall be completed
prior to the final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy.



      (2)   In lieu art fees have been paid pursuant to this
chapter, if applicable.



      (3)   Financial security in an amount equal to the acquisition
and installation cost of an approved art work, in a form approved by the City
Attorney, has been posted.  In cases where an applicant is not certain
whether to contribute to the City Art Fund or to obtain approval of an art
work, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to
negotiate an agreement with the applicant for returnable deposit, into the
City Art Fund, an amount of in-lieu fees for the project pursuant to this
chapter for a period of time not to exceed one year after the issuance if any
construction permit.  At the end of that year, the deposit shall no longer
be refundable and the applicant will be deemed to have met the Art in Public
Places Program requirements.  That option is to allow an applicant
additional time to determine the desired alternative for compliance with the
Art in Public Places Program requirements.



      (4)   Donation of an approved art work has been accepted by
the City Council.



      (5)   In cases where approved art work is placed on private
property pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall execute and record a
covenant with the Los Angeles County recorder, which sets forth the applicant
and subsequent property owner’s obligations to comply with maintenance
obligations of the Art in Public Places Program.  The covenant shall be
recorded prior to the request for final construction inspection and the
issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy.



   (B)   For the purposes of division (A), full compliance with the Art
in Public Places Program shall not be found until the entire Art in Public
Places Program allocation required by § 154.021 for the project has been
satisfied.



   (C)   A maximum of 25% of funding received in any one year for the
City Art Fund shall be allocated for performing arts in subsequent years,
subject to the release of funding availability and review of applications by
the Commission.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.021  PROGRAM ALLOCATIONS.



   The Art in Public Places Program allocation, as used in this Chapter,
is the percentage of the development costs set aside for the city’s Art in
Public Places Program and shall be an amount equal to 1% of the total
building valuation for an applicable project, as defined in § 154.019,
excluding land acquisition and off-site improvement costs (the “Art in
Public Places Allocation”).  The total building valuation shall consist of
the dollar amount of all construction permits using the latest Building
Valuation Data as set forth by the International Conference of Building
Officials (ICBO) unless, in the opinion of the Building Official, a different
valuation methodology is more appropriate for a particular project.



   (A)   In lieu of placement of an approved art work, the applicant
may pay for deposit into the city Art Fund an amount equal to the Art in
Public Places Program Allocation set forth in division (A), above.  In lieu
fees are due prior to the issuance of a building permit.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the applicant from
placing an approved art work with acquisition and installation costs in an
amount less than the Art in Public Places Program Allocation; provided, that
the applicant shall also pay for deposit into the City Art Fund an amount
equal to the difference between the Art in Public Places Program Allocation
and the costs of acquisition and installation of such art work.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.022  APPLICATION AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES FOR PLACING ART WORK ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   Application procedures.  An application for placement of art
work on private property shall be submitted to the Community Development
Director, and shall include the following information, at minimum:



      (1)   Preliminary sketches, photographs, or other
documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the
proposed art work.



      (2)   An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the
proposed art work;



      (3)   Preliminary plans containing such detailed information
as may be required by the Community Development Director to evaluate,
adequately, the location of the art work in relation to the proposed
development, including compatibility with the character of adjacent
conforming developed parcels and existing neighborhood if necessary to
evaluate the proposal; and



      (4)   A narrative proposal with elevations, site plans, lines
of site studies, renderings, and other descriptive materials, as deemed
necessary by the Community Development Director, to be submitted to the
Commission to demonstrate the art work will be displayed in an area open and
freely available to the general public at least ten hours a day, seven days
per week, or otherwise provide public accessibility in an equivalent manner
based on the characteristics of the art work or its placement on the site.



   (B)   Approval.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) below, completed
applications shall be submitted to the Community Development Director for
review and approval of the art work, considering the aesthetic quality and
harmony of the art work with the existing on-site improvements and the
proposed location of and public accessibility to the art work.



      (2)   The Commission shall review the completed application,
together with the recommendation of the Community Development Director and
approve, approve with conditions or deny the proposed art work, and its
proposed location, considering the aesthetic quality and harmony with the
proposed project, and the public accessibility to the art work.



         (a)   If the applicant proposed significant revisions to
the art work, a revised application shall be submitted to the Community
Development Director for review and recommendation to the Commission.  The
Commission shall make a determination whether to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny the requested revision.



         (b)   If the applicant proposed or the Planning
Commission, or other decision-making body, recommends significant revisions
to the architecture or physical design and layout of the proposed project
subsequent to receipt of the Community Development Director’s
recommendation, the revised application may be returned to the Commission for
further review and recommendation.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.023  PROCEDURE FOR ACCEPTANCE OF ART WORK DONATED TO THE CITY.



   (A)   Application procedure.  An application for acceptance of art
work to be donated to the city for placement on public property shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director and shall include the
following information, at a minimum:



      (1)   Preliminary sketches, photographs, models, site plan,
lines of sight, or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to
indicate the nature of the proposed art work.



      (2)   An appraisal or other evidence of the value of the
proposed art work, including acquisition and installation costs;



      (3)   A written agreement in a form approved by the City
Attorney, executed by or on behalf of the artist who created the art work,
which expressly waives his or her rights under the California Art
Preservation Act or other applicable law;



      (4)   Other information as may be required by the City Council
to adequately evaluate the proposed donation of art work.



   (B)   Review of application.



      (1)   Completed applications shall be submitted to the
Community Development Director for review and recommendation to the City
Council.



      (2)   Recommendations shall be forwarded to the City Council,
which shall have the sole authority.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.024  LIMITATIONS ON FORMS OF ART.



   (A)   Private property.  Subject to the provisions of § 154.021,
if a person subject to this chapter chooses to meet the Art in Public Places
Program allocation requirement by providing art work, the only form of art
that can satisfy the requirement is placement of an approved art work on
private property.  As used in this chapter, an art work is a sculpture,
mural, or portable painting, earthwork, firework, neon, glass mosaic,
photograph, print calligraphy, or other physical hard media.



   (B)   Donation of art.  Subject to the provisions of § 154.023, if
an applicant subject to this chapter chooses to meet the Art in Public Places
Program allocation by donation of art, the only form of art which can be
donated to the city is an art work, as described in the definition contained
in § 154.017.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.025  OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF ART WORK.



   (A)   All art work placed on the site of an applicant’s project
shall remain the property of the property owner and his or her successor(s)
in interest.  The obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to
preserve the art work in good condition shall remain with the property owner
of the site.



   (B)   Maintenance of art work, as used in this section shall include
without limitation, preservation of the art work in good condition to the
satisfaction of the city, protection of the art work against physical
defacement, mutilation or alteration, and securing and maintaining fire and
extended insurance coverage and vandalism coverage in an amount to be
determined by the City Attorney.  Prior to placement of an approved art
work, the applicant and the owner of the site shall execute and record a
covenant in a form approved by the City Attorney for maintenance of the art
work.  Failure to maintain the art work as provided herein is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.  The city shall pursue additional remedies
to obtain compliance with the provisions of this Art in Public Places Program
as appropriate.



   (C)   In addition to all other remedies provided by law, in the
event the owner fails to maintain the art work, upon reasonable notice, the
city may perform all necessary repairs, maintenance or secure insurance, and
the costs thereof, shall become a lien against the real property.



   (D)   All art work donated to the city shall become the property of
the city upon acceptance by the City Council.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.026  ART WORK ON PUBLIC PROPERTY, PERFORMING ARTS AND PURCHASE OF
REAL PROPERTY FOR PUBLIC ART.



   (A)   The Commission shall prepare an annual plan for the Art in
Public Places Program.



   (B)   The Commission may recommend to the City Council the purchase
of art work to be displayed on public property, support for the performing
arts, and the purchase and improvement of real property to be used for the
display of art work.  A recommendation shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The type of art work considered, an analysis of the
constraints applicable to placement of the art work on a site, the need for
and practicality of the maintenance of the art work, and the costs of
acquisition and installation of the art work; or



      (2)   The type of performance and amount recommended; or



      (3)   The estimated costs of acquisition and improvements of
the real property proposed to be purchased.



   (C)   The Commission is authorized to review performing arts grants
allocations and make a recommendation to the City Council up to the amount
authorized by the City budget for the current fiscal year during which the
grants are being considered.



   (D)   An expenditure from the City Art Fund may be made for the
performing arts; provided, the City Council approved the performing arts
event and the performance would occur at a location in the city, or owned or
controlled by the city or the City of Baldwin Park Community Development
Commission, or at an alternative site which is in close proximity to the
corporate boundaries of the city and has facilities for performing arts which
compliment or supplement those available within the city.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.027  RETURN OF FEES.



   (A)   Fees paid into the City Art Fund which are not committed
within five years after the date of payment may be returned to the then
current owner of the development project, with all interest actually earned
thereon at the rate earned by the city, if a written request for return is
filed with the City Treasurer during the fifth year after payment, and refund
of fees is approved by the City Council.  The request for return shall be
verified, and include the date of payment, the amount paid and method of
payment, the location of the new development for which the fee was paid, and
a statement that the applicant is the payer of the fees or the current owner
of the development project.



   (B)   The City Council shall determine if return of the then
uncommitted portion of the fees and interest is appropriate and, if so, the
method of refund.  No refund shall be appropriate if the City Council
determines any of the following applies:



      (1)   The City Council finds the fee is needed for the Art in
Public Places Program; provided, that at least ten days prior to the hearing,
notice of public hearing on this issue has been published and posted on the
site of the development project in not less than three places.



      (2)   Moneys were not posted as fees, but were satisfied by
letter of credit, bond or other instrument taken to secure payment at a
future date.



      (3)   The administrative costs of refunding the uncommitted
fees pursuant to this chapter exceeds the amount to be refunded; provided,
that at least ten days prior to the hearing, a notice of public hearing on
this issue has been published and posted on the site of the development
project in not less than three places.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.028  CRITERIA FOR APPROVING ARCHITECTURE AS ART.



   The following criteria shall be used to determine, on a case-by-case
basis, whether architecture can be considered art for purposes of fulfilling
the Art in Public Places Program requirements:



   (A)   The architect shall be substantially recognized by the art
world in shows, museums, and/or publications.



   (B)   When reviewing architecture as art, the underlying concept of
the architecture shall be expressive as more than mere utilitarian
architecture.  The architecture as a whole or certain architectural features
shall express ideas or meaning and have cultural significance or conceptual
complexity in relation to the totality of the object.



   (C)   In the alternative, architecture can be considered art if it
is created as a collaborative effort with an artist, the artist does the
majority of the work, the artist has major design control of the portions of
the architecture to be considered art, and the artist has been brought in
early in the process.  The artist shall have experience and knowledge of
monumental scale and sculpture.



   (D)   The architecture must meet all the general criteria regarding
placement of art work on private property as defined in § 154.022 of this
chapter.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.029  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVING ARCHITECTURE AS ART.



   The following procedure must be followed by the developer to fill the
public art requirement with the building’s architecture.



   (A)   The applicant and architect must make two presentations to the
Commission:



      (1)   The first presentation shall be made prior to the
development application being deemed complete.  The applicant must submit a
maquette and other materials which satisfactorily illustrate the proposed
conceptual development.  The applicant and architect must submit a
conceptual statement expressing why the architecture should be considered
art, including an explanation of the ideas, meaning, cultural significance or
conceptual complexity expressed in the architecture.



      (2)   The second presentation shall be made at the completion
of the city approval process.  The applicant must then submit a maquette and
other materials and other materials that satisfactorily illustrate the
to-be-built development.



   (B)   The applicant and architect shall demonstrate there will be
high quality materials and craftsmanship used in the execution of the
construction.



   (C)   If all of the foregoing criteria are met, then the Commission
shall accept the architecture as art, only if, in its judgment, the
architectural work is of extremely high artistic merit and would make a
substantial cultural contribution to the community.



   (D)   The applicant or architect shall have the responsibility to
demonstrate all of the foregoing criteria are met.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.030  EXEMPTION.



   Buildings which are designed and dedicated to performing arts spaces or
museum uses shall not also be required to meet the 1% set-aside requirement
for as long as the performing arts or museum uses are maintained within the
building.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.031  REMOVAL OF ART WORK.



   The Commission shall recommend and the City Council shall establish
guidelines to address potential options for the sale, removal, and disposal
of art work in cases where such change becomes necessary.  These guidelines
shall be adopted by resolution as soon as reasonable feasible.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



§ 154.032  APPEAL.



   Any person may seek review of any decision of the Commission by the
City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk’s Office within
ten days after the decision of the Commission.  The City Clerk’s Office
shall coordinate with the Community Development Director to schedule the
appeal hearing before the City Council.



(Ord. 1245, passed 9-15-04)



FLOOD CONTROL FACILITIES



§ 154.040  DEPOSIT AND USE OF FEES.



   Fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the Flood
Control Facilities Fund maintained by the City Treasurer, and shall be used
solely for the construction of new flood control facilities as described in
the Storm Drain Master Plan.



(Ord. 1248, passed 1-5-05)



§ 154.041  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any new development
shall pay a flood control facility fee in an amount to be established by
resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1248, passed 1-5-05)



§ 154.042  CREDIT FOR FACILITIES INSTALLED BY DEVELOPER.



   It is the intent of the City Council that the fees established by this
subchapter shall not be duplicative of fees or costs otherwise imposed upon
development.  The City Engineer shall therefore be responsible for
determining if in any particular circumstance, all or part of such fees shall
be off-set by the value of any off-site flood control facilities required as
a condition of approval of a development.  The decision of the City Engineer
shall be final.



(Ord. 1248, passed 1-5-05)



TRAFFIC CONGESTION RELIEF FACILITIES



§ 154.050  DEPOSIT AND USE OF FEES.



   Fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the
Traffic Congestion Relief Facilities Fund maintained by the City Treasurer,
and shall be used solely for the construction of new traffic signals and
traffic control signs within the city.



(Ord. 1248, passed 1-5-05)



§ 154.051  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any new development
shall pay a traffic congestion relief facility fee in an amount to be
established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1248, passed 1-5-05)



§ 154.052  CREDIT FOR FACILITIES INSTALLED BY DEVELOPER.



   It is the intent of the City Council that the fees established by this
subchapter shall not be duplicative of fees or costs otherwise imposed upon
development.  The City Engineer shall therefore be responsible for
determining if in any particular circumstance, all or part of such fees shall
be off-set by the value of any off-site traffic congestion relief facilities
required as a condition of approval of a development.  The decision of the
City Engineer shall be final.



(Ord. 1248, passed 1-5-05)



LAW ENFORCEMENT FACILITIES, VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT



§ 154.060  DEPOSIT AND USE OF FEES.



   Fees paid pursuant to this subchapter shall be deposited into the law
enforcement development impact fund maintained by the City Treasurer, and
shall be used solely for law enforcement facilities, vehicles and equipment
infrastructure, generated by the city’s growing population and business
expansion and cannot address any existing capital deficiencies.



(Ord. 1386, passed 9-7-16)



§ 154.061  PAYMENT OF FEES.



   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any new development
shall pay a law enforcement facilities, vehicles and equipment development
impact fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council.



(Ord. 1386, passed 9-7-16)



CHAPTER 155:  FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT



Section



   155.001   Statement of purpose



   155.002   Definitions



   155.003   Application



   155.004   Compliance



   155.005   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   155.006   Interpretation



   155.007   Review of development permits



   155.008   Standards of construction



   155.009   Standards for subdivisions



   155.010   Standards for utilities



§ 155.001  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use
and development of floodplains so as to minimize future blighted areas caused
by flood damage;



   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in
a floodplain; and



   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy floodplains assume responsibility
for their actions.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.002  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year (also called the “100-YEAR FLOOD”). 



   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
property, including but not limited to construction of buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations.



   DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any permit otherwise required by this code for any
development, including but not limited to a demolition, grading, or building
permit.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.



      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:  the overflow of inland or tidal
waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by
flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud
on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a
current of water and deposited along the path of the current; or



      (2)   The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a
lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by
waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in division (1) above.



   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area subject to flooding during a base flood, as
determined by the Floodplain Administrator based upon the Flood Insurance
Rate Map issued by the United States Department of Homeland Security through
the Federal Emergency Management Agency.



   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s Chief Executive Officer or his
or her designee.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the United States Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register; or



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or



      (3)   Individually listed on a State of California inventory
of historic places; or



      (4)   Individually listed on the city’s local inventory of
historic places if the city has adopted a historic preservation program that
has been certified either by the State of California or the Secretary of the
Interior.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.



      (1)   Any structure for which a building permit is first
issued on or after the effective date of this chapter;



      (2)   Any subsequent improvements to any structure for which a
building permit is first issued on or after the effective date of this
chapter; and



      (3)   Any substantial improvement to any structure existing on
the effective date of this chapter.



   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; structure also includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a
manufactured home to the extent the city may control such structures under
state law.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure where
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would
equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
or other proposed new development of a structure existing as of the effective
date of this chapter, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. 
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage,
regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:



      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
violations of health, sanitary, or safety code specifications not resulting
from substantial damage which have been identified by the city and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.003 APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to any development or subdivision of any 
land in the city which is located in any area identified as a floodplain. A
map of all floodplains shall be kept on file in the Public Works Department.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.004 COMPLIANCE.



   No land within a floodplain shall be altered nor any new construction
performed on such land without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter.  Violation of the requirements of this chapter (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions established under this chapter) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.005  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this
chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.006  INTERPRETATION.



   (A)   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all
provisions shall be:



      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;



      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the city; and



      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers
granted the city under state or federal law, nor to limit or repeal the
obligation to comply with any other state or federal law, whether or not
enforced by the city.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to state or imply that
compliance with the requirements of this chapter assures that flood or
flooding will not cause damage either within a floodplain or within any other
area in the city.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.007  REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   Prior to the issuance of a development permit by the city, the
Floodplain Administrator shall review the development permit application to
determine that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, and that
all state and federal permits required for construction in a floodplain, if
any, have been obtained.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.008  STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.



   In addition to any other requirements of law, all new construction
shall:



   (A)   Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.



   (B)   Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant
to flood damage and using methods and practices that minimize flood damage,
including but not limited to designing or locating all electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.009  STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.



   Any proposed subdivision of land in a floodplain shall be designed to
assure that:



   (A)   The design of the subdivision is consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage within the flood prone area;



   (B)   All public utilities and facilities serving the subdivision,
including but not limited to sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, are
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and



   (C)   Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



§ 155.010  STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.



   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage
systems within a floodplain shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:



      (1)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and



      (2)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.



   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems on land within a floodplain
which are otherwise permitted by law shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 1280, passed 6-7-06)



CHAPTER 156:  SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS



Section



   156.01   Title



   156.02   Purpose



   156.03   Definitions



   156.04   Applicability



   156.05   Solar energy system requirements



   156.06   Duties of Building Department and Building Official



   156.07   Expedited permit review and inspection requirements



   156.08   Fees



§ 156.01  TITLE.



   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and designated as
the "Small Residential Solar Energy System Permits " ordinance.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.02  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this Article is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188
(Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective
installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter
is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable
barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the
ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter
allows the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and
safety.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.03  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASSOCIATION. A nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association
created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.



   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Board of Appeals established pursuant to Baldwin
Park Municipal Code § 150.011.



   BUILDING DEPARTMENT. The Building Department for the City of Baldwin
Park.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The Building Official for the City of Baldwin Park.



   CITY. The City of Baldwin Park.



   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following:



      (1)   A community apartment project.



      (2)   A condominium project.



      (3)   A planned development.



      (4)   A stock cooperative.



   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The utilization of one or more of the following:



      (1)   Email.



      (2)   The Internet.



      (3)   Facsimile.



   EXPEDITED PERMITTING and EXPEDITED REVIEW. The process outlined in §
156.070 entitled "expedited permit review and inspection requirements."



   A FEASIBLE METHOD TO SATISFACTORILY MITIGATE OR AVOID THE SPECIFIC,
ADVERSE IMPACT. Includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method,
condition or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated
application in a prior successful application for a similar permit.



   LABELS. Signage identifying solar equipment, solar equipment ratings,
and warnings of potential hazards. Labels shall be made of durable plastic or
metallic material with edged or engraved lettering. The label description
shall comply with the requirements of the current California Electrical Code.



   REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS. On a solar system are those restrictions that
do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly
decrease its efficiency or specific performance, or that allow for an
alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation
benefits.



   RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM
OR DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED PERFORMANCE:



      (1)   For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating
systems: an amount exceeding 10% of the cost of the system, but in no case
more than $1,000, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by
an amount exceeding 10%, as originally specified and proposed.



      (2)   For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $
1,000 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10% as originally
specified and proposed.



   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. All of the following:



      (1)   A solar energy system that is not larger than ten
kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal.



      (2)   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable
state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or
amended by the City of Baldwin Park and all State of California health and
safety standards.



      (3)   A solar energy system that is installed on one and
two-family homes of R3 occupancy as defined by the California Building Code.



      (4)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the
maximum legal building height as defined by the City of Baldwin Park.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. Either of the following:



      (1)   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose
primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution
of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or
water heating.



      (2)   Any structural design feature of a building whose
primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution
of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or
water heating.



   SPECIFIC ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health
or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.04  APPLICABILITY.



   This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop
solar energy systems in the city. Small residential rooftop solar energy
systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this
chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical
modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size,
type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to
require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind
replacements shall not require a permit.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.05  SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and
safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the State of
California.



   (B)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family
residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications
shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the
California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.



   (C)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.06  DUTIES OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT AND BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   All documents required for the submission of an expedited
small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made
available on the city's publicly accessible website.



   (B)   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and
documents via email, the city's website, or facsimile shall be made available
to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.



   (C)   An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all
forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.



   (D)   The Building Department shall adopt a standard plan and
checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar
energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review.



   (E)   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process,
standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the
recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and
standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar
Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and
Research.



   (F)   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65850.55
and 66015 and Cal. Health & Safety Code § 17951.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.07  EXPEDITED PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   The Building Department shall adopt an administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential
rooftop solar energy system applications within 30 days of adoption of this
chapter. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy
system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard
plan, the Building Department shall issue a building permit or other
non-discretionary permit in a timely manner and no later than five working
days from the day of submittal. A Building Official may require an applicant
to apply for a use permit if the Official finds, based on substantial
evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact
upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed pursuant to
the procedures outlined in § 150.011 of this Code.



   (B)   Review of the application shall be limited to the Building
Official's review of whether the applicant meets local, state and federal
health and safety requirements.



   (C)   If a use permit is required, a Building Official may deny an
application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based
upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would
have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse
impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the
potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such
decisions may be appealed pursuant to procedures outlined in § 150.011 of
this Code.



   (D)   Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to
mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest
possible cost. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the
selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of Cal. Civil
Code § 714(d)(l)(A)-(B).



   (E)   The City shall not condition the approval of an application on
the approval of an association as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080.



   (F)   If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy
system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all
deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent
to the applicant for resubmission.



   (G)   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the
Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems
eligible for expedited review.



   (H)   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should
include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two
business days of a request and will provide the applicant with a two-hour
inspection window.



   (I)   If the small residential rooftop solar energy system fails
inspection, subsequent inspection(s) is/are authorized and re-inspection fees
may be assessed if the installation repeatedly fails to meet the safety
standards of the Building and Electrical Codes or if access to the work site
is limited or restricted repeatedly.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



§ 156.08  FEES.



   (A)   Separate permit and plans review fees will be required for
solar energy systems pursuant to this chapter. The fee shall reimburse the
city for staff time incurred and resources expended in its administration of
this chapter.



   (B)   The residential solar systems permit fee and the residential
solar systems plans review fee shall be set by resolution as approved by the
City Council.



   (C)   Additional hourly re-inspection fees as set forth in the
city's Fees Schedule may be assessed on a projects that repeatedly fail
inspections.



(Ord. 1380, passed 9-16-15)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



Table



   I.   CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES



   II.   ZONING MAP CHANGES



TABLE I:  CONTRACTS, AGREEMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1081
 
5-18-94
 
Amending and restating the lease agreement between the city and the Baldwin
Park Financing Authority, including an escrow agreement between the city, the
Authority and the Bank of America National Trust and Savings Association.


1088
 
9-7-94
 
Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the city and the California
Public Employees' Retirement System.


1107
 
11-1-95
 
Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the
Board of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.


1134
 
10-7-98
 
Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the
Board of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.


1142
 
7-21-99
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a Development Agreement with Ken Spiker &
Associates Inc. for the approval of nine new billboard structures at specific
locations


1147
 
11-3-99
 
Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the
Board of Administration of the California Public Employee's Retirement System.


1150
 
10-20-99
 
Declaring a moratorium on the approval of permits and/or licenses for the
establishment and/or the expansion of acupressure or other similar
enterprises or businesses or uses in the city.


1151
 
12-1-99
 
Extending a moratorium on the approval of permits and/or licenses for the
establishment and/or the expansion of acupressure or other similar
enterprises or businesses or uses in the city.


1154
 
12-15-99
 
Amending certain redevelopment project area plans pursuant to the provisions
of Assembly Bill 1342.


1157
 
3-15-00
 
Amending Ordinance No. 1154 to conform to the title thereof and the recital
therein which ordinance amended certain redevelopment project area plans in
compliance with Assembly Bill No. 1342.


1223
 
3-17-04
 
Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council of the City
of Baldwin Park and the Board of Administration of the California Public
Employees' Retirement System.


1246
 
9-15-04
 
Entering into an amended lease agreement between the city and the financing
authority.


1262
 
5-4-05
 
Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the
Board of Administration of the California Public Employee's Retirement System.


1305
 
6-20-07
 
Declaring a moratorium on the establishment of medical marijuana dispensaries
within the city.


1307
 
8-1-07
 
Declaring a moratorium on the establishment of medical marijuana dispensaries
within the city.


1318
 
6-4-08
 
Extending a moratorium on the establishment of medicinal marijuana
dispensaries with the city.


1347
 
9-7-11
 
Authorizing participation in California Voluntary Alternative Redevelopment
Program in order to permit the continued existence and operation of the
Community Development Commission.


1376
 
9-2-15   
 
Requiring specific findings by the City Council and voter approval by a super
majority before contracting out general police services.


1378
 
9-2-15   
 
Declaring a moratorium on the establishment of new and expansion of existing
massage establishments within the city.


1381
 
10-7-15
 
Extending a moratorium on the establishment of new and expansion of existing
massage establishments within the city.


1395
 
12-21-16
 
Authorizing the city of Baldwin Park to enter into a development agreement
with Bulletin Displays, LLC for the approval of nine digital billboard sign
faces on three new structures, nine static billboard faces on three new
structures and one existing three sided, static faced billboard structure at
the real property generally located along the I-605 and I-10 freeways.


1399
 
5-3-17
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Becker Boards
Small, LLC for the approval of a new digital billboard structure at the real
property located at 1919 Puente Avenue along the I-10 freeway within the city.


1410
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Jenome
Research for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 4145 Puente Avenue within the city.


1411
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Baldwin Park
Tale Corp. for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 14551 Joanbridge Street within the city.


1412
 
7-18-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Rukli, Inc.
for the distribution of cannabis at real property located at 4150 Puente
Avenue within the city.


1413
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with 428
Cloverleaf, LLC for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the
real property located at 13111 Spring Street within the city.


1414
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Casa Verde
Group for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 5117 Calmview Avenue within the city.


1416
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Organic
Management Solutions for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at
the real property located at 14837 and 14841 Ramona Blvd. within the city.


1417
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Medical Grade
Farms BP for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 5148 Bleecker Street within the city.


1418
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Kultiv8
Group, LLC for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 15023 Ramona Blvd. within the city.


1419
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with GSC Capital
Group for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 4621 Littlejohn Street within the city.


1420
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Elite Green
Cultivators for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 5157 Azusa Canyon Road within the city.


1421
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Pacific
Cultivation, LLC for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the
real property located at 5175 Commerce Drive within the city.


1422
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Cloud Control
Inc. for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 13450 Brooks Drive, Unit A & C within the city.


1423
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with VRD, Inc. for
the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real property located
at 4802 Littlejohn Street within the city.


1424
 
5-2-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Green Health
Industries, LLC,  for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at
the real property located at 13460 Brooks Drive within the city.


1425
 
7-18-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with the Grown
Folks, Inc. for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 14712 Arrow Highway within the city.


1426
 
7-18-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with W & F
International Corporation for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of
cannabis at the real property located at 4276 Elton Street within the city.


1427
 
7-18-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Tier One
Consulting for the cultivation and/or manufacturing of cannabis at the real
property located at 14726 Arrow Highway within the city.


1429
 
10-3-18
 
Authorizing the city to enter into a development agreement with Becker Boards
Small, LLC, for the approval of a new digital billboard structure at the real
property located at 13100 Brooks Drive along the I-605 freeway within the
city.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




1077
 
4-20-94
 
Rezoning certain property located at 3567-3609 Big Dalton Avenue from R-1,
Single-Family Residential to R-1(PD), Single-Family Residential Planned
Overlay Zone.


1090
 
12-7-94
 
Rezoning certain property located at 14874-78 Pacific Avenue from R-1,
Single-Family Residential District to C-1, Neighborhood Commercial Zone.


1132
 
6-17-98
 
Rezoning certain property located at 12900-12916 Ramona Boulevard (Case No.
Z-508) from C-2, General Commercial to R-1, Single-Family Residential
District.


1141
 
7-21-99
 
Rezoning certain property located 440 Cloverleaf Drive (Case No. Z-509) from
IC (PD), Industrial Commercial (Planned Development) to IC (PD) (O),
Industrial Commercial (Planned Development) Outdoor Advertising Overlay Zone.


1143
 
7-21-99
 
Rezoning certain property located 3251 Patritti Avenue (Case No. Z-510) from
OS, Open Space to C-1 (O), Neighborhood Commercial, Outdoor Advertising
Overlay.


1144
 
7-21-99
 
Rezoning certain property located northwest corner of the I-10 and I-605
freeways within the Southern California Edison right-of-way (Case No. Z-511)
from OS, Open Space to I-C (O), General Manufacturing, Outdoor Advertising
Overlay Zone.


1160
 
5-17-00
 
Rezoning certain property located at 13329 Garvey Avenue (Case No. Z-513)
from IC, Industrial Commercial to IC (O), Industrial Sierra Vista Overlay.


1162
 
2-21-01
 
Rezoning certain property located at 12911-12921 Garvey Avenue from OI,
Office Industrial to OI (O), Office Industrial Sierra Vista Overlay.


1167
 
11-1-00
 
Rezoning certain property located at 12670 Ramona Boulevard from C-2, General
Commercial to C-2 (O), General Commercial Outdoor Advertising District
Overlay.


1172
 
2-28-01
 
Rezoning certain property located at 12999 Garvey Avenue from FC, Freeway
Commercial to FC (O), Freeway Commercial Sierra Vista Overlay.


1173
 
2-21-01
 
Rezoning certain property located at Dalewood Street, south of the I-10 San
Bernardino Freeway, adjacent to the Southern California right-of-way, from
OI, Office Industrial to OI (O), Office Industrial Sierra Vista Overlay.


1174
 
2-21-01
 
Rezoning certain property located at 843 Frazier from OI, Office Industrial
to OI (O), Office Industrial Sierra Vista Overlay.


1175
 
4-4-01
 
Rezoning certain property located at 5110 Maine Avenue from C-1, Neighborhood
Commercial to R-1, Single Family Residential.


1176
 
4-18-01
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 12800-12806 Dalewood Street from
O-I, Office Industrial, to R-1, Single-Family Residential.


1197
 
12-18-02
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3722-3736 Merced Avenue from RG,
Residential Garden to RG (PD), Residential Garden Planned Development
District Overlay.


1198
 
11-20-02
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3714½-3728 Maine Avenue from R-1,
Single Family Residential to R-1 (PD), Single Family Residential Planned
Development District Overlay.


1200
 
12-4-02
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3933 Bresee Avenue from RG,
Residential Garden to RG (PD), Residential Garden Planned Development
District Overlay.


1202
 
5-7-03
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 4611 Maine Avenue from RG,
Residential Garden to RG(PD), Residential Garden Planned Development District
Overlay.


1205
 
7-30-03
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 4751 Center Street from R-1,
Single-Family Residential to R-1(PD), Single-Family Residential Planned
Development District Overlay.


1206
 
7-2-03
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 14564 Pacific Avenue from C-1,
Neighborhood Commercial to RG, Residential Garden.


1207
 
6-2-04
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3111 Baldwin Park Boulevard from
IC, Industrial Commercial to C-2, General Commercial.


1208
 
7-16-03
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3102-3106 Frazier Street from RG,
Residential Garden to RG(PD), Residential Garden Planned Development District
Overlay.


1211
 
7-30-03
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 13356-13358 Ramona Boulevard from
C-2, General Commercial to RG, Residential Garden.


1222
 
12-3-03
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 4316 Walnut Street from RG,
Residential Garden to RG(PD), Residential Garden Planned Development District
Overlay.


1224
 
4-7-04
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3948-58 Baldwin Park Blvd. from RG,
Residential Garden to RG(PD) Residential Garden Planned Development.


1227
 
3-3-04
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3224 - 3250 Baldwin Park Boulevard
from R-1, Single-Family Residential to RG, Residential Garden.


1228
 
3-3-04
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3948 - 3958 Baldwin Park Boulevard
from RG, Residential Garden RG(PD), Residential Garden Planned Development
District Overlay.


1247
 
9-29-04
 
Rezoning certain real property located at Dart Street from R-1, Single-Family
Residential to R-3(PD) Multi-Family Residential Planned Development District
Overlay.


1251
 
2-16-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3773-3779 Bresee Street from RG,
Residential Garden to RG(PD) Residential Garden Planned Development.


1253
 
5-4-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 4958 Maine Avenue from R-1,
Single-Family Residential to RG(PD), Residential Garden Multi-Family with a
Planned Development Overlay.


1261
 
3-16-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 14548 Pacific Avenue from C-1,
Neighborhood Commercial to RG, Residential Garden.


1271
 
9-21-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 819 Frazier Street from OI, Office
Industrial to R-1 (PD), Single- Family Residential Planned Development
District Overlay.


1272
 
9-21-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 3940 - 3948 Walnut Street from R-1,
Single-Family Residential to R-1 (PD), Single-Family Residential Planned
Development District Overlay.


1275
 
10-5-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 4306 Center Street from R-1,
Single-Family Residential to R-1 (PD), Single-Family Residential Planned
Development District Overlay.


1276
 
10-5-05
 
Rezoning certain real property located at 4229 - 4241 Walnut Street from R-1,
Single-Family Residential to R-1 (PD), Single-Family Residential Planned
Development District Overlay.


1298
 
2-7-07
 
Rezoning certain property located at 1312 - 13940 Merced Avenue, 3637 Baldwin
Park Blvd. and 13821-25 Kenmore Avenue to add a specific plan overlay to the
underlying R-1 and C-1 zoning.


1319
 
6-18-08
 
Rezoning certain property located at 3427-3441 Baldwin Park Blvd. to add the
specific plan overlay to the underlying RG zoning.


1368
 
1-21-15
 
Rezoning property identified as parcel 4 on page 17 of map book 8552 in the
Los Angeles County Assessor’s records to add a specific plan overlay to the
underlying R-1 to zoning.


1393
 
1-18-17
 
Rezoning property identified as parcel numbers 8438-015-037, 8438-015-059,
8438-015-043, and 8438-015-047, from  RG/RD, Residential Garden Planned
Development, and MU-2, Mixed-Use 2, to R-3. High Density Residential and to
apply the specific plan overlay.


1409
 
4-18-18
 
Approving zoning designations on properties within specific plan areas which
are consistency edits that have been previously approved by the City Council
(locations: Plan 13-01 (ROEM - Ramona Blvd./Bogart St.), Specific plan 14-01
(Indigo Project - Baldwin Park Blvd./Merced Ave.), SP 15-01 (Downtown transit
oriented specific plan) and Specific plan 16-01 (Pacific Villas - Pacific
Ave.); applicant city of Baldwin Park; Case Number Z-556).


 
 
 
 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to California Codes





References to 1983 Code





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES




Administration Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


 



 




Business and Professions Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




Ch. 2 of Division 1.5
 
127.02


Division 10 (commencing with § 2600)
 
127.02, 127.03


4600 et seq.
 
110.04, 118.03


5230
 
97.169


5231
 
97.169


5500.1
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5615
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100, 153.220.130


5641
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5641.1
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5641.2   
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5641.3
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5641.4
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5641.5
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


5641.6
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


6701
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


7027.5
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


7500 et seq.
 
120.01, 120.04


7512 et seq.
 
120.01


7524
 
Ch. 120


7544 et seq.
 
Ch. 120


7590 et seq.
 
Ch. 91


7590.1
 
91.03


7590.2
 
91.03


7591.6
 
91.03


7592.8 et seq.
 
Ch. 91


8771
 
152.10


16000 et seq.
 
111.03


16001
 
111.37


17510
 
122.03


23000 et seq.
 
130.45, 130.46


26000
 
127.01


26000 et seq.
 
127.01


26001(ai)
 
127.02


26001(al)
 
127.02


26001(an)
 
127.02


26001(b)(4)
 
127.02


26001(c)
 
127.02


26001(f)
 
127.02


26001(k)
 
127.02


26001(m)
 
127.02


26001(r)
 
127.02


26001(y)
 
127.02


 
 
 




 




Civil Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




714(d)(1)(A)-(B)
 
156.07


783
 
35.120


1094.5
 
10.20, 100.260


1094.6(b)
 
10.20


1094.8
 
124.100


1351
 
94.5.010, 154.002


1355
 
152.10


1714.1
 
96.02


1714.3
 
96.02


1940(b)(2)
 
94.5.010


2080 et seq.
 
37.15


3072
 
100.050


3073
 
100.050


4080
 
156.07


 
 
 




 




Civil Procedure Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


446
 
95.5.09


1094.6
 
125.120


1094.8
 
124.100


 



 




Code of Regulations




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




Title 16, § 832.27
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


Title 24
 
150.011, 150.020, 150.101


Title 24, Part 2
 
150.140


Title 24, Part 2.5
 
150.140


Title 24, Part 3
 
150.150


Title 24, Part 4
 
150.160


Title 24, Part 5
 
150.170, 150.180


Title 24, Part 7
 
150.190


Title 24, Part 8
 
150.052, 150.200


Title 24, Part 10
 
150.210


Title 24, Part 11
 
150.140


Title 24, Part 12
 
150.220


600.1
 
120.01


 
 
 




 




Education Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


94900
 
118.01


94905
 
118.01


94311.1
 
118.05, 118.17


 



 




Food and Agricultural Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


6721
 
153.160.090, 153.160.100


16301 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


30501 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


 



 




Government Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




Title 1, Ch. 1, § 900
 
10.19


Title 1, Ch. 2, Pt. 3, Div. 3.6, § 910
 
10.19


Title 7, Ch. 3, Div. 1, Art. 8
 
153.210.660


905
 
10.19


910
 
10.19


935
 
10.19


935(B)
 
10.19


940 - 949
 
10.19


945.6
 
10.19


950 - 951
 
10.19


4000 et seq.
 
Ch. 34


6250 et seq.
 
125.040


8550 et seq.
 
36.01


15000 et seq.
 
153.010.060


34851 - 34859
 
31.01


34870 et seq.
 
30.02


34900
 
30.02


36501 et seq.
 
Ch. 31


36801 et. seq.
 
Ch. 30


36900 - 36901
 
10.99


36903 - 36904
 
10.99


36904
 
38.01


36937
 
10.15


37100.5
 
35.091


37101
 
111.03


37202 et seq.
 
35.001


38772(d)(3)
 
95.14


38773.1
 
52.17, 95.11


38773.5
 
52.17, 95.12


38775
 
97.045


38792
 
Ch. 92


38900 et seq.
 
Ch. 51


40200 et seq.
 
154.002


40601 et seq.
 
30.02


40801 et seq.
 
31.30


40802 - 40805
 
31.46


41801 et seq.
 
31.15


43000 et seq.
 
35.001


45000 et seq.
 
33.01


50022.1 - 50022.10
 
10.01, 150.004


51030 et seq.
 
Ch. 118


51500 et seq.
 
35.001


53066
 
Ch. 114


53069.3
 
131.05


53069.4
 
15.11


53150 et seq.
 
38.32


54201- 54294
 
34.21


54950 et seq.
 
30.01, 32.04


65000 et seq.
 
153.010.050


65093
 
153.210.100


65100
 
153.020.010


65100 - 65102
 
32.65


65301 et seq.
 
153.220.080


65358
 
153.210.770, 153.210.780


65450 et seq.
 
153.220.200


65451
 
153.110.040


65452
 
153.210.670


65582
 
153.120.500


65583(a)
 
153.120.500


65589.5
 
153.120.500


65591 et seq.
 
153.160.030


65850.55
 
156.06


65850.6
 
153.180.050


65852.1
 
94.5.010, 153.120.350


65852.2
 
94.5.010, 153.120.350


65852.150
 
94.5.010, 153.120.350


65853
 
153.210.720


65864
 
153.210.820


65864 - 65869.5
 
153.210.860


65865
 
153.210.830


65906
 
153.210.350, 153.210.400


65915
 
153.040.130, 153.040.140, 153.040.160


65943
 
153.190.020


65962.5(d) and (f)
 
152.08


65964
 
153.180.050


66015
 
156.06


66410 et seq.
 
152.03


66412
 
152.04


66412.1
 
152.04


66412.2
 
152.04


66412.5
 
152.04


66424.6
 
152.07


66451.11(A) - (E)
 
152.15


66451.30(a)
 
152.16


66451.30(b)
 
152.16


66474.2
 
152.14


66498.1
 
152.08


66499 - 66499.20 3/4
 
152.11


91500
 
32.90


 
 
 




 




Health and Safety Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




1250
 
153.220.030


1267.8
 
153.220.070


1502
 
153.220.030


1508
 
153.220.190


1566.3
 
153.220.070


1568.01
 
153.220.030


1568.0831
 
153.220.070


1569.2
 
153.220.030


1569.85
 
153.220.070


1596.78
 
94.5.010


1596.78(b)
 
153.220.040


1596.78.c
 
153.220.040


1900 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


5470 et seq.
 
Ch. 51


11007
 
95.5.01


11018
 
153.220.140


11054 - 11058
 
118.06, 118.18, 122.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


11362.5
 
127.02, 153.220.140


11362.7(i)
 
127.02


11362.7 to 11362.83
 
127.02


11370.4
 
127.02


11379.8
 
127.02


11380.5
 
96.04


11401
 
95.5.01


11550
 
118.06


11590
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


11834.11
 
153.220.030


11834.23
 
153.220.070


12500 et seq.
 
93.11


12505
 
93.01


12511
 
93.01


12529
 
93.01


17951
 
156.06


17980
 
95.14


18007
 
153.220.140


18008
 
153.220.140


18214
 
153.220.140


33114.5
 
32.80


34115.5
 
32.100


40460
 
34.61


44223
 
34.60, 34.62


46000 et seq.
 
91.03


113758   
 
153.220.040


113758(a)
 
153.220.040


114365 et seq.
 
153.120.270


 
 
 




 




Labor Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


Division 4, § 3201
 
10.19


Ch.1, Art. 1, Pt. 7, Div. 2, § 1720
 
10.19


1102.1
 
33.22


3201 et seq.
 
33.24


6404.5
 
125.080


 



 




Penal Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




Title 4, Ch. I, § 13510(c)
 
31.60


Title 4, Ch. I, § 13512
 
31.60


Title 4, Ch. I, Part 4, § 13522
 
31.60


Title 9, Part 1, Ch. 1, 5, 7.5,
 
122.20


19
 
10.99, 127.14


186.22(f)
 
130.07


243.4
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


261
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


261 et seq.
 
Ch. 132


266a
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.080, 124.100


266b
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.080, 124.100


266c
 
124.040, 124.080, 124.100


266d
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


266e
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.080, 124.100


266f
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


266g
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080,124.100


266h
 
95.5.01, 118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


266i
 
95.5.01, 118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


266j
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


267
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


288
 
124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


290
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.100


311 through 313.1(d)
 
97.180


311 through 313.4.
 
97.180, 124.100


313
 
97.183


313.1
 
97.180


313.1(d)
 
97.180


314
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


315
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


316
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


318
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


320
 
132.03


326.5
 
Ch. 113, 113.01, 113.02, 113.03, 113.05-113.08


326.5b
 
113.16


330
 
96.02, 132.03


330A
 
96.02


330c
 
113.04


337a
 
132.03


415
 
96.02, 118.06, 118.18


416
 
130.17


450 et seq.
 
Ch. 131


594
 
96.02


594(c)(2)(A)
 
131.06


594.1(a) - (f)
 
131.03


597 et seq.
 
Ch. 92


602
 
118.06, 118.18


647(a)
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


647(b)
 
95.5.01, 118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


647(d)
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


653.22
 
118.06, 118.18, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.100


853.5 - 853.8
 
10.98


1203.4
 
118.04, 118.16


1412
 
95.5.04


11105
 
122.18


11225-11235
 
118.06, 118.18


12000 et seq.
 
130.03


12001
 
130.72


12033
 
130.72


12302
 
130.72


12322
 
130.72


12050
 
130.72


 
 
 




 




Public Contract Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


20161
 
34.26, 34.39


 



 




Public Resources Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




4291(a), (b)
 
153.160.090


5181 et seq.
 
95.15


21000 et seq.
 
152.03, 152.06, 152.08, 153.010.060, 153.210.090


21060.3
 
53.02, 53.14


21061.1
 
53.01


21065
 
52.13


40000 et seq.
 
53.01


 




 




Public Utilities Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


215-5
 
35.093


218
 
35.093


234
 
35.093


241
 
35.093


 



 




Revenue and Taxation Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




Division 2, Part 1
 
35.041, 35.042


Division 2, Part 1.5
 
35.036, 35.044 - 35.046


Division 2, Part 20
 
35.097


5096 et seq.
 
35.019


6067
 
35.043


6203
 
35.042


6366
 
35.044


6366.1
 
35.044


6701
 
35.042


6702
 
35.042


6711
 
35.042


6715
 
35.042


6737
 
35.042


6797
 
35.042


6828
 
35.042


7200 et seq.
 
35.036


7280
 
35.062


7280.5
 
35.073


7281
 
35.062


11901 et seq.
 
35.016, 35.020


11927
 
35.018


11928
 
35.018


11929
 
35.018


23701(a)
 
113.04


23701(b)
 
113.04


23701(d)
 
113.04, 113.16


23701(e)
 
113.04


23701(f)
 
113.04


23701(g)
 
113.04


23701(l)
 
113.04


 




 




Streets and Highways Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


Pt. 1, Div. 13, § 11000
 
10.19


5000 et seq.
 
Ch. 97


5870 et seq.
 
Ch. 97


5896.1 et seq.
 
97.061


22500 et seq.
 
97.127


 



 




Vehicle Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section




670
 
90.01, 95.5.01


5004
 
90.11


16500 et seq.
 
Ch. 123


21100
 
Ch. 123


21100 et seq.
 
Ch. 71


21100(p)
 
72.21


21106
 
70.28


21107.6
 
71.17


21112
 
Ch. 123


21351 et seq.
 
70.15


21400 et seq.
 
70.01


21458
 
70.21


21657
 
70.25


21950 et seq.
 
71.55


22101
 
70.22


22113
 
70.22


22348 et seq.
 
72.71


22500 et seq.
 
Ch. 72


22661
 
90.04, 90.05, 90.09


22705
 
100.050


22850
 
90.11


23109
 
130.37


23130
 
130.37


27907
 
100.210, 100.250


35700 et seq.
 
71.31


 
 
 




 




Water Code




 

Statutory Code Section
 
Code Section


13000 et seq.
 
52.15


13373
 
52.01, 52.13


 



 



REFERENCES TO 1983 CODE



 

1983 Code Section
 
1994 Code Section




1.01.070
 
10.99


Ch. 1.04
 
10.05


1.08.010
 
38.02


1.08.020
 
38.02


1.12.010
 
38.01


Ch. 1.16
 
10.98


1.20.010
 
10.99


1.30.010
 
31.60


2.04.010
 
31.01


2.04.020
 
31.02


2.04.030
 
31.03


2.04.040
 
31.04


2.04.050
 
31.05


2.04.060
 
31.06


2.08.010
 
30.01


2.08.020
 
30.01


2.08.030
 
30.02


2.08.040
 
30.03


2.12.010
 
30.04


2.12.020
 
30.04


2.12.030
 
30.04


2.12.040
 
30.04


2.12.050
 
30.04


2.12.060
 
30.04


2.12.070
 
30.04


2.16.010
 
31.15


2.16.020
 
31.16


2.16.030
 
31.17


2.16.040
 
31.18


2.16.050
 
31.19


2.16.060
 
31.20


2.20.010
 
31.30


2.20.020
 
31.31


2.20.030
 
31.32


2.20.040
 
31.33


2.24.010
 
31.45


2.24.020
 
31.46


2.24.030
 
31.47


2.28.020
 
32.02


2.28.030
 
32.03


2.28.040
 
32.04


2.28.050
 
32.05


2.28.060
 
32.06


2.28.070
 
32.07


2.28.080
 
32.08


2.28.090
 
32.09


2.28.100
 
32.10


2.32.010
 
32.80


2.36.010
 
32.20


2.36.020
 
32.21


2.36.030
 
32.22


2.36.040
 
32.23


2.36.050
 
32.24


2.40.010
 
32.50


2.40.020
 
32.51


2.40.030
 
32.52


2.40.040
 
32.53


2.40.050
 
32.54


2.44.010
 
32.65


2.44.020
 
32.66


2.44.030
 
32.67


2.44.040
 
32.68


2.48.010
 
32.35


2.48.020
 
32.36


2.48.030
 
32.37


2.48.040
 
32.38


2.52.010
 
32.90


2.56.010
 
33.01


2.56.020
 
33.02


2.56.030
 
33.03


2.56.040
 
33.04


2.56.050
 
33.05


2.56.060
 
33.06


2.56.070
 
33.07


2.56.080
 
33.08


2.56.090
 
33.09


2.56.100
 
33.10


2.56.110
 
33.40


2.56.120
 
33.41


2.56.130
 
33.42


2.56.140
 
33.43


2.56.150
 
33.44


2.56.160
 
33.45


2.56.170
 
33.20


2.56.180
 
33.21


2.56.190
 
33.22


2.56.200
 
33.23


2.56.210
 
33.24


2.56.220
 
33.25


2.56.230
 
33.26


2.56.240
 
33.27


2.56.250
 
33.28


2.60.010
 
37.01


2.60.020
 
37.02


2.60.030
 
37.03


2.64.010
 
37.15


2.64.020
 
37.16


2.64.030
 
37.17


2.64.040
 
37.18


2.64.050
 
37.19


2.65.010
 
36.01


2.65.020
 
36.02


2.65.030
 
36.03


2.65.040
 
36.04


2.65.050
 
36.05


2.65.060
 
36.06


2.65.070
 
36.07


2.65.080
 
36.08


2.65.090
 
36.09


2.65.100
 
36.10, 36.99


2.68.010
 
38.15


2.68.020
 
38.16


2.68.030
 
38.17


2.68.040
 
38.18


2.68.050
 
38.19


3.04.010
 
34.01


3.04.020
 
34.02


3.04.030
 
34.03


3.04.040
 
34.04


3.04.050
 
34.05


3.04.060
 
34.06


3.04.070
 
34.07


3.04.080
 
34.08


3.04.090
 
34.09


3.04.100
 
34.10


3.08.010
 
34.20


3.08.020
 
34.21


3.08.030
 
34.22


3.08.040
 
34.23


3.08.050
 
34.24


3.08.060
 
34.25


3.08.070
 
34.26


3.08.080
 
34.27


3.08.090
 
34.28


3.08.100
 
34.29


3.08.110
 
34.30


3.08.120
 
34.31


3.08.130
 
34.32


3.08.140
 
34.33


3.08.150
 
34.34


3.08.160
 
34.35


3.08.170
 
34.36


3.08.180
 
34.37


3.08.190
 
34.38


3.08.200
 
34.39


3.16.010
 
35.001


3.20.010
 
35.015


3.20.020
 
35.016


3.20.030
 
35.017


3.20.040
 
35.018


3.20.050
 
35.019


3.20.060
 
35.020


3.24.010
 
35.035


3.24.020
 
35.036


3.24.030
 
35.037


3.24.040
 
35.038


3.24.050
 
35.039


3.24.060
 
35.040


3.24.070
 
35.041


3.24.080
 
35.042


3.24.090
 
35.043


3.24.100
 
35.044


3.24.110
 
35.045


3.24.120
 
35.046


3.24.150
 
35.999


3.24.155
 
35.047


3.28.010
 
35.060


3.28.020
 
35.061


3.28.030
 
35.062


3.28.040
 
35.063


3.28.050
 
35.064


3.28.060
 
35.065


3.28.070
 
35.066


3.28.080
 
35.067


3.28.090
 
35.067


3.28.100
 
35.067


3.28.110
 
35.067


3.28.120
 
35.067


3.28.130
 
35.068


3.28.140
 
35.069


3.28.150
 
35.070


3.28.160
 
35.071


3.28.170
 
35.072


3.28.180
 
35.999


3.28.190
 
35.073


3.30.010
 
35.121


3.30.020A
 
35.122


3.30.020B
 
35.120


3.32.010
 
35.090


3.32.020
 
35.091


3.32.030
 
35.092


3.32.040
 
35.093


3.32.050
 
35.094


3.32.060
 
35.095


3.32.070
 
35.096


3.32.080
 
35.097


3.32.090
 
35.098


3.32.100
 
35.099


3.32.110
 
35.100


3.32.120
 
35.101


3.32.130
 
35.102


3.32.140
 
35.103


3.32.150
 
35.104


3.32.160
 
35.105


3.32.170
 
35.106


3.32.180
 
35.107


3.32.190
 
35.108


3.32.200
 
35.109


3.32.210
 
35.110


3.34.010
 
34.50


3.34.020
 
34.51


3.35.010
 
34.60


3.35.020
 
34.61


3.35.030
 
34.62


5.04.010
 
111.01


5.04.020
 
111.02


5.04.030
 
111.03


5.04.040
 
111.04


5.04.050
 
111.05


5.04.060
 
111.06


5.04.070
 
111.07


5.04.080
 
111.08


5.04.090
 
111.09


5.04.100
 
111.10


5.04.110
 
111.11


5.04.120
 
111.12


5.04.130
 
111.13


5.04.140
 
111.14


5.04.150
 
111.15


5.04.160
 
111.16


5.04.170
 
111.17


5.04.180
 
111.18


5.04.190
 
111.35


5.04.200
 
111.36


5.04.210
 
111.37


5.04.220
 
111.38


5.04.230
 
111.39


5.04.240
 
111.40


5.04.250
 
111.19


5.04.260
 
111.20


5.04.270
 
111.21


5.04.280
 
111.22


5.04.290
 
111.23


5.08.010
 
111.50


5.08.020
 
111.50


5.08.030
 
111.50


5.08.050
 
111.50


5.08.060
 
111.50


5.08.070
 
111.50


5.08.080
 
111.50


5.08.090
 
111.50


5.08.095
 
111.50


5.08.100
 
111.50


5.08.110
 
111.50


5.08.120
 
111.50


5.08.130
 
111.50


5.08.140
 
111.50


5.08.150
 
111.50


5.08.160
 
111.50


5.08.170
 
111.50


5.08.175
 
111.50


5.08.180
 
111.50


5.08.190
 
111.50


5.08.200
 
111.50


5.08.210
 
111.50


5.08.220
 
111.50


5.08.225
 
111.50


5.08.230
 
111.50


5.08.240
 
111.50


5.12.010
 
110.01


5.12.020
 
110.02


5.12.030
 
110.03


5.12.040
 
110.04


5.12.050
 
110.05


5.12.060
 
110.06


5.12.070
 
110.07


5.12.080
 
110.08


5.12.090
 
110.09


5.12.100
 
110.10


5.12.110
 
110.11


5.16.010
 
112.01


5.16.020
 
112.02


5.16.030
 
112.03


5.16.040
 
112.04


5.16.050
 
112.05


5.16.060
 
112.06


5.16.070
 
112.07


5.24.010
 
114.01


5.24.020
 
114.02


5.24.030
 
114.03


5.24.040
 
114.04


5.24.050
 
114.05


5.24.060
 
114.06


5.24.070
 
114.07


5.24.080
 
114.08


5.24.090
 
114.09


5.24.100
 
114.10


5.24.110
 
114.11


5.24.120
 
114.12


5.24.130
 
114.13


5.24.140
 
114.14


5.24.150
 
114.15


5.24.160
 
114.16


5.24.170
 
114.17


5.24.180
 
114.18


5.24.190
 
114.19


5.24.200
 
114.20


5.24.210
 
114.21


5.24.220
 
114.22


5.24.230
 
114.23


5.24.240
 
114.24


5.24.250I
 
114.23


5.24.250A
 
114.25


5.24.250B
 
114.26


5.24.250D
 
114.27


5.24.250H
 
114.28


5.24.250G
 
114.29


5.24.260
 
114.30


5.28.010
 
115.01


5.28.020
 
115.02


5.28.030
 
115.03


5.28.050
 
115.04


5.28.060
 
115.05


5.28.070
 
115.05


5.28.080
 
115.05


5.32.010
 
116.01


5.32.020
 
116.02


5.32.030
 
116.03


5.32.040
 
116.04


5.32.050
 
116.05


5.40.010
 
119.02


5.44.010
 
120.01


5.44.020
 
120.02


5.44.030
 
120.03


5.44.040
 
120.04


5.44.050
 
120.05


5.44.060
 
120.06


5.44.070
 
120.07


5.48.010
 
121.01


5.48.020
 
121.02


5.48.030
 
121.03


5.48.040
 
121.04


5.48.050
 
121.05


5.48.060
 
121.06


5.52.010
 
123.01


5.52.020
 
123.02


5.52.030
 
123.03


5.52.040
 
123.04


5.52.050
 
123.05


5.52.060
 
123.06


5.52.070
 
123.07


5.52.080
 
123.08


5.52.090
 
123.09


5.52.100
 
123.10


5.52.110
 
123.20


5.52.130
 
123.22


5.52.140
 
123.23


5.52.150
 
123.24


5.52.160
 
123.25


5.52.170
 
123.26


5.52.180
 
123.27


5.52.190
 
123.28


5.52.200
 
123.29


5.52.210
 
123.30


5.52.220
 
123.31


5.56.010
 
110.20


5.56.020
 
110.21


5.56.030
 
110.22


5.56.040
 
110.23


5.56.050
 
110.24


5.56.055
 
110.25


8.04.010
 
94.01


8.04.020
 
94.01


8.12.010
 
92.01


8.12.020
 
92.02


8.16.010
 
90.01


8.16.020
 
90.02


8.16.030
 
90.02


8.16.040
 
90.03


8.16.050
 
90.04


8.16.060
 
90.05


8.16.070
 
90.06


8.16.080
 
90.07


8.16.090
 
90.08


8.16.100
 
90.09


8.16.110
 
90.10


8.16.120
 
90.11


8.16.130
 
90.12


8.16.140
 
90.13


8.16.150
 
90.14


8.20.010
 
93.01


8.20.020
 
93.02


8.20.030
 
93.03


8.20.040
 
93.04


8.20.050
 
93.05


8.20.060
 
93.06


8.20.070
 
93.07


8.20.080
 
93.08


8.20.090
 
93.09


8.20.110
 
93.10


8.20.120
 
93.10


8.20.130
 
93.10


8.20.140
 
93.10


8.20.150
 
93.11


8.20.160
 
93.11


8.20.170
 
93.11


8.20.180
 
93.11


8.20.190
 
93.11


8.20.200
 
93.11


8.20.210
 
93.11


8.20.220
 
93.11


8.20.230
 
93.10


8.20.240
 
93.10


8.20.250
 
93.10


8.20.260
 
93.10


8.20.270
 
93.10


8.28.010
 
94.02


8.36.010
 
91.01


8.36.020
 
91.02


8.36.030
 
91.15 - 91.17, 91.19, 91.22


8.36.040
 
91.06


8.36.060
 
91.40


8.36.100
 
91.03


8.36.120
 
91.03


8.36.130
 
91.05


8.36.140
 
91.41


9.04.010
 
130.05


9.04.020
 
130.06


9.05.010
 
38.30


9.05.020
 
38.31


9.05.030
 
38.32


9.08.030
 
132.03


9.09.010
 
130.45


9.09.020
 
130.46


9.09.030
 
130.47


9.12.010
 
132.15


9.12.020
 
132.16


9.12.030
 
132.17


9.12.040
 
132.18


9.12.050
 
132.19


9.20.010
 
131.01


9.20.020
 
131.02


9.20.030
 
131.03


9.20.040
 
131.04


9.20.050
 
131.05


9.24.020
 
130.01


9.28.010
 
130.02


9.32.010
 
130.03


9.33.010
 
130.04


9.36.010
 
130.60


9.36.020
 
130.61


9.36.030
 
130.62


9.40.010
 
130.15


9.40.020
 
130.16


9.40.030
 
130.17


9.40.040
 
130.18


Ch. 10.04
 
70.01


10.08.010
 
70.02


10.08.020
 
70.03


10.08.030
 
70.04


10.12.010
 
70.15


10.12.020
 
70.16


10.12.030
 
70.17


10.12.040
 
70.18


10.12.050
 
70.19


10.12.060
 
70.20


10.12.070
 
70.21


10.16.010
 
70.22


10.16.020
 
70.23


10.16.030
 
70.24


10.20.010
 
70.25


10.24.010
 
70.26


10.28.010
 
71.01


10.28.020
 
71.18


10.28.030
 
71.02


10.28.040
 
71.03


10.28.050
 
71.04


10.28.060
 
71.05


10.32.010
 
70.28


10.32.020
 
71.55


10.36.010
 
72.01


10.36.020
 
72.02


10.36.030
 
72.03


10.36.040
 
72.04


10.36.050
 
72.05


10.36.060
 
72.06


10.36.070
 
72.07


10.36.080
 
72.08


10.36.090
 
72.09


10.36.100
 
72.10


10.36.110
 
72.11


10.36.130
 
72.12


10.36.140
 
72.13


10.36.150
 
72.13


10.36.160
 
72.13


10.36.170
 
72.14


10.36.180
 
72.15


10.36.190
 
72.16


10.36.200
 
72.17


10.36.210
 
72.18


10.36.220
 
72.19


10.36.230
 
72.20


10.36.240
 
72.21


10.40.010
 
72.35


10.40.020
 
72.36


10.40.030
 
72.37


10.40.040
 
72.38


10.40.050
 
72.38


10.40.060
 
72.38


10.40.070
 
72.39


10.44.010
 
71.30


10.44.020
 
71.31


10.44.030
 
71.32


10.44.040
 
71.33


10.44.050
 
72.71


10.44.060
 
72.21


10.48.010
 
72.60


10.48.020
 
72.61


10.48.030
 
72.62


10.48.040
 
72.63


10.48.050
 
72.64


10.48.060
 
72.65


10.48.070
 
72.66


10.48.080
 
72.67


10.48.090
 
72.68


10.48.100
 
72.69


10.48.110
 
72.70


10.48.120
 
72.71


10.52.010
 
71.06


10.52.020
 
71.45


10.56.010
 
72.71


10.56.020
 
70.27


10.60.010
 
72.50


10.60.020
 
72.51


10.60.030
 
71.15


10.64.010
 
71.16


10.64.020
 
71.17


12.04.010
 
97.040


12.04.020
 
97.041


12.04.030
 
97.042


12.04.040
 
97.043


12.04.050
 
97.043


12.04.060
 
97.044


12.04.070
 
97.045


12.04.080
 
97.046


12.04.090
 
97.047


12.04.100
 
97.048


12.04.110
 
97.049


12.04.120
 
97.050


12.05.010
 
122.01


12.05.020
 
122.02


12.05.030
 
122.03


12.05.040
 
122.99


12.08.010
 
97.001


12.08.020
 
97.002


12.08.030
 
97.003


12.08.040
 
97.004


12.08.050
 
97.005


12.08.060
 
97.006


12.08.070
 
97.007


12.08.080
 
97.008


12.08.090
 
97.009


12.08.100
 
97.010


12.08.110
 
97.011


12.08.120
 
97.012


12.08.130
 
97.013


12.08.140
 
97.014


12.08.150
 
97.015


12.08.160
 
97.016


12.08.170
 
97.017


12.08.180
 
97.018


12.08.190
 
97.019


12.08.200
 
97.020


12.08.210
 
97.021


12.08.220
 
97.022


12.12.010
 
97.165


12.12.020
 
97.166


12.12.030
 
97.166


12.12.040
 
97.166


12.12.050
 
97.166


12.12.060
 
97.166


12.12.070
 
97.167


12.12.080
 
97.168


12.12.090
 
97.169


12.12.100
 
97.170


12.16.010
 
97.090


12.16.020
 
97.091


12.16.030
 
97.091


12.20.010
 
97.145


12.20.020
 
97.146


12.20.030
 
97.147


12.20.040
 
97.148


12.20.050
 
97.149


12.20.060
 
97.150


12.20.070
 
97.151


12.20.080
 
97.152


12.20.090
 
97.153


12.20.100
 
97.154


12.24.010
 
96.01


12.24.020
 
96.15


12.24.030
 
96.16


12.24.040
 
96.17


12.24.050
 
96.18


12.24.060
 
96.19


12.24.070
 
96.20


12.24.080
 
96.21


12.24.090
 
96.22


12.24.100
 
96.23


12.24.110
 
96.24


12.24.120
 
96.02


12.24.130
 
96.02


12.24.140
 
96.02


12.24.150
 
96.02


12.24.160
 
96.02


12.24.170
 
96.02


12.24.180
 
96.02


12.24.190
 
96.02


12.24.200
 
96.02


12.24.210
 
96.02


12.24.220
 
96.02


12.24.230
 
96.02


12.24.240
 
96.02


12.24.250
 
96.02


12.24.260
 
96.02


12.24.270
 
96.02


12.24.280
 
96.03


12.28.010
 
97.125


12.28.020
 
97.126


12.28.030
 
97.127


12.28.040
 
97.128


12.28.050
 
97.129


12.28.060
 
97.130


12.28.070
 
97.131


12.28.080
 
97.132


12.36.010
 
97.060


12.36.020
 
97.061


12.36.030
 
97.062


12.36.040
 
97.063


13.04.010
 
51.10


13.04.020
 
51.11


13.04.030
 
51.12


13.04.040
 
51.12


13.04.050
 
51.12


13.04.060
 
51.25


13.04.070
 
51.26


13.04.080
 
51.27


13.04.090
 
51.28


13.04.100
 
51.01


13.08.010
 
97.070


13.08.020
 
97.071


13.08.030
 
97.072


13.08.040
 
97.073


13.08.050
 
97.074


13.08.060
 
97.075


13.08.070
 
97.076


13.08.080
 
97.077


13.08.090
 
97.078


13.08.100
 
97.079


13.08.110
 
97.080


15.40.010
 
151.01, 151.02


15.40.020
 
151.02


15.40.030
 
151.02


15.40.040
 
151.02


15.40.050
 
151.02


15.40.060
 
151.15


15.40.070
 
151.16


15.40.080
 
151.17


15.40.090
 
151.18


15.40.100
 
151.19


15.40.110
 
151.20


15.40.120
 
151.21


 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




811
 
  -  -80
 
115.05


812
 
  -  -80
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


815
 
  -  -80
 
90.11


816
 
  -  -81
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


818
 
  -  -81
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


819
 
  -  -81
 
34.23, 34.38, 34.39


820
 
  -  -81
 
97.060 - 97.063


822
 
  -  -81
 
32.03, 32.35 - 32.38, 32.51, 32.52


824
 
  -  -81
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


825
 
  -  -82
 
30.03


826
 
  -  -81
 
32.20 - 32.24


828
 
  -  -81
 
90.02 - 90.09, 90.12, 90.14


833
 
  -  -82
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


834
 
  -  -82
 
32.90


835
 
  -  -82
 
30.01


836
 
  -  -82
 
130.06


837
 
  -  -82
 
97.060 - 97.063


840
 
  -  -82
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


841
 
  -  -82
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


843
 
  -  -82
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


844
 
  -  -82
 
92.01


845
 
  -  -82
 
10.98, 10.99, 30.02, 31.03, 31.06, 33.05, 34.03, 34.05, 34.06, 34.23, 34.26,
34.34, 35.018, 51.01, 51.25 - 51.27, 70.01, 70.15 - 70.28, 72.03, 72.04,
72.11 - 72.17, 72.35, 72.36, 72.39, 72.61, 93.11, 94.01, 96.01, 97.001 -
97.011, 97.015, 97.018, 97.019, 97.022, 97.042, 97.044, 97.046, 97.047,
97.075, 97.090, 97.091, 97.125 - 97.127, 97.131, 97.147 - 97.154, 151.02,
151.19


 
 
 
 
150.002, 150.026 - 150.028, 150.041, 150.071 repealed by Ord. 1308


849
 
  -  -83
 
51.10 - 51.12


855
 
  -  -83
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


858
 
  -  -83
 
110.21


864
 
  -  -83
 
Ch. 73, Sched. I


867
 
  -  -83
 
32.80


869
 
  -  -83
 
35.044


870
 
  -  -83
 
35.044


872
 
  -  -84
 
130.45, 130.46


873
 
  -  -84
 
72.21


885
 
  -  -84
 
34.50, 34.51


886
 
  -  -85
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


887
 
  -  -85
 
91.01 - 91.03, 91.05, 91.06, 91.15 - 91.17, 91.19, 91.22, 91.40, 91.41


889
 
  -  -85
 
35.121


892
 
  -  -85
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


894
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


895
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


896
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


899
 
  -  -85
 
130.47


901
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


902
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


903
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


904
 
  -  -85
 
130.04


907
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


908
 
  -  -85
 
35.090 - 35.109


909
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


912
 
  -  -85
 
114.01 - 114.30


913
 
  -  -85
 
35.047


915
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


916
 
  -  -85
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


917
 
  -  -85
 
130.60 - 130.62


919
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


920
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


922
 
  -  -86
 
35.096, 35.097


923
 
  -  -86
 
72.04


925
 
  -  -86
 
71.45


927
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


930
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


931
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


932
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


933
 
  -  -86
 
110.21, 110.25


935
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


937
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


940
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


941
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


945
 
  -  -86
 
34.07


946
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


950
 
  -  -86
 
10.98


952
 
  -  -86
 
72.20


953
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


954
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


957
 
  -  -86
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


957
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


959
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


963
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


964
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


965
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


966
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


973
 
  -  -87
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


979
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


980
 
  -  -88
 
110.21


981
 
  -  -88
 
110.21


985
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


988
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


989
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


994
 
  -  -88
 
92.01, 92.02


996
 
  -  -88
 
32.66


997
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1000
 
  -  -88
 
10.99


1001
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1002
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1003
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1004
 
  -  -88
 
10.99


1005
 
  -  -88
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1006
 
  -  -89
 
36.01 - 36.10, 36.99


1007
 
  -  -89
 
36.01 - 36.10, 36.99


1011
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1013
 
  -  -89
 
31.60


1017
 
  -  -89
 
38.30 - 38.32


1019
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1020
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1021
 
  -  -89
 
33.05


1023
 
  -  -89
 
38.15 - 38.19


1025
 
  -  -89
 
72.21


1026
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1026
 
  -  -90
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1028
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1029
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1031
 
  -  -89
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1032
 
  -  -89
 
97.050


1036
 
  -  -90
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


1037
 
  -  -90
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1039
 
  -  -90
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1043
 
  -  -90
 
71.16, 71.17


1046
 
  -  -91
 
33.05


1047
 
  -  -91
 
34.60 - 34.62


1048
 
  -  -91
 
131.03, 131.04


1050
 
  -  -91
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1051
 
  -  -91
 
151.01


 
 
 
 
150.001, 150.006, 150.040, 150.050, 150.060, 150.070 repealed by Ord. 1308


1052
 
  -  -91
 
131.05


1053
 
  -  -91
 
35.096, 35.097, 35.110


1054
 
  -  -91
 
111.50


1056
 
  -  -92
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1057
 
  -  -92
 
32.66


1061
 
  -  -93
 
130.15 - 130.18


1062
 
  -  -93
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1063
 
  -  -93
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1064
 
  -  -93
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1065
 
  -  -93
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1066
 
  -  -93
 
93.01 - 93.06


1067
 
  -  -93
 
35.073


1070
 
  -  -93
 
122.99


1071
 
  -  -93
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1072
 
8-4-93
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1074
 
10-20-93
 
31.06


1075
 
11-17-93
 
10.99


1076
 
1-5-94
 
Repealed by. Ord. 1308


1077
 
4-20-94
 
T.S.O. II


1078
 
4-20-94
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1079
 
4-20-94
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1080
 
5-4-94
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


1081
 
5-18-94
 
T.S.O. I


1082
 
5-18-94
 
122.01 - 122.04, 122.15 - 122.21


1084
 
7-20-94
 
111.02, 111.51


1085
 
7-20-94
 
119.01, 119.02


1088
 
9-7-94
 
T.S.O. I


1090
 
12-7-94
 
T.S.O. II


1091
 
1-4-95
 
Repealed §§ 117.01 - 117.06, 117.15 - 117.15 - 117.21, 117.30 - 117.35


1092
 
1-18-95
 
96.02


1093
 
1-18-95
 
Not included in Code


1094
 
1-18-95
 
Not included in Code


1095
 
1-18-95
 
Not included in Code


1096
 
1-18-95
 
Not included in Code


1097
 
1-189-5
 
Not included in Code


1098
 
1-18-95
 
Not included in Code


1099
 
3-1-95
 
121.15 - 121.17


1100
 
4-5-95
 
Adopting Ordinance


1101
 
5-17-95
 
34.20 - 34.39


1102
 
5-17-95
 
Repealed §§ 132.01, 132.02


1103
 
7-5-95
 
10.19, 10.20


1106
 
8-16-95
 
130.025


1107
 
11-1-95
 
T.S.O. I


1108
 
12-6-95
 
151.01


 
 
 
 
150.001, 150.006, 150.040, 150.050, 150.055, 150.060, 150.070 repealed by
Ord. 1308


1109
 
12-20-95
 
111.05, 111.06, 111.08, 111.09, 111.10, 111.12, 111.13, 111.15 - 111.18,
111.21, 111.22, 111.35 - 111.38, 111.51


1110
 
1-17-96
 
31.06


1111
 
2-21-96
 
91.40, 91.41


1112
 
3-6-96
 
Not included in Code


1113
 
4-3-96
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1114
 
5-1-96
 
130.30 - 130.44


1115
 
6-5-96
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1116
 
6-19-96
 
Ch. 113


1117
 
9-4-96
 
124.010 - 124.110, 124.120 - 124.150, 124.160 - 124.190


1120
 
2-19-97
 
98.01 - 98.06


1122
 
2-5-97
 
30.02


1123
 
2-19-97
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1124
 
3-19-97
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1126
 
7-2-97
 
130.02


1127
 
9-3-97
 
122.99(B)


1129
 
2-4-98
 
132.04


1130
 
4-15-98
 
34.06


1131
 
5-6-98
 
31.01 - 31.06


1132
 
6-17-98
 
T.S.O. II


1133
 
8-5-98
 
32.35, 32.51


1134
 
10-7-98
 
T.S.O. I


1135
 
11-4-99
 
151.01


 
 
 
 
150.001, 150.006, 150.040, 150.050, 150.055, 150.060, 150.070 repealed by
Ord. 1308


1136
 
11-18-98
 
51.12


1138
 
12-16-98
 
96.04


1139
 
6-2-99
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


1140
 
6-16-99
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1141
 
7-21-99
 
T.S.O. II


1142
 
7-21-99
 
T.S.O. I


1143
 
7-21-99
 
T.S.O. II


1144
 
7-21-99
 
T.S.O. II


1145
 
7-21-99
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1146
 
10-6-99
 
31.03


1147
 
11-3-99
 
T.S.O. I


1148
 
11-3-99
 
Repealed by Ord. 1189 on 7-2-02


1149
 
11-3-99
 
Repealed by Ord. 1189 on 7-2-02


1150
 
10-20-99
 
T.S.O. I


1151
 
12-1-99
 
T.S.O. I


1154
 
12-15-99
 
T.S.O. I


1155
 
1-19-00
 
32.08, 32.11, 32.21, 32.36, 32.66


1156
 
2-2-00
 
110.21


1157
 
3-15-00
 
T.S.O. I


1160
 
5-17-00
 
T.S.O. II


1161
 
7-12-00
 
100.010 - 100.050, 100.090 - 100.130, 100.200 - 100.270


1162
 
2-21-01
 
T.S.O. II


1163
 
9-6-00
 
T.S.O. II


1165
 
8-16-00
 
72.13, Ch. 74, Sch. I


1166
 
10-18-00
 
99.01 - 99.04


1167
 
11-1-00
 
T.S.O. II


1168
 
11-15-00
 
32.36


1169
 
2-7-01
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1171
 
1-17-01
 
94.01


1172
 
2-28-01
 
T.S.O. II


1173
 
2-21-01
 
T.S.O. II


1174
 
2-21-01
 
T.S.O. II


1175
 
4-4-01
 
T.S.O. II


1176
 
4-18-01
 
T.S.O. II


1177
 
5-2-01
 
100.020, 100.090


1178
 
6-6-01
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1181
 
8-1-01
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1182
 
9-5-01
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1183
 
10-3-01
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1184
 
2-20-02
 
131.01, 131.05, 131.06


1185
 
3-27-02
 
93.06


1186
 
5-1-01
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1187
 
6-19-02
 
93.03


1188
 
6-19-02
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1189
 
7-2-02
 
Repealing §§ 130.70, 130.71


1191
 
7-2-02
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


1193
 
8-21-02
 
52.01 - 52.19


1194
 
11-6-02
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1195
 
11-6-02
 
Repealed by Ord. 1308


1196
 
11-6-02
 
130.43


1197
 
12-18-02
 
T.S.O. II


1198
 
11-20-02
 
T.S.O. II


1200
 
12-4-02
 
T.S.O. II


1201
 
4-16-03
 
110.03, 110.04


1202
 
5-7-03
 
T.S.O. II


1203
 
5-28-03
 
130.07 - 130.09, 130.99


1204
 
6-18-03
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1205
 
7-30-03
 
T.S.O. II


1206
 
7-2-03
 
T.S.O. II


1207
 
6-2-04
 
T.S.O. II


1208
 
7-16-03
 
T.S.O. II


1211
 
7-30-03
 
T.S.O. II


1212
 
9-3-03
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1213
 
8-20-03
 
93.03


1214
 
10-15-03
 
53.01, 53.02, 53.10 - 53.16


1216
 
11-5-03
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1218
 
11-19-03
 
95.5.01 - 95.5.14


1219
 
11-5-03
 
96.01, 96.25


1220
 
11-19-03
 
96.01, 96.25


1222
 
12-3-03
 
T.S.O. II


1223
 
3-17-04
 
T.S.O. I


1224
 
4-7-04
 
T.S.O. II


1225
 
2-18-04
 
31.03, 33.05


1226
 
3-3-04
 
31.03, 33.06


1227
 
3-3-04
 
T.S.O. II


1228
 
3-3-04
 
T.S.O. II


1229
 
6-2-04
 
92.01 - 92.03


1230
 
4-21-04
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


1231
 
7-7-04
 
10.21


1232
 
6-2-04
 
38.15 - 38.19


1233
 
5-5-04
 
118.01 - 118.35


1235
 
5-19-04
 
97.180 - 97.187


1236
 
  -  -
 
Not Included in Code


1238
 
  -  -
 
Not Included in Code


1239
 
7-21-04
 
32.100


1240
 
7-21-04
 
32.101


1241
 
9-1-04
 
92.01 - 92.03


1242
 
9-15-04
 
154.001 - 154.007


1243
 
11-17-04
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1245
 
9-15-04
 
154.015 - 154.032


1246
 
9-15-04
 
T.S.O. I


1247
 
9-29-04
 
T.S.O. II


1248
 
1-5-05
 
154.040 - 154.042, 154.050 - 154.052


1249
 
11-17-04
 
30.02


1250
 
11-17-04
 
34.26


1251
 
2-16-05
 
T.S.O. II


1252
 
12-1-04
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1253
 
5-4-05
 
T.S.O. II


1254
 
12-1-04
 
123.32


1255
 
1-5-05
 
123.32


1256
 
2-16-05
 
93.02 - 93.04, 93.06, 93.07, 93.10 - 93.12


1257
 
4-20-05
 
Not Included in Code


1258
 
2-2-05
 
33.05


1259
 
6-15-05
 
33.05


1260
 
12-7-05
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1261
 
3-16-05
 
T.S.O. II


1262
 
5-4-05
 
T.S.O. I


1263
 
6-1-05
 
Not Included in Code


1265
 
8-17-05
 
122.04


1266
 
6-15-05
 
97.105 - 97.111


1267
 
7-6-05
 
97.105 - 97.111


1268
 
9-7-05
 
97.145 - 97.147, 97.149, 97.155, 97.156


1269
 
7-20-05
 
30.03


1270
 
9-21-05
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1271
 
9-21-05
 
T.S.O. II


1272
 
9-21-05
 
T.S.O.  II


1273
 
9-21-05
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1274
 
9-21-05
 
110.21


1275
 
10-5-05
 
T.S.O. II


1276
 
10-5-05
 
T.S.O. II


1277
 
12-21-05
 
Not Included in Code


1278
 
1-18-06
 
Not Included in Code


1279
 
2-15-06
 
Not Included in Code


1280
 
6-7-06
 
155.001 - 155.010


1281
 
3-1-06
 
95.01 - 95.15


1282
 
3-1-06
 
15.01 - 15.13


1283
 
3-15-06
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1284
 
3-15-06
 
Not Included in Code


1285
 
4-5-06
 
Not Included in Code


1286
 
7-5-06
 
Not Included in Code


1287
 
7-5-06
 
Not Included in Code


1288
 
8-2-06
 
53.11


1289
 
7-19-06
 
Not Included in Code


1290
 
8-2-06
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1291
 
8-2-06
 
Not Included in Code


1292
 
8-16-06
 
35.097


1293
 
12-6-06
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1294
 
10-4-06
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1295
 
11-1-06
 
10.99


1296
 
12-6-06
 
Repealed by Ords. 1369, 1370


1297
 
2-7-07
 
50.01 - 50.16


1298
 
2-7-07
 
T.S.O. II


1299
 
2-7-07
 
38.15 - 38.17


1300
 
3-21-07
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1301
 
4-4-07
 
124.010, 124.020, 124.040, 124.060, 124.080, 124.090, 124.100, 124.120


1302
 
6-6-07
 
Not Included in Code (Repealed by Ord. 1309)


1303
 
4-18-07
 
Not Included in Code


1304
 
10-17-07
 
96.02


1305
 
6-20-07
 
T.S.O. I


1306
 
8-15-07
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1307
 
8-1-07
 
T.S.O. I


1308
 
12-19-07
 
150.001 - 150.011, 150.020, 150.030 - 150.035, 150.040 - 150.052, 150.060 -
150.065, 150.071 - 150.077, 150.080 - 150.088, 150.100 - 150.104, 150.110 -
150.119, 150.121, 150.122, 150.130 - 150.135, 150.140 - 150.143, 150.150,
150.151 - 150.153, 150.160, 150.170, 150.180, 150.190, 150.200, 150.210,
150.220


1309
 
9-19-07
 
Repealing §§ 97.135 - 97.138


1310
 
7-1-09
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


1311
 
12-5-07
 
150.237, 150.238


1312
 
2-20-08
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1313
 
2-20-08
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


1314
 
2-6-08
 
98.02, 98.07, 98.08


1315
 
5-21-08
 
119.02


1316
 
11-19-08
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1318
 
6-4-08
 
T.S.O. I


1319
 
6-18-08
 
T.S.O. II


1321
 
10-1-08
 
125.010 - 125.130


1322
 
9-17-08
 
Repealed by Ords. 1369, 1370


1323
 
2-4-09
 
95.16


1324
 
4-1-09
 
93.01


1325
 
4-15-09
 
150.250 - 150.261


1326
 
4-15-09
 
121.04


1327
 
4-29-09
 
93.01


1328
 
5-6-09
 
93.01, 93.12


1329
 
6-2-10
 
91.01 - 91.06, 91.15 - 91.22, 91.30 - 91.32, 91.40 - 91.42, 91.99


1330
 
1-20-10
 
110.04, 118.03


1331
 
12-2-09
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1332
 
11-2-11
 
94.5.010, 94.5.020, 94.5.030, 94.5.040, 94.5.050, 94.5.060, 94.5.070,
94.5.080, 94.5.090, 94.5.095, 94.5.100, 94.5.110, 94.5.120, 94.5.130, 94.5.140


1333
 
5-19-10
 
Not Included in Code


1334
 
6-16-10
 
Not Included in Code


1335
 
8-4-10
 
Ch. 73, Sched. II


1336
 
11-3-10
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1337
 
12-15-10
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1338
 
11-17-10
 
150.001 - 150.011, 150.020, 150.030 - 150.035, 150.040 - 150.052, 150.060 -
150.065, 150.071 - 150.077, 150.080 - 150.088, 150.100 - 150.104, 150.110 -
150.122, 150.130 - 150.135, 150.140 - 150.143, 150.150, 150.151 - 150.153,
150.154, 150.160, 150.170, 150.180, 150.190, 150.200, 150.210, 150.211,
150.220


1340
 
2-2-11
 
Repealed by Ord. 1346


1344
 
7-6-11
 
96.02, 96.05


1347
 
12-15-10
 
39.01 - 39.05


1347
 
9-7-11
 
T.S.O. I


1345
 
11-2-11
 
92.01 - 92.03


1349
 
3-7-12
 
10.19


1350
 
3-7-12
 
35.108


1346
 
5-2-12
 
152.01 - 152.20, 153.010.010 - 153.010.080, 153.020.010 - 153.020.090,
153.030.010 - 153.030.030, 153.040.010 - 153.040.190, 153.050.010 -
153.050.060, 153.060.010 - 153.060.030, 153.070.010 - 153.070.070,
153.080.010 - 153.080.050, 153.090.010 - 153.090.040, 153.100.010 -
153.100.050, 153.110.010 - 153.110.050, 153.120.010 - 153.120.550,
153.130.010 - 153.130.120, 153.140.010 - 153.140.090, 153.150.010 -
153.150.160, 153.160.010 - 153.160.230, 153.165.010 - 153.165.100,
153.170.010 - 153.170.110, 153.180.010 - 153.180.120, 153.190.010 -
153.190.060, 153.200.010 - 153.200.200, 153.210.010 - 153.210.280,
153.210.320 - 153.210.1040, 153.220.010 - 153.220.270, Ch. 153 Appendix


1351
 
5-2-12
 
Not Included in Code


1354
 
9-19-12
 
96.02


1352
 
11-7-12
 
126.01 - 126.03


1355
 
8-7-13
 
Repealed by Ord. 1402


1357
 
3-20-13
 
53.11


1358
 
6-19-13
 
39.01 - 39.03


1361
 
12-18-13
 
150.001 - 150.012 , 150.020 , 150.030 - 150.035 , 150.040 - 150.052 , 150.060
- 150.065 , 150.071 - 150.077 , 150.080 - 150.088 , 150.100 - 150.104 ,
150.110 - 150.122 , 150.130 - 150.135 , 150.140  - 150.143, 150.150, 150.151
- 150.153 , 150.160 , 150.170 , 150.180 , 150.190 , 150.200 , 150.210 ,
150.220


1363
 
2-19-14
 
52.13


1365
 
10-1-14
 
72.21


1366
 
12-3-14
 
Not Included in Code


1367
 
1-7-15
 
150.251, 150.253


1368
 
1-21-15
 
T.S.O. II


1369
 
2-18-15
 
Not Included in Code


1370
 
3-4-15
 
Not Included in Code


1372
 
3-18-15
 
93.01


1371
 
4-15-15
 
153.170.060, 153.170.080, 153.170.090


1373
 
4-1-15
 
97.023


1374
 
9-2-15
 
153.120.250 - 153.120.270, 153.220.040, 153.220.050, 153.220.090, 153.220.100


1375
 
7-15-15
 
91.40


1376
 
9-2-15
 
T.S.O. I


1378
 
9-2-15
 
T.S.O. I


1379
 
11-4-15
 
153.160.010 - 153.160.230, 153.220.130


1380
 
9-16-15
 
156.01 - 156.08


1381
 
10-7-15
 
T.S.O. I


1382
 
1-20-16
 
153.120.320, 153.120.330, 153.220.140


1384
 
3-16-16
 
39.02 - 39.04


1385
 
6-20-16
 
153.050.020


1386
 
9-7-16
 
154.060, 154.061


1387
 
5-18-16
 
Ch. 73, Sch. II


1388
 
9-21-16
 
130.31, 130.34, 130.37


1391
 
11-16-16
 
30.05


1392
 
1-18-17
 
33.23


1393
 
1-18-17
 
T.S.O. II


1394
 
12-21-16
 
Repealed by Ord. 1402


1395
 
12-21-16
 
T.S.O. I


1396
 
2-1-17
 
153.001 - 150.012, 150.020, 150.030 - 150.035, 150.040 - 150.052, 150.060 -
150.065, 150.071 - 150.077, 150.080 - 150.088, 150.100 - 150.104, 150.110 -
150.122, 150.130 - 150.135, 150.140 - 150.143, 150.150 - 150.153, 150.160,
150.170, 150.180, 150.190, 150.200, 150.210, 150.220


1397
 
4-5-17
 
153.170.010 - 153.170.100, 153.170.110


1398
 
5-3-17
 
Repealed by Ord. 1402


1399
 
5-3-17
 
T.S.O. I


1400
 
8-16-17
 
127.01 - 127.18


1401
 
8-16-17
 
153.050.020, 153.120.330


1402
 
11-15-17
 
153.170.010 - 153.170.110, 153.210.090, 153.210.265, 153.220.200


1403
 
12-13-17
 
127.01 - 127.18


1406
 
5-2-18
 
50.01, 50.17


1407
 
3-7-18
 
100.010 - 100.050, 100.090 - 100.130, 100.200 - 100.235, 100.250 - 100.270


1408
 
4-4-18
 
127.01 - 127.18


1409
 
4-18-18
 
T.S.O. II


1410
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1411
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1412
 
7-18-18
 
T.S.O. I


1413
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1414
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1416
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1417
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1418
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1419
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1420
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1421
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1422
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1423
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1424
 
5-2-18
 
T.S.O. I


1425
 
7-18-18
 
T.S.O. I


1426
 
7-18-18
 
T.S.O. I


1427
 
7-18-18
 
T.S.O. I


1428
 
7-18-18
 
150.080 - 150.088


1429
 
10-3-18
 
T.S.O. I


 
 
 
 
 




 



 


